Project Gutenberg's Note-book No. 1 of the Kickapoo Club, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Note-book No. 1 of the Kickapoo Club

Author: Various

Release Date: April 19, 2014 [EBook #45440]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTE-BOOK #1 OF KICKAPOO CLUB ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Bryan Ness, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)











NOTE-BOOK NO. 1,

OF THE

KICKAPOO CLUB.

BLOOMINGTON, ILLINOIS,

1914.

[Illustration]

     The articles shown herein are one bronze and steel-edged
     tomahawk blade, found at the site of Kickapoo Fort in
     Section 5, West Township, McLean Co. Ill., by Mark Piper,
     one granite hatchet made from a discarded discoidal
     hammer-stone (or discoidal hammer-stone made from a
     discarded hatchet, which?) and one flint drill, both found
     by S. W. Le Neve, at Kingfisher Hill, Menard County, Ill.
     The five smaller potsherds beneath these were also found by
     Mark Piper, at Kingfisher Hill.

     The two perpendicular rows of stamped and rouletted
     potsherds on each side of this group were found at an
     ancient camp-site on the south bluff of the Sangamon river,
     on the Center Farm, in the north part of Menard Co. Ill.,
     by Mr. E. H. Hamilton and are now in the collection of the
     McLean County Historical Society.

                    M. C.




"_Help Save the Great Cahokia Mound_"

_By C. H. Robinson, Normal, Illinois._


On April 20th, 1913, an enthusiastic party of Bloomington and Normal
men made an archaeological expedition to the great Cahokia mound
group in Southern Illinois, which is located in Madison and St. Clair
counties, about two miles east of the corporate limits of East St.
Louis, Illinois. The location is easily accessible by way of the new
hard road or by the St. Louis and Collinsville electric system.

The great Cahokia, or better know as Monk's Mound, together with many
smaller mounds are located on a 204 acre farm belonging to the Hon.
T. T. Ramey's heirs. This farm is situated in the most picturesque
and richest part of the famous "American bottoms." Land which is so
fertile that even the aborigines raised much with but little effort
and which no doubt led to the location and construction here of the
largest earth mound ever built by primitive man, the great pyramid of
Cheops in Egypt or the Aztec temple mound of Mexico excepted. Monk's
mound covers more ground than any pyramid of Egypt. Cheops is but 746
feet square, the Aztec temple of Mexico is 680 feet square, while
Monk's mound is 1080 feet by 780 feet and 104 feet high making about
84,000,000 cubic feet of earth.

This mound has never been touched with pick or shovel, although great
quantities of archaeological material have been removed from many of
the surrounding smaller mounds and cultivated fields, and many fine
collections are to be found in both private and public places, taken
from this most ancient residence site of a vanquished race.

The variety and nature of material formed around the great Cahokia
group clearly indicate that the mound builders or their successors
had access to or traded with other tribes or people located at the
headquarters of the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers, also on the Gulf
of Mexico, and possibly from the Atlantic to the Pacific Oceans,
as evidenced by the vast quantities and nature of the material,
from which such large varities of implements and ornaments were
constructed. For as workmen are known by their chips so here may
also be found the evidence of past ages wrought in such material as
flint, jasper, pipe stone, granite, agate, galena, obsidian, hematite,
copper, quartz, crystal, deep sea conch shells and much other material
foreign to this section of the state.

The surrounding cultivated fields are strewn with pottery fragments
mingled with which may be found many human bones and implements of the
stone age. Here after the heavy spring rains are over may be plowed up
many characteristic specimens. Surely in ages past what a mecca this
location must have been!

Regarding the shape and size of the great Cahokia mound group it may
be said that all types except the effigy are represented here the
form of the largest mound is a parallelogram, with straight sides,
the longer of which are north and south. On the southern end thirty
feet above the base is a terrace or apex, containing two acres of
ground. On the western side some thirty feet above the first terrace
is a second of some what less extent. The top of the mound is flat,
containing about one acre and a half, and is divided into two parts
the northern portion of which is some four or five feet higher than
the southern portion.

Near the middle of the first terrace, at the base of the mound is a
projecting point apparently the remains of a graded pathway ascending
from the plain to the terrace. Monk's mound stands true to the exact
points of the compass.

There are several conical shaped mounds of about forty feet in height,
together with a large number of rectangular shape flat top mounds
ranging in size from 20 to 30 feet in height and some of smaller size
sufficient to conveniently accommodate a good sized farm house and
out buildings. One noticeable exception of this mound group lies just
south of the great mound the same being of conical shape except that
there are nine radiating ridges extending outward at equal distances
from the flattened top. This mound is about fifty feet high with a 150
foot base, the radiating ridges extending outward about ten feet each,
just what these radiating ridges symbolize no one knows, possibly the
radiating lines of the sun, or the ridges may represent the sacred
conch shells found buried here in great numbers.

Monk's mound derived this name from the fact that from 1804 to 1809
a colony of Monks of the order of La Trappe occupied the locality as
missionaries among the Cahokia Indians. These monks devoted themselves
to silence and seclusion and ate a strictly vegetable diet. They soon
succumbed to the malarial influences existing at that time, many
died and those remaining returned whence they came, the last of them
leaving in March, 1813.

The name Cahokia given the group of mounds is derived from a tribe of
Indians met by LaSalle in that vicinity, during his visit there in
December, 1681. Growing upon Monk's mound may be seen a pear orchard,
set out by the Monks, many of these trees are yet vigorous and bear
fruit in season. Besides these fruit trees, there are many fine forest
trees, some of which have reached a very large size; all of which
tends to make this large mound one of the most picturesque sights in
spring, summer and autumn.

Only a short distance to the north of Monk's mound flows Cahokia
Creek, its heavily wooded tract of timber giving here a rare chance
to the Archaeologist and land-scape artist to help some one of the
greatest movements of pre-historic man to be found in the United
States today. Ohio has long since made safe her serpent mound,
together with many lesser ones by proper legislative acts, other
states and counties have protected pre-historic works of much less
importance. Why then should the great State of Illinois not preserve
our Cahokia group? During the last legislative session at Springfield,
Cahokia mound park bills were introduced in both houses and are now
known as House Bill No. 176 Flagg, and Senate Bill No. 276 Beall,
on June 7, 1913. The matter was refered to the Illinois State Park
Commission to investigate the desirability of the state acquiring the
Cahokia mound and report to the forty-ninth General Assembly not later
than Feb. 1, 1915.

The names and addresses of the members of the Illinois State Board of
Park Commissioners are as follows: Alexander Richards, Ottawa, Ill. T.
A. James, Evanston, Ill. and Thomas Cahill, Loda, Ill.

[Illustration: Plate No. 1 At research on Ramey Farm in field near
Monk's Mound, October, 1913]

[Illustration: Plate No. 2 Characteristic surface finds from location
shown on plate 1.]

Cuts furnished by C. H. Robinson

Cahokia Surface Finds, No. 3

Plate No. 2

1. Large arrow point or small flint hoe, length 3 inch
2. Sections of human skull
3. Outer shell of sacred conch shell
4. Perfect shape hammer stone, granite
5. Pottery ear from vessel
6. Potsherd, incised design, color black
7. Pottery, ducks head
8. Pottery, engraved design
9. Potsherd, reed, marked design, color red
11. Potsherd, reed, marked design, color yellow
12. Potsherd, raised, marked design, color black
13. Potsherd, reed, marked design, color red
14. Potsherd, reed, marked design, color brown
15. Potsherd, grass, marked design, color brown
16. Potsherd, incised, marked design, color black
17. Potsherd, raised, marked design, color brown
19. Potsherd, grass, marked design, color yellow
20. Inner spiral of sacred conch shell
21. Potsherd, grass, marked design, color brown
22. Fragment of polished discoidal stone
23. Perfect barbed arrow point 1 inch long, semi-circular row
    around No. 23, show characteristic Cahokia arrow points
24. Copper ornament
25. Pipestone
26. Agate
27. Gavel sand stone polisher
28. Quartz crystal
30. Pieces of human arm bone
31. Incomplete flint artifacts

[Illustration: Plate No. 3 West Twin Grove Indian Camp Site on farm of
Chas. F. Kauffman, May, 1912]

[Illustration: Plate No. 4 Artifacts made by aborigines on Camp Site
shown on Plate No. 4]

Cuts furnished by C. H. Robinson


West Twin Grove Camp Site

Plate No. 4.

1. Gamestone 2-1/4 (problematical) gray granite
2. Scraper, pink flint
3. Knife 4 inches long, yellow flint, (between 30 and 4)
4. Bird arrow point, 3/4 inches long, white flint
5. Double notched arrow, curved body, white flint
6. Notch of arrow, flat on one side
7. Scraper--mottled blue and white flint
8. Barbed arrow, to remain in wound
9. Non-barbed arrow, to be withdrawn from wound
10. Common chert arrows
11. Red flint arrow
12. Heavy chert arrow
13. Blue flint arrow
14. Rare ceremonial stone, brown flint
15. Drill, white flint
17. Blunt arrow, white flint
18. Drill, white flint
19. Half completed leaf arrow, white flint
20. Finely finished spear point, pink flint
22. Common arrow
23. Perfect shape leaf arrow, blue flint
24. Fragment of pottery, porphyry tempered
25. First piece of arrow found on camp-site
26. Drill, white flint
27. 2/3 completed leaf shape arrow, white flint
28. Perfect hafted scarper, white flint
29. Wide base arrow, white flint
30. Perfect knife, mottled flint, red, white and blue
31. Perfect double bevel arrow, white flint

Through the courtesy of the Ramey Family, the writer and party were
given much valuable data and information pertaining to the early
history of this historic spot, therefore honorary mention is herewith
given to the sturdy and honest pioneer, the late T. T. Ramey, who was
one of the few successful 49er's. Returning east again, he invested
his hard earned gold in the rich alluvial "American bottom" lands of
Madison County and upon which now stands the great Cahokia mound,
together with twenty others of lesser magnitude. He was a close
student of both God and man. He soon conceived the idea that the large
mound should never be disturbed and if possible become the property
of the state. Thus he kept in tact this great earthwork during his
lifetime and it is with the same spirit that his children do likewise.

May we not hope that the State of Illinois shall in due time make this
great mound group a state preserve and keep intact the great Cahokia
Mound just as the Ramey family have done for many years?

The party making the Cahokia trip was composed of Milo Custer, G.
Blumke, Mark Piper, S. W. Le Neve, Herbert Cox and the writer.

                    Charles M. Robinson.




_Aboriginal Flint Implement Work Shop or Camp Site._

_Located on Section 33, Dry Grove Township, McLean County, Illinois_

_By Richard Thomas Robinson, Normal, Illinois_


May 8, 1912, at this place, my father found the barbed shank of a
flint arrow head. Around this broken part of an arrow head were
several flint chips. This led to a closer examination, which resulted
in the finding of about three dozen pieces a flint core, and several
arrow heads, some finished and several about half complete. Many trips
have been made to this old camp site in the past two years and all the
pieces, or parts of arrow heads as well as chips have been carefully
preserved. On none of our trips have we come home empty handed. Even
some pottery fragments have been found. These, like all the other
material are apparently quite ancient. This camp is near the old
Indian trail, which use to run between Bloomington and Peoria, where
was then located old Fort Clark.

Mr. George Washington Henry the oldest resident of the grove remembers
when he was a boy of eight, the Indians camping on this trail. He has
told us many interesting stories about the Indians, and wild game
which roamed the prairies in those days. He has gone on walks with us
to the places of interest, and told us what was there eighty years ago.

Among the things that have been found at this camp site are namely: a
double beveled arrow head, of which the government reports show only
one in 3,000 are found, one curved arrow head, one leaf shaped, one
of the same kind incomplete, and many barbed arrow heads of different
sizes, of which many are incomplete. Several scrapers, some ceremonial
stones, a flint drill, and saw, several small bird points, and one
large spear point, incomplete. Two very fine skinning knives, one
problematic stone, shaped round like a hammer stone, but flat on two
sides.

We have excavated at this place to a depth of about two feet but in
our excavations found nothing of any great value. In all we have
secured several hundred fine specimens.

There are probably a great many more interesting things to be found
here and we feel very grateful to Mr. Kaufman for granting us the
privilege of searching for the remains of those who lived many years
before us.




_A Trip to Petersburg, Ill. and Kingfisher's Hill_

_By Mark Piper, Bloomington, Illinois_


One of our most interesting trips was taken on May 18th, 1913 to
Petersburg and Kingfisher Hill in an auto owned by T. R. Good. The
party, S. W. LeNeve, Gus. Blumke, Chas. Robinson and myself met at the
Court House in Bloomington, Ill, where Mr. Good met us at 5 a. m. with
his machine. At about 10 a. m. we arrived at Bonnett brothers on whose
farm we were to look for relics. We then made our way to the tops of
some hills where there were indications of Indian graves. There I for
once was the lucky one and found part of a skeleton, while Mr. Good
afterward found three more. Owing to the peculiar nature of the soil
they were exceedingly well preserved, there did not appear to be any
system of burial as the bones and skulls seemed to be in a heap. Some
of the bones showed tooth marks as though some wild animal had gnawed
them. One peculiar thing about their graves was that they were on the
very top of the highest hills, except some which were on the side near
the top. Nothing was found in the graves with the bones. Besides the
skeleton we also found arrow heads, buffalo teeth and other relics.

Our next trip to the Bonnett farm was taken June 23. The party this
time consisted of Charles H. Robinson, Gus. Blumke, Mr. Robinson's son
and myself. We met at the Union Depot in the wee small hours of the
night and took a train at about one o'clock for Petersburg where we
had previously made arrangements for a team to meet us and take us to
the Bonnett farm.

After breakfast Mr. Bonnett supplied us each with an old coat which
would help to keep out the rain. We then took spades and started out.
We crossed creeks and ponds as though they were dry and after digging
on numerous hills without success we came back to dinner and more
coffee. After dinner we had better success for we found some graves
and also a camp site located on the banks of Cleary's Creek in which
a great number of shells lay exposed, also quite a quantity of broken
pottery of a special stamped and rouletted design. Pottery similar to
this has been found at Naples Ill., and is described in government
literature. We also found fragments of bone and flint articles but as
that was in a field of growing wheat we could not excavate.


[Illustration: Cut furnished by Wm. B. Brigham (Cuts one-half size.)]

     The six arrow heads of the upper row show a variety of
     shapes with a marked difference in the notches and base.

     The long spear-heads was found in the Bloomington cemetery
     by J. W. Moran. This is a beautiful pink flint.

     The specimen below in the center is no doubt a knife. The
     spear-head on either side show a notched and a stem-base.

     Below is a notched scraper, and a drill. The two small game
     points are from the Cahokia mounds, Madison County. (This
     kind is characteristic of that region.)




_My Indian Collection_

_By W. B. Brigham, Assistant County Supt. of Schools._


One day many years ago while working in the field, my father picked
up an Indian arrow-head. He gave it to me as a play-thing and it was
much enjoyed tho soon lost; leaving me with a sad heart but a deep
longing to find others. Twenty years later after I had roamed o'er
the prairies and worked in the fields less than six arrow points were
garnered and some of these were obtained from schoolmates. Yet my
fascination for these relics has increased as we have learned more of
the habits and haunts of the Indians, their different implements and
the manner in which they were made.

The Indian hunters and warriors would often lose arrows while on
the prairies, but we find them in greater numbers with other stone
implements in some of the old village or camp-sites. These were
generally on elevated ground in or near the woods and along the
streams. The close observer will find little difficulty in locating
these places by the presence of granite spalls and flint flakes which
are readily distinguished from the pebbles of the glacial drift. This
camp debris is sometimes covered by the alluvial from the uplands
and is no longer to be found on the surface but is often revealed by
diggings or by a washout.

Some years ago, Mr. Milo Custer located a camp-site in section sixteen
Bloomington Township and made a good find. I took up his trail
and frequently visited the field being always rewarded by finding
something of interest, including arrow and spear heads, knives,
scrapers, drills and human teeth. No large implements were found there
by me. This site was located on the south slope of a hill running down
to what had been a pond in early days, the water probably standing
there several feet deep throughout the year.

These sites disclose some very interesting facts and furnish much
food for speculation. The great variety of "finds" not only recalls
many phases of the primitive life of the Indians but also shows that
the "ancient arrow-maker" possessed patience and skill of the highest
degree.

It is all the more wonderful when we consider that these results were
obtained with such crude tools, and again that no artists of modern
civilization can attain the technic or reproduce the work of these
children of savagery.

In the accompanying illustration are some typical small flint or chert
implements found in McLean County.

     NOTE----In 1899, I farmed the twenty acre tract in Sec. 16,
     Bloomington Township, mentioned by Mr. Brigham and during
     the spring and summer of that year at the camp-site he also
     mentions I found about 130 arrowheads, one long granite
     celt, two granite discoidal hammer-stones, two broken
     perforated sand-stone tablets and several potsherds. This
     material I donated to the McLean County Historical Society.
     It was all destroyed in the fire of June 19, 1900.

                    MILO CUSTER




_Prehistoric Mounds of Woodford County, Illinois_

_By Stanley M. East._


Acting upon information furnished Mr. Custer by Mr. L. J. Freese,
president of the Woodford County Historical Society. A number of
members of our club made a trip on July 6th of last year to Spring
Bay, Ill., to investigate some mounds on the farm of Mr. W. J.
Eichorn. We were courteously granted permission by Mr. Eichorn to
thoroughly investigate one of the smaller mounds. This was done both
by surface examination and by making a six foot excavation in the
center. Nothing however was found except a few glacial boulders in a
natural deposite about five feet beneath the mound surface and there
were no evidences of prehistoric human remains to be seen. This mound
has a height of about six feet and a diameter of approximately one
hundred feet. Owing to the fact that it was under cultivation no
further excavation could be made without injury to the corn and indeed
no further excavations appeared profitable.

On this same field and at a distance of perhaps one thousand feet is
a beautiful conical shaped mound about twenty-five feet in height and
with a base diameter of about seventy-five feet. This mound is covered
with small trees and shrubs and makes a novel and pleasing appearance
rising as it does in the cultivated field (see cut.) We have since
been given permission to excavate in this one and it is our intention
to do so at an early date.

The members making this trip were Messrs. Milo Custer, Gus Blumke, C.
H. Robinson, Mark Piper, Homer Haworth, Ed Swann, Thomas Robinson and
the writer.




_Prehistoric Indian Relics Found In The Vicinity Of "Cahokia Mound."_

_By Gus Bluemke_


April 20, 1913, a party of archaeologists from Bloomington and Normal
Ill. visited "Cahokia" or "Monk's Mound" in search of relics. The
weather was ideal and all who availed themselves of the opportunity
were indeed well repaid in the success of the trip and also for the
enjoyment and recreation which these journeys afford.

Our party was composed of the following: Mark Piper, C. H. Robinson,
T. J. Robinson, S. W. LeNeve, Miss Minerva LeNeve, Herman Cox and Milo
Custer. A second trip was made October 12, 1913, and on this occasion
the following members visited "Cahokia": C. H. Robinson, Homer
Haworth, Mark Piper, R. T. Robinson, Wm. Brigham, Stanley East, S. W.
LeNeve and the writer.

Several good specimens of arrow-heads were found, one particularly
rare specimen was found by the writer which is shown in the cut
furnished by me. This point has six notches on each edge, each of
which are one-eight of an inch in depth. The length of this point from
tip to base is one and one-quarter inches. There is also shown in the
same cut a very small arrow point one-half inch in length, and of pink
colored flint. This is a very good specimen of such a small sized
arrow point. There are shown herewith several other types of arrow
points of different sizes.

Cut furnished by Stanley M. East and Homer Haworth

[Illustration: (1) Mound on farm of W. J. Eichorn near Spring Bay,
Woodford County, Illinois.]

[Illustration: (2) Members of the Kickapoo Club at Spring Bay, Illinois, July 6,
1913.]

It is a notable fact that practically all arrow points found in this
locality are small, ranging from three-quarters of an inch to an inch
and one-half in length. The cut shows several other relics, all of
which were found near "Cahokia." The surface of the adjoining fields
are literally covered with fragments of ancient pottery. Judging from
the fancy rims and handles and the engravings on these fragments it is
evident that the mound builders were very adept in the manufacture of
this kind of pottery. The cut shows two specimens of broken pottery
and the particular surface markings on the same. There is also an
imitation of a birds head made of the same material. This was probably
an ornament or handle for some vessel. This pottery was evidently
colored in some manner as some of the fragments are bright red in
color and others are jet black or brown. Many pieces were highly
polished. There is also shown in the cut a conch core or sea shell
with reversed whorls. This one is six inches long and of these there
seem to be a great number found in this locality and found in such a
position and under such circumstances as to leave hardly a doubt in
the mind that they were held sacred by the mound builders and used in
their religious ceremonies.

A brass signet ring was also found which is evidently traders material
and may possibly have been brought there by the "monks." This ring
has a pecular emblem on the flat circular surface which looks like a
right angle with a character in the center shaped like a heart. The
circular surface of the seal or signet is five-sixteenths of an inch
in diameter and the size of the ring is three-quarter inch.

There is also shown a blue glass bead. Several beads of different
material have been found here but the most rare is one shown in
the cut, made of shell, circular in form, one inch in diameter and
three-sixteenths of an inch in thickness, with a three-sixteenths inch
hole through the center. This specimen is of the kind commonly known
as wampum and was used by the Indians as money. There is also shown in
the cut a bear's claw of which several were found by members of our
party.

The largest specimen shown in the center of the cut is a chert hoe or
cultivating implement found by the writer. This specimen is seven and
one half inches long and tapers from two to four and three quarters
inches in width. It was discovered about eighteen inches below the
surface in the field north-east of the great "Cahokia mound." The
accompanying cut shows the location of this find and a good view of
the surroundings.




_A Visit to Hopiland._

_By Miss Edith M. Cox and Herbert Cox._


At sunset on the first of August, 1913, we were at last ready to leave
Holbrook, Arizona for Hopiland--almost a hundred miles northward from
this point on the Santa Fe. The Indians--never in a hurry--had taken
the greater part of the day in loading the three white covered wagons.

Our party included four Hopis, one Navajo, a white man employed by the
government and three white women. My friend Miss Nelson a missionary
among these Hopis, was returning to her work and I was going to visit
her. The third woman was a new worker. Steve, a splendid Christian
Hopi and his twelve year old David, had come for Miss Nelson and her
friends.

Across the desert we traveled until we were at an elevation of some
seven thousand feet. The vastness of the desert, the scant and varying
vegetation, the Painted Desert, the great buttes which deceived us
by their apparent nearness, the scattered dwellings of the Navajo
Indians, the exhilaration which came from sleeping in the open, the
call of the distant coyote or the prairie dogs, the camp fire built
of anything available--all these made wonderful impressions on one
accustomed to limited horizons.

No more primitive nor interesting Indians are to be found in North
America today than these Hopis removed from the traveled highways of
men. They were discovered by Coronado in 1540. Priests came, but were
driven out by the Hopis. A few years later these Indians moved on top
of three mesas. These appear as huge prows of ships projecting into
the great desert. To protect themselves the Indians built their houses
in terrace fashion of such material that one on the desert can with
difficulty see them.

The Hopi is industrious. Walled in gardens, fields of corn on the
plain and flocks of sheep show his agricultural interests. Weaving is
done by the men in winter. They make all the clothing. The women build
and own the houses. All water is carried in jars on the backs of women
up the narrow mesa trail. Beautiful red and light colored pottery is
made on First Mesa while baskets are made by the women of Second Mesa.
The foundation of these baskets is grass covered with yucca fibers
bleached in the sun or colored with juices from plants. If the public
realized the value of these baskets so that it would demand them these
Indians would not be so poor.

The Hopi has no written language. Some two thousand words constitute
his vocabulary. The older people use the sign language very much.

The Hopi marriage is little more than a washing of the heads of each
party in seperate bowls, then in one bowl. One may marry another if
he is absent. Divorce is easily obtained by putting a man's saddle
outside the door. If he puts wood outside her door and it is taken in
he may enter again.

Children not old enough to belong to the Tribe are buried in crevices
of the rocks. The place of burial indicated by a stick. It is not
uncommon to see eight or nine sticks in one place. The older ones are
buried in a sitting posture in the ground. The third or fourth morning
after burial they believe the spirit partakes of meal and water; then
by means of a feather pointing west it goes to its spirit home in the
Grand Canyon.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: (Cut furnished by Gus Bluemke.)]

They have many ceremonies and rites. Some two hundred spirits are
worshipped. These are represented by masked men, dolls and placs.

The desire for rain has an important part in many ceremonies. This is
true of the famous Hopi Snake Dance. This attracted much attention
last year because attended by Mr. Roosevelt. Some fifty machines,
mostly Fords, made the desert trip. The Hopis believe a great smoke
in the earth controls the rain. A great many rattle and bull snakes
are gathered and cared for in the underground "kivas" or caves. At
sunset on the ninth day of the ceremony the snake men come from the
kivas. They dance with the snake in the mouth until all have been thus
treated. A priest frees them in the rocks and prays that the parent
snake may give the Hopis rain.

Our government maintains a school for children of each mesa and
one more advanced at government headquarters. Those desiring to go
further are sent to Indian schools. Some of these Hopis are known as
unfriendlies--hostile to the government. Until last year soldiers had
to be sent to get their children whom the parents refused to send.

Besides the missionaries who are doing much the government has its
agent, farmer, windmill man, doctors, teachers and matrons.

On my return to the railroad we were delayed because of heavy
rains. What was a small stream in August was in September a river
three-fourths of a mile wide when we first saw it. In the bed of this
stream our wagon was stuck. The chief of the Navajo Tribe helped us
take it to pieces and so get it out of the mud in the wash.

Imagine if you can what it would mean to hear a train whistle after
six weeks' absence from civilization. As we topped the rise on the
afternoon of the fourth day the sight of that brought me to my
feet. How I gazed at it! My Indian driver said "Miss----pashalayi"
("Miss----you are very happy.")

Early the next morning three of us said good bye. My Indian companion
with his hat in hand and my father and I said more in those parting
handshakes than words could ever tell. A few minutes later we were
borne westward by train and he to the north in his wagon.

[Illustration: Section of a Hopi Village, Second Mesa, Shipaulovi.]

(Handwritten notation: Cut Furnished by Herbert Cox)




KATAHOTAN.

Old Town.

(To The Kickapoo Club.)


    Behold the trail
    Where many moccasinned feet have trod,
    And many white mens weary steps
    Have led to death untimely, or to long captivity.

    Behold the village site,
    Where once the Kickapoos
    In pole-bark houses lived, and where
    Their council-house
    Stood from the others, somewhat larger,
    And a little way apart.

    Here Pemoatam and Masheena met
    To choose for war or peace, and choosing war,
    Set forth upon that dire ill-fated way
    That led to Tippecanoe, and Tecumsehs fall.

    Here also came
    Frenchman and Spaniard in the early days,
    Then our First Settlers in the later times,
    To counsel with their distant Indian neighbors.

    Black Robes and Couriers des Bois,
    Long Knives and Rangers intermingled.
    And here came traders from the far Detroit,
    To barter white mens wares for Indian peltries.

    Behold where once the Dance Ground was
    Where many soft-shod feet have stepped
    To rhythmic beating of the painted drums,
    And rattling of the shaking, stone-filled gourds.

    And here the head men lectured and exhorted them
    To follow steadfast in their fathers ways,
    Which they had practiced ere the white men came,
    With hands against the whites eternally.

    Behold the graves
    Of many Kickapoos who died
    Long years before their children
    Left Illinois and journeyed westward.

    And here the stockade fort
    Built up by other hands than theirs,
    Of which no mark nor trace remains
    Save this the whites erected.

    From these few gleanings of the early years,
    From these few broken fragments that we find,
    Canst realize and picture once anew
    The scenes of former days in Katahotan?

    Canst conjure mental vision of the times
    When priest and white fur-trader may have come
    To preach "salvation" and to barter wares
    With savage tribesmen who once dwelt herein?

    Canst picture Lee and Stark or old Masheena?
    Or Pemoatam whose consistent pride
    Forbade him live beneath the Long Knives rule
    But whom afflictions blow could not withstand?

    Where now the corn and grass grows rank,
    Where now the white mens cattle come to drink
    At spring or stream where once the buffalo
    And deer and Indian pony slaked their thirst?

    It may be also here Kaanakuk
    Once taught his people of those better ways
    So well remembered yet, but which
    So few still follow faithfully.

    If they should choose, his people might come here
    To see where once their forbears lived.
    Where some who once found humble burial,
    And other hands have long years since removed.

    I fear that strange tradition which they hold
    That 'Some day we shall all go back
    To Aneneewa whence our people came'
    Shall never never be fulfilled,
    Nor moccasinned feet shall tread this soil again
    In Times unending course of centuries.

    Lest in some unknown shadow-land, perchance
    Within that place they call Apamekka,
    Of which their "Prophet" taught them--
    Celestial Katahotan--
    Celestial "Aneneewa."

    For now the corn and grass grows rank
    And now the white mens cattle come to drink
    At spring and stream where once the buffalo
    And deer and Indian pony slaked their thirst.

                        M. C.




Transcriber's Notes


Minor punctuation typos were silently corrected. Run-on sentences and
grammatical errors were retained as in the original.

Spelling variations were retained for Bluemke(2)/Blumke(5) and
Kaufman(1)/Kauffman(1).

Page 1: Probable typo: "varities" for "varieties."
  (Orig: such large varities of implements and ornaments)

Plate 4: Typo "No. 4" for "No. 3."
  (Orig: Artifacts ... on Camp Site shown on Plate No. 4)

Page 5: Deleted duplicate "and."
  (Orig: perforated sand-stone tablets and and several potsherds.)

Page 6: Probable typo: "deposite" for "deposit."
  (Orig: a few glacial boulders in a natural deposite)

Page 6: Changed "an" to "and."
  (Orig: from tip to base is one an one-quarter inches.)

Page 7: Changed "pratically" to "practically."
  (Orig: It is a notable fact that pratically all arrow points)

Page 7: Changed "brough" to "brought."
  (Orig: possibly have been brough there by the "monks.")

Page 7: Probable typo: "pecular" for "peculiar."
  (Orig: This ring has a pecular emblem)

Page 8: Probable typo: "seperate" for "separate."
  (Orig: each party in seperate bowls,)








End of Project Gutenberg's Note-book No. 1 of the Kickapoo Club, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTE-BOOK #1 OF KICKAPOO CLUB ***

***** This file should be named 45440.txt or 45440.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/4/4/45440/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Bryan Ness, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
