The Project Gutenberg eBook, Roster and Statistical Record of Company D,
of the Eleventh Regiment Maine Infantry Volunteers, by Albert Maxfield and
Robert Brady


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Roster and Statistical Record of Company D, of the Eleventh Regiment Maine Infantry Volunteers
       With a Sketch of Its Services in the War of the Rebellion


Author: Albert Maxfield and Robert Brady



Release Date: April 26, 2014  [eBook #45503]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROSTER AND STATISTICAL RECORD OF
COMPANY D, OF THE ELEVENTH REGIMENT MAINE INFANTRY VOLUNTEERS***


E-text prepared by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/rosterstatistica00maxf


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).





ROSTER AND STATISTICAL RECORD OF COMPANY D,
OF THE ELEVENTH REGIMENT MAINE INFANTRY VOLUNTEERS,

With A Sketch of Its Services in the War of the Rebellion.

Prepared by

ALBERT MAXFIELD AND ROBERT BRADY, JR.


    "Far from over the distance,
        The faltering echoes come:
    Of the flying blast of bugle
        And the rattling roll of drum."




1890.




_In offering this Sketch, Roster and Statistical Record of the services
of Company D in the War of the Rebellion, to its members, we wish to
acknowledge the kind assistance given in its preparation by the men of
D and of the Eleventh; also of that given by citizen friends in Maine,
in tracing the fate of members of the Company who have wandered out of
view in the twenty-five years that have passed since they were mustered
out; and to acknowledge that of Captain Thomas Clark of the Office of
the Adjutant-General of Maine, he having kindly furnished us with
valuable and necessary information._

_In reading the Sketch, members of D will kindly remember that it is
written from one point of view only, and that many things they would
like to see in it that are not there, may not have been sufficiently
well remembered by the writer, if he ever knew them, to enable him to
set them down in a trustworthy manner, and, too, that the limitations
of space and the unity of the sketch made it necessary for him to leave
out many things that he himself would have been glad to have
incorporated in the story he had to tell._

_The Roster and Statistical Record is as complete as it has seemed
possible to make it. That there are blanks where there should be
information is not at all the fault of the compiler, he having sought
diligently but unsuccessfully for the information the blank spaces
should furnish._

_ALBERT MAXFIELD_,

_ROBERT BRADY, Jr._




COMPANY D,

--OF THE--

ELEVENTH REGIMENT MAINE INFANTRY VOLUNTEERS,

--IN THE--

WAR OF THE REBELLION.


This Company was formed in the early Fall of 1861. Its members were
chiefly from the towns of the upper Penobscot, from Lee, Springfield,
Topsfield, Enfield, Prentiss, and contiguous towns; a few from other
parts of the State signing the Company rolls at Augusta.

According to its first descriptive list, much the greater number of the
original members of D were farmers by occupation at the time of their
enlistment, and most of them were young men of from eighteen to
twenty-four years of age. And according to the same authority, its
voluntary organization consisted of Leonard S. Harvey, Captain; John D.
Stanwood, First Lieutenant; Gibson S. Budge, Second Lieutenant; Robert
Brady, First Sergeant; with Abner F. Bassett, Jas. W. Noyes, Judson L.
Young and Francis M. Johnson as Sergeants; John McDonald, Richard W.
Dawe, Ephraim Francis, Hughey G. Rideout, John Sherman, Benjamin Gould,
Wm. H. Chamberlain and Freeman R. Dakin as Corporals; Robert A.
Strickland, Musician; Henry W. Rider, Wagoner; the rest of the Company,
77 in number, consenting to serve their country as private soldiers.


AUGUSTA AND WASHINGTON.

Thus organized, the Company rendezvoused at Augusta, where, October 19,
'61, it was mustered into the service of the United States, as Company
D, of the Eleventh Regiment Maine Infantry Volunteers.

The regiment started for Washington, November 13, '61, arriving there
on the 16th, and the same day pitched its circular Ellis tents on
Meridian Hill, back of Washington, naming its camp "Knox," after the
hero of the Revolution that Maine claims as her own.

The only really notable event that took place in the several weeks the
regiment occupied Camp Knox, was the Battle of the Sand Pits, by which
name the quarrel between the men of the Eleventh and those of a United
States Cavalry Regiment camped near Camp Knox, is known to the
initiated. Whatever the cause of the quarrel, it culminated in an
undisciplined rush to arms and a prompt occupation of the disputed sand
pits by the more hot headed of the Eleventh. Fortunately no blood was
shed before the officers of the two regiments got their men under
control. No reputations were lost in this engagement, and but one was
made, that of Private Longley, of D Company, who, with characteristic
French-Canadian impetuosity slipped a cartridge into the muzzle of his
Belgian rifle, bullet end first, effectually spiking the piece.

The Eleventh was here brigaded with the 104th and 52nd Pennsylvania,
the 56th and 100th New York Infantry Regiments, Regan's Seventh New
York Battery of three inch ordnance guns attached; Colonel W. W. H.
Davis, of the 104th Pennsylvania, in command of the Brigade, by reason
of seniority of commission.

Soon after this formation, on New Year's Day, 1862, the brigade went
into winter quarters in Carver Barracks, on Meridian Hill. Each
regiment was domiciled in a dozen or fourteen one-story wooden
houses, shell like structures of from fifty to sixty feet in length,
twenty-five or thirty in width, and separated from each other by a
street of perhaps twenty-five feet in width. The buildings of each
regiment bordered one side of a great esplanade, the garrison flag
floating from a tall staff in its center, each building laying a gable
end to this square, which was common to all for drill and parade
purposes.

Here the Winter was passed in perfecting the drill and discipline of
the men, the officers gaining their technical military knowledge, book
in hand, while imparting the contents to their stalwart pupils. In this
way both officers and men practiced assiduously until they could load
and fire in a truly military manner; march with mathematical accuracy
and wheel geometrically. They also learned to obey orders without demur
or question, under penalty of "Death or some worse punishment," as the
men would have it the United States Army Regulations, read to them so
frequently, provided for about all the offences in the military
decalogue, this being their free rendering of the often closing phrase
of a paragraph:--"Death, or such other punishment as the sentence of a
court martial may inflict."

So far as recollection serves, the men of D were not given to law
breaking. There is a remembrance though of Private Bridges standing on
the head of a barrel at the head of the company street, a punishment
for some now forgotten offense that did not seem to affect Private
Bridges' sense of shame to any appreciable degree, he assuring all
anxious inquirers that he was stationed in so commanding a position
that he might announce the paymaster's anticipated approach from
Washington, that all men of D might have timely warning to be on hand
to receive their somewhat overdue dollars.

It was a very dull winter. About all the diversions from drill and
parade that I recall are a few days on pass spent in wandering through
the Capitol and other Government buildings--through the Smithsonian
Institute--in visiting the already crowded hospitals--a marching part
in the pompous military funeral given General Lander's body--and a
dinner party given by D on Washington's Birthday, at which the field
and staff of the regiment, the conspicuous guests, paid for their
oyster stew and cider in speeches of impassioned eloquence, prophesying
such a speedy downfall of the Wicked Rebellion that some of our men
were almost inclined to pack their knapsacks before going to sleep, not
to run any risk of missing the eastern train in the morning in case the
W.R. should fall to pieces during the night.

This seems to be the place to have it recalled by Lieutenant Budge to
the men of D who passed the Winter of 1861-62 in these barracks, that
he commanded a detail that winter that, under the direction of the
Provost Marshal General of Washington, seized and spilled into the
gutters of that city some thirty thousand dollars worth of more or less
ardent spirits. It would be interesting to have added to these figures
a computation of the number of gallons of such fluids spilled by the
men of D during its entire military history, spilled from canteens and
other fluid receptacles, especially the number of gallons spilled by
the re-enlisted men when on their famous furlough in the Winter of
1864.

Life in Washington passed as briefly indicated until March, when
preparations were made for moving "On to Richmond." So eager were the
men to make this movement, many of them fancying it would bring about
an immediate ending of the war, that they chafed at the unavoidable
delay that lack of transport service occasioned; Private Leighton, I
believe it was, voicing the opinion of many that the delay was
pusillanimous, and patriotically declaring for an immediate taking of
Richmond and the hanging of Jeff. Davis, that all the farmers of the
army might get home in time to attend to their Spring planting. And
when there was one false start, the regiment in line, with baggage
packed, and all ready for the word of command, then we were ordered
back to quarters, there were curses loud and deep, even had been
deacons using language that would have shocked the sisters, till the
band jocularly struck up "Wait for the wagon and we'll all take a
ride," when good nature was restored, proving that music indeed hath
soothing charms.


THE PENINSULA CAMPAIGN.

The afternoon of the 28th of March, the brigade, now the third of
General Casey's division of the Fourth Army Corps, General Keyes,
commanding, was actually en route for Alexandria; Captain Maxfield's
diary says:--"With boots blacked, hands in white gloves and brass
shoulder scales on," a campaign guise difficult for the men of '64 to
appreciate.

This was a hard march for green troops, unaccustomed to heavy marching
order, with more too than the phrase implies, for besides gun,
equipments, forty rounds of cartridges, the knapsacks were not only
stuffed with the ordinary kits of soldiers, but were laden with the
remains of civilian wardrobes and the accumulations of a winter's
garrison duty. I think that no man of D ever reached a more welcome
camp ground than the one outside of Alexandria that night. And by the
time the newly issued shelter tents were buttoned together, were
pitched, and the camp fires were lighted, there were many too weary to
care for anything but to creep supperless into their tents, wrap their
blankets around them and rest their aching bones. In the morning
reveille awoke them to see a Spring snow storm, half rain and half snow
beating down, followed by a day of discomfort and another night on a
wet camp ground, and glad enough the next afternoon, that of March
30th, were all to get on board the transport Constitution, with all its
discomforts of wet decks, on which the men must sleep closely crowded
together; four regiments of our brigade, the Eleventh, the 56th and the
100th New York, and the 52d Pennsylvania regiments, with Regan's
Battery, jamming the five decked Constitution to its utmost capacity.

Proceeding to Fortress Monroe, we were ordered to land at Newport News,
to which place we were taken by a smaller steamer, the Constitution
drawing too many feet of water to be able to reach the landing place.
In steaming across the bay the masts of the sunken war ships could be
seen standing above the surface of the water telling of the great Naval
combat that so lately took place in this placid water. Soon a puff of
smoke rolled out from a rebel battery off Sewell's Point, announcing
the coming of the first hostile shot. It fell so far short of our
steamer that the tell-tale spray of water its plunge threw into the air
was received by us with a yell of derision.

Landing at Newport News the 2d of April, the brigade went into camp,
where we remained for a few days owing to lack of wagon transportation.
It was here that the men first went on picket. And Captain Maxfield's
diary records that there was a rush among them to go on picket duty,
probably as great a one as there was in later years to escape such
service.

The 6th of April, we proceeded to Young's Mills, where we occupied the
log barracks rebel troops had occupied the previous winter. Here the
regiment was paid off, and where they had learned it is a mystery, but
it did seem as if not only the men of D but those of every company of
the regiment were adepts in the mysteries of the national game; for
wherever you went through the thick woods surrounding the barracks you
would come across groups of men squatting around the tops of hard bread
boxes laid on the ground, and hear such mystic phrases as:--"Ante up or
leave the board." "It's your deal." "I raise you five cents." "I see
you and go you five better." Some of the men wrecked their available
fortunes in a few hours at the game, then would borrow a quarter from
some friend and regain all they had lost, only to lose it again before
night. Such is the see-saw of fortune.

The 17th of April, we rejoined the brigade in position before Lee's
Mill, on the creek known as the Warwick River. We took a modest part in
the siege of Yorktown. I chiefly remember a reconnoissance in which
Company D followed a skirmish line as its reserve.

By company front, trying to keep a perfect alignment, keeping step as
if on parade, D crashed through woods and bushes, quite undaunted until
a shell came screeching towards them; and as it fell some twenty feet
before them, burst in a cloud of smoke and the pieces went flying into
the air, our heroes waited with open mouths for half a minute perhaps,
certainly quite long enough for all danger to have passed, then at one
and the same time each and all, as if by a common impulse, threw
themselves flat upon the ground, and digging their noses into the soil,
lay there for another full half minute before arising to march on their
dignified way.

Think of that you men of Morris Island, to whom flying shot and shells
became a matter of course, of no more consequence than beans from a
bean shooter. But that was your first shell, and 'twas long before you
had heard the warning cries of "Jim Island" and "Sullivan," long before
those names had become so familiar to you as to have hardened your
nerves to comparative indifference.

It was in this reconnoissance that the first man of the regiment was
killed, Private Mace, of Company A. As the first man of the regiment
killed, his body had a fascination for all of us as it lay in camp, and
few of us but were awe struck as we looked upon the waxen face of our
comrade, now drained of blood, but yesterday blooming with health and
spirits, struck dead in a second as if by a thunderbolt. The only other
matter for record here is our being called out early one morning to
stand to arms and listen to the attack a portion of the Vermont brigade
made on the dam across the Warwick, known as Dam No. 1. Though the
charging and the answering yells, the crash of musketry and the booming
of cannon came to us, out of danger, but as the crash and uproar of a
distant thunder shower, yet it was so suggestive of what was going on
in the semi-darkness beyond the intervening woods, that it gave some of
us a dread foreboding that the time was really near at hand when we
must be active participants in just such bits of the bloody game of
war.

We were not in the trenches before Yorktown at any time except as
individuals. Then to creeping to the outer works and watching the slow
operations of the siege, we much preferred to sit in the interior works
and listen to the blood-curdling tales of the so-called California
sharpshooters, the butts of whose rifles were notched to their utmost
capacity, each notch representing a dead rebel, according to its
owner's statement, but as it was estimated that the combined notches on
the butts of their rifles outnumbered the entire rebel force under
Magruder, it is more probable that they bore quite as much testimony to
the mendacious abilities of the story tellers as to their sharp
shooting ones.

One fine May morning, that of the 4th, it was known that Magruder had
evacuated Yorktown the night before, and under the command of our new
brigade commander, Brigadier General Henry M. Naglee, we were in quick
pursuit. We crossed the rebel lines at Lee's Mills, which fortified
position we gallantly carried without loss in the absence of the flying
enemy.

As the different commands of our army moved forward, they converged on
the road leading from Yorktown to Williamsburg with the result that
this road was soon packed with horse, foot and artillery, all pushing
eagerly forward, and without overmuch regards for right of way.

Company D, holding the right of the regiment, was a pleased auditor to
a little conversation between Colonel Caldwell and the irate commander
of a regiment the Eleventh had unceremoniously displaced. The displaced
commander was evidently, by manner and seat in the saddle, a regular
officer, which then meant among other things, an officer with large
ideas of his own importance as a trained military man, and small ones
of all volunteer officers.

"Sir," roared he, riding up to Colonel Caldwell, "How dare you march
across the head of my command?"

The Colonel looked at him in his large placid way, without answering
him, much as a mastiff looks at a snarling terrier.

"Do you know who I am, sir?" yelled the angry commander, now doubly
enraged at the elaborate indifference, and the apparently studied
silence of our Colonel. "I am Major so-and-so of such and such a
regiment."

"And I," answered Colonel Caldwell, smiling blandly, touching his cap
with military courtesy as he spoke, "And I am Colonel John C. Caldwell,
commanding the Eleventh Maine Regiment of Infantry Volunteers, and am
quite at your service, sir."

Speechless with rage, and fairly gasping at the haw-haw of approval we
country bumpkins gave the Colonel's answer, Major so-and-so backed his
horse a little, turned him, and galloped away in as furious a state of
mind as any gallant Major ever galloped in.

This bright May day was spent by the infantry in marching and halting
while the cavalry pressed forward on the heels of the flying enemy.
Towards night the regiments went into bivouac. Then the men scattered
for foraging purposes. The inhabitants had mainly fled to Richmond,
perhaps naturally, they consisting of women, children and male
antiquities generally, McClellan's report stating that every able
bodied male of the Peninsula was in the ranks of the rebel army.

They went hastily, evidently. I remember one house from which the
occupants had fled just as they were about to seat themselves to a meal
apparently, for the table was spread with dishes and untouched
victuals. Loading themselves with food and furniture from these
deserted houses, the boys returned to camp.

My particular group of D slept that night on a feather bed, spread on
the ground, with sheets, quilts, pillows--all the accompaniments. But,
alas, it began to rain heavily in the night, so that before morning our
downy nest of the evening before was about as comfortable a sleeping
place as a bed-tick filled with mush and milk would be--a soaked,
oozing, nasty mess.

In the morning we pushed forward in a heavy rain over roads cut up by
artillery wheels and punched full of holes by the hoofs of innumerable
horses. We could soon hear the battle of Williamsburg progressing in
front as we, wet to the skin, plodded on our miserable way. Towards
night, General McClellan ordered General Naglee to push forward and
reinforce General Hancock, who was reported as heavily pressed. We
moved forward rapidly and zealously, but before we could reach Hancock,
that brilliant commander had, by feigning a retreat, led the opposing
enemy from their intrenchments into the open field, where with a few
heavy volleys he stopped them, then charging with the bayonet, routed
and dispersed their column, capturing some five hundred of it.

We arrived only in time to witness the overthrow of the enemy, and to
give the victors generous cheers of congratulations. Taking position in
line, we stood to our arms through a cold, wet night, entirely without
fire, and almost without food, our nearly empty haversacks furnishing
us with a very scanty supper. It was a night to remember.

But in the morning, the dreaded morning, when all that long line of
earthworks, beyond which lay the old city of Williamsburg, must be
carried; in the morning our chilled blood was not only warmed by a
brilliant sun, but by the knowledge that the Confederates had evacuated
these intrenchments too, and were still falling back towards Richmond.

The supply trains had been left behind in leaving the lines before
Yorktown, and when enterprising wagon-masters did get their trains
towards the front, they were compelled to give way to hurrying troops
and artillery. It now became necessary to await the coming of these but
lately despised supply trains, for soldiers, to march and fight, must
be fed, and you might as well try to get fight out of empty cartridge
boxes as out of empty haversacks.

A few days then, we of necessity spent before Williamsburg, to rest the
exhausted troops and to replenish empty cartridge boxes and haversacks.
These few days were mainly passed by our men in taking a first sight of
the horrors of war. Not only our own wounded were there, but the
enemy's as well, left behind in the care of their surgeons, in the
hurried flight of the rear guard that had made the stand for delay at
Williamsburg. Cut, hacked, shot, dead and dying, a sorry sight there
was in the barracks Confederate troops had occupied during the winter,
now used for hospital purposes. And out on the field was a worse one.
Dead bodies lay where they fell, and as they fell. Some in the act of
loading, some as if firing, these that had been shot dead in their
tracks; others lay on their backs or curled into tortuous shapes,
staring stonily, as if for a last look at the world that had faded from
their darkening eyes as the life blood poured from their mortal wounds.
However hardened we became afterwards, the most indifferent of us by
nature was then visibly affected by the gruesome sights we saw on the
bloody field of Williamsburg.

The 9th of May we were on the march again, but moved slowly, the roads
being few and narrow, and the weather rainy. On the 13th, Colonel
Caldwell having been promoted a Brigadier-General, took leave of us and
Colonel Plaisted assumed command. It was two o'clock in the morning of
the 14th of May before we reached New Kent Court House, and about the
19th before we reached the Chickahominy and took possession of the
ruins of Bottoms and the Railroad Bridges.

A reconnoissance D and a piece of artillery made showed that the last
named bridge had been burned. We had a merry exchange of grape with the
enemy's artillery across the river, here about forty feet wide, fringed
with a dense growth of forest trees, and bordered by low marshy bottom
lands, varying from half a mile to a mile in width, as McClellan
describes it. The following day, the 20th, Naglee's Brigade crossed
Bottoms Bridge and D with another company of infantry and a squadron of
cavalry followed General Naglee for some miles along a road leading
through White Oak Swamp to the James River. We touched the enemy's
cavalry but once and quickly formed at a bridge to receive his
anticipated charge. It not coming, General Naglee crossed the bridge
with his cavalry and charged the enemy, the General at the head of his
little force scattering the enemy in every direction but ours. We then
marched on again for some miles, when the infantry went into position
at a big farm house on a commanding hill and General Naglee and the
cavalry rode away towards the James River. It was said that they
watered their horses in that river before returning to us, which they
did in about an hour. We then made a rapid retrograde movement for
Bottoms Bridge, marching back by another road than that we had taken in
advancing, by this sharp manoeuvre escaping the attention of a body of
gray coated gentlemen who had assembled at a point on our line of
advance to give us a taste of Southern hospitality on our return march.
This rapid and brilliant reconnoissance, right through the enemy's
country, gave General McClellan important information regarding roads
and their connections that he found very useful to him when unexpected
circumstances forced us to retreat in that direction.

On the 24th of May, General Naglee's brigade dislodged the enemy from
the vicinity of Seven Pines and secured a strong position for our
advance. McClellan says also that on the 25th, under cover of a
movement by General Naglee, the whole Fourth Corps took up and began to
fortify a position at Seven Pines. On the 28th his record also shows
Casey's division was moved forward to Fair Oaks, three-quarters of a
mile in advance of Seven Pines, leaving General Couch at the works at
Seven Pines. General Casey immediately began a new line of rifle pits
and a small redoubt for six field guns to cover our new position. Here
we were engaged in constant skirmishing and picket service until May
31, when the battle of Fair Oaks was fought. When about noon of the
31st of May the Rebel Commands of D. H. Hill, Huger, Longstreet and G.
W. Smith swept down on Casey's division, D and other companies of the
regiment were on the picket line, D on the extreme right. The few
members of D left in camp joined regiments moving to the front as they
came forward, and with the rest of Naglee's Brigade, to use the
language of General McClellan's official report concerning our brigade,
"struggled gallantly to maintain the redoubt and rifle pits against the
overwhelming masses of the enemy." As individuals those of D so engaged
did their duty, both here and in the later stands made at General
Couch's rifle pits. One of them, Private Gray, reported missing, was
undoubtedly killed while voluntarily attached to some stranger
organization, receiving burial with their dead of his adopted regiment.
But the story of D as a company we will tell from information furnished
us by its First Sergeant, Brady, who commanded and directed its
movements when it made its stand on the picket line against an
advancing line of battle. The portion of the Regiment not on picket was
taken into the battle by then Major Campbell, and shares with the 104th
Pennsylvania the warm encomiums of official writers on the heroic
bravery shown by these two regiments that day.

The night before the battle of Fair Oaks was one of a terrible storm,
that we all know. D went on picket that evening, occupying the extreme
right of the line, an entirely unsupported position. The men passed a
miserable night, watching in darkness and storm, sheltering themselves
as they best could and still remain alert, for all the signs pointed to
an early attack on us; the pressure of the enemies skirmish lines, the
plain movements of their troops, and the fact that they must either
dislodge us or lose Richmond. Towards morning the storm ceased, and the
day broke with the promise of clearness. Shortly afterwards Sergeant
Brady came out of camp with Private Annis, then a detailed cook, Annis
bearing a camp kettle in which he proceeded to prepare coffee, when the
men partook of a rough breakfast. Soon Lieutenant Washington, of
General Johnston's staff, rode unexpectedly into the line of D, having
mistaken a road in carrying orders to some rebel command. Quickly
halted, he ruefully yielded himself a prisoner, and under Captain
Harvey's pilotage made an unwilling way to General Casey's
headquarters. Captain Harvey failing to return, the command of the
company devolved upon Second Lieutenant Johnson, as First Lieutenant
Stanwood was away sick. The capture of Lieutenant Washington made the
pickets doubly alert. Besides, General Naglee himself rode out to their
line to make observations, and warned them that they were liable to be
attacked at any moment. Soon great activity was displayed by the rebel
pickets in the immediate front, and sharp picket fighting took place
during the forenoon. A little after noon the roar of the attack on the
left was heard. It was uncertain what the pickets should do. Lieutenant
Johnson and Corporal Keene moved out on the right to learn, if they
could, what force, if any, guarded the flank. They found it entirely
unguarded, and moved along until they fell in with Sumner's advance,
when they were occupied in giving information concerning the movements
of the enemy, and the bearing of the roads to General Sumner's aids.

Sergeant Brady had been left in command of the company by Lieutenant
Johnson, and shortly a rebel line of battle appeared moving towards the
line held by D. Under Sergeant Brady's orders, some of the men began to
barricade the road they centered on by falling trees across it, the
others keeping up a rapid fire on the enemy to give the idea by their
boldness that they covered a line of battle, while really between them
and Fair Oaks there was then no force whatever. This ruse succeeded to
an unexpected degree, the rebel line of battle halting, throwing out a
strong skirmish line, and making an elaborately cautious advance. Of
course their skirmishers easily flanked our forlorn pickets, and
curling them back in spite of their stubborn resistance, finally
scattered them through the woods.

Before the rebel onset, Sergeant Brady, realizing by the sound of the
battle that he was cut off from his camp, had carefully cautioned the
men to make their line of inevitable retreat toward the right and rear,
and fortunately for most of them they followed these orders, reaching
our lines in safety. Those that were captured were Sergeant Bassett,
Corporal Dakin, Musician Strickland, Privates William and Moses
Sherman, House, and lastly Sergeant Brady himself, who, the captor of
two rebel soldiers, was triumphantly following his prisoners into our
lines as he supposed, when, reaching the railroad, a line of rebel
infantry confronted him, and he found it necessary to exchange place
with his own prisoners, who, you may be sure, took a great pleasure in
escorting him to Richmond. These, with Private Gray killed, and Private
Blaine wounded, cover the loss of D at the battle of Fair Oaks.

It will be seen by this, that when night fell on the first day of the
battle of Fair Oaks, Company D was somewhat scattered. Some of its
members had joined the colors, but many were still wandering in search
of them, while a stout detachment was already housed in Libby Prison.
But before the next day noontime, the company was fully organized again
under the command of Lieutenant Johnson, Captain Harvey relinquishing
the command, pending the acceptance of his resignation, which
circumstances forced him to send in.

The regiment took no part in the second day's fighting, constituting
part of the reserve. That night they lay in the edge of a piece of
woods. During it certain mules belonging to the Q.M. Department of our
army were stampeded, galloping in a body along our line of battle, the
rattling of the chains of their harnesses which had not been removed
when they were unhitched from the wagons, so resembling the clanking of
the scabbards of galloping cavalrymen, that many of the Eleventh, more
than will confess it, were sure that the rebel Stuart and his cavalry
were upon us. For a few minutes the utmost consternation and confusion
prevailed, but the truth was quickly known and quiet restored. Of
course no one was really scared, still it is said that some of the
Eleventh, and they not all of the rank and file either, displayed an
unexpected aptitude for tree climbing during the misconception.

After the battle we had occasion to look over the battle-field, for of
course we did not know that our missing were captured, they might be
killed or wounded.

It told the same ghastly story of war as that of Williamsburg. Our
hastily abandoned camp had been rummaged by the Confederates and the
shelter tents and old blankets taken from it to spread on the wet
ground as they lay in line of battle. The long line of wet trampled
tents and blankets told the exact position the enemy occupied the night
of the first day of the battle. The kettles still hung over the charred
embers of the extinguished cook fires, the headquarters' tents still
stood in their places, the horns of the band still hanging on the limbs
of the apple trees they were hanging on when the band took its hasty
departure for Augusta. It tooted for us no more. In a day or two our
division was placed under command of General Peck and ordered to guard
the Railroad Bridge and Bottoms Bridge; Couch's division guarding the
fords across the White Oak Swamp. For some days our position was at the
bridges, we camping at the end of the Railroad Bridge, just where the
Confederate artillery had stood when D and its Federal piece of
artillery first opened fire on each other from opposite ends of the
bridge. Then came the swift and almost unheralded march of Jackson from
the Valley to the south side of the Chickahominy and the Seven Days'
Battles. The story of the Battle of Gaines' Mills was brought to us by
the seemingly interminable army of the disheartened troops that for
hours filed across the Railroad Bridge, without officers or orders,
clamoring that all was lost, and that Jackson was moving swiftly
towards us, crushing all opposition.

With a well-manned battery, strongly supported, placed on the hill
behind us, the Eleventh went down into the swamps of the Chickahominy,
remaining there in a long skirmish line for two or three days,
expecting every hour to hear the skirmishers of the enemy crashing
through the woods of the opposite shore of the Chickahominy, now easily
fordable by light troops. But before the momentarily uncertain enemy
moved forward McClellan's rapidly laid plans had been fully acted on,
our right wing was across the Chickahominy by its various bridges, the
bridges were destroyed, and the retreat to the James River was in full
operation. As we moved away from the Railroad Bridge, the center spans
of which had been destroyed by axemen of the Eleventh the day before,
the famous train of cars that our men had loaded with shells and
combustibles at Savage Station came tearing down the track, and
reaching the bridge took its mighty header.

General "Dick" Taylor, of the Confederates, who was in command of the
troops at the other end of the bridge, says of it, while the battle of
Savage Station was raging on the afternoon of June 29th, Magruder
attacking Sumner, to be beaten off, the din of the distant combat was
silenced to his ears by a train approaching from Savage Station,
gathering speed as it rushed along, quickly emerging from the forest to
show two engines drawing a long string of cars. Reaching the bridge,
the engines exploded with a terrible noise, followed in succession by
the explosion of the carriages laden with ammunition. Shells burst in
all directions, he says, the river was lashed into foam, trees were
torn for acres around, and several of his men were wounded.

To this harsh music we moved swiftly away till we had crossed White Oak
Swamp Bridge in gathering darkness and reached the high ground beyond
it. Here we bivouacked in line of battle, all but the guards sleeping
on their arms, while the rear guard came filing across the bridge.
In the morning exhausted troops could be seen lying fast asleep
everywhere--in the fields, the woods, even in the dusty road itself.
But all of our troops were across the swamp, and as fast as the packed
condition of the roads to the James would permit, all but those of
us to form the rear guard of the day, the divisions of Smith and
Richardson and Naglee's Brigade, under command of Franklin, to lay here
and hold Jackson himself at bay, were moving slowly towards the next
selected position to make a stand--Malvern Hill. That Jackson was on
the other side of the bridge we knew, the rattle of the skirmishers'
rifles told us that. But just about noon he announced his presence by
suddenly opening on us with thirty pieces of artillery.

One moment there was nothing above us but a cloudless summer sky, the
next the air was full of shrieking shells, bursting in puffs of white
smoke, and showering down a storm of broken iron. It was so startling
in its suddenness that it is not strange, as the Second Corps
chronicler says, that there was "a scene of dire confusion." And to add
to it, the men in charge of a ponton train drawn up by the roadside,
waiting for an opportunity to lumber away along it, unhitched their
horses, mounted them and fled for the James River.

The confusion lasted but for a minute, and in it the Eleventh had no
share. We were lying in the edge of the woods that bordered the great
cleared field in which the troops and trains were massed, and perhaps
had an advantage in all being wide awake. At any rate we were not a bit
demoralized. Scarcely a man started to his feet, all waiting for the
word of command. It came quickly, and from the mouth of General Naglee
himself, who riding up to us and seeing our immovability while the
troops around us were in evident confusion, could not restrain his
delight at our coolness, but cried out "Fall in, my Yankee squad," for
the Eleventh was few in numbers now. We fell in, and as he proudly led
us across the big field to a new position, we stiffened our necks and
neither dodged or bowed to the storm of iron beating down upon us. We
had made a hit, and we knew it.

Taking up a position behind the rails of a torn-down fence, the
Eleventh lay listening to Jackson's cannon and watching Hazzard's
battery as it swept the White Oak Swamp Bridge with a storm of grape
and cannister that kept even Jackson at bay. The cannoneers fell one by
one--were thinned out until the officers not yet killed or wounded
dismounted and took their places at the guns. It was whispered that
their ammunition was giving out--was most gone--a few rounds more and
the last shell would be fired, and then Jackson and his 35,000 men
would pour across the bridge and up the heights to learn what sort of
stuff we were made of.

But this was not to be. Just as we were gathering ourselves together
for the apparently fast coming struggle, there came a yell from the
rear, a sound of desperately galloping horses, and with slashing whips
Pettits' battery came tearing on at the top of their horses' speed,
General Naglee leading them into position. Ours, as did all the
regiments massed in the big field, rose and cheered Naglee and the
artillerymen as they swept by. Inside of a minute from their first
appearance, they were in position, unlimbered, and were sweeping the
bridge with grape and cannister.

Away on the left, at Glendale, there was fighting, and hard fighting
too. Our men were so hard pressed that Franklin felt obliged to return
two brigades to Sedgwick that he had borrowed from him. And our old
commander, Colonel Caldwell, who had been with us during the day (now a
Brigadier-General and commanding a brigade in Richardson's division),
marched away with his brigade too, and rendered effective service in
beating the masses of the enemy off.

They attacked at several points in their efforts to break through the
lines of our men covering the roads by which our supply, ammunition and
artillery trains were retreating to Malvern Hill. Slocum, on the
Charles City road, was attacked at half-past one o'clock, but held his
position by a sweeping artillery fire. Then, McCall, at Glendale, a
point half way to Malvern Hill, was heavily attacked. McCall and many
of his men and guns were captured, but the strength of the rebel blow
was exhausted in the necessary effort, so that Sumner, whose line had
been in the rear of McCall's, letting the broken troops through, opened
heavily with artillery and musketry, repulsing all the enemy's efforts
to break his line. Later in the day an attempt was made on Porter,
stationed at Malvern Hill. He, too, by the aid of the gunboats,
maintained his position. As night fell, we prepared to retreat. The
abandoned ponton train was set on fire, and by its flaring light we
moved back, marching on and on until morning found us in position with
our own division at Malvern Hill.

The line of battle stretched around Malvern Hill, which is a point on
the James River of perhaps sixty feet in height with a broad cleared
top. Our line of defence made a huge semicircle, the flanks on the
river and under protection of the gunboats. Our own position was on the
right flank, close to the river. But a third of the troops of our army
were actually engaged in the battle of July 1st, 1862. It was an
artillery battle; the hill was crowned with sixty pieces of artillery,
planted to sweep all possible openings by which troops could advance.
Magruder and D. H. Hill made determined efforts to withstand their fire
but, when supplemented with a rolling infantry fire, no troops could
stand it. Night fell with our position undisturbed at any point.

As for me, I slept through most of the uproar; slept the sleep of the
thoroughly tired-out. And I understand that all that could of the army
did so too, refreshing tired Nature against the hour of need; many of
the troops actually engaged waking to do their brief part in repelling
an assault, and that done, to lie down in their line of battle to fall
asleep again.

When darkness set in the retreat was continued. Troops, batteries and
trains moved towards Harrison's Landing all night. Morning broke, the
heavens opened, and torrents of rain descended. Our division lay in a
covering position to oppose any advance the enemy might make, but he
had given up the chase. With our troops already on the James, under
cover of our gunboats, he knew it was madness to pursue further. So,
the sodden, tired men, the trains of wounded, batteries and wagons
floundered unmolested through the mud into Harrison's Landing, and not
till all were past us, the last straggling man and wagon, did we of the
rear guard move into that haven of rest and safety for the beaten,
battered, exhausted Army of the Potomac.


HARRISON'S LANDING.

At Harrison's Landing our regiment was encamped on the left of the
line, close to the river. There was but one alarm here, that of the
morning of August 1, when the enemy ran some light guns to the opposite
bank of the James and opened fire on the landing. For about thirty
minutes there was a lively exchange of shot and shell between their
battery and our gunboats, when the enemy fell back, and troubled us no
more.

Here we remained until the middle of August, our life a monotony of
picket duty in an open field, baking, sweltering under a hot sun, with
only such shelter as kennels made of sticks and wheat straw afforded.
In camp, a well shaded one fortunately, we lazily slept the time away,
drilling occasionally, but not often, though when General Emory took
command of our brigade here, General Naglee going north on leave, he
established a series of brigade drills, the chief amusement in which,
to the rank and file, was to see the commanders of the different
regiments gallop up to the General after each awkward movement to
receive the maledictory criticisms of that outraged old cavalry warrior
on their evident ignorance of what to him was as familiar as winking.
They passed his encomiums along to their line officers on returning to
their regiments you may be sure, and the line officers took it out of
their "non coms," who cursed the men for their stupidity, who damned
the man who invented tactics and themselves for having been such fools
as to enlist for soldiers with which officers could play shuttlecock
and battledore.

Finally, the preparations for the evacuation of the Landing being
completed, we of Keyes' Corps moved away from it the 16th of August.
The 17th we crossed the Chickahominy near the mouth of the James,
crossing on a ponton bridge of two thousand feet in length, reached
Williamsburg the 18th, went into camp about where we did when there in
May, marching to Yorktown the 20th.


YORKTOWN.

All of the army but two divisions of our corps now took transports to
go to the relief of Pope and Burnside, and to fight the battle of
Antietam. Two divisions of our corps were left on the Peninsula;
Couch's going with the main army. Our brigade took position at
Yorktown, and proceeded to strengthen the defences of that place to
enable it to resist any attack from the direction of Richmond. The work
was soon completed, but we were not troubled by the enemy. Once a raid
of Confederate cavalrymen on Williamsburg created a flurry of
anticipation, but nothing came of it except an opportunity for General
Emory to see the regiments promptly take their previously assigned
positions. The General soon after this left us, General Naglee having
returned, and it was known that though General Emory had taken command
reluctantly, preferring his old command naturally, yet that he left us
with characteristic and vigorous asseverations of regret at having to
do so. Shortly before his leaving, the so-called "'62 men" joined us.
Their recruits were rather looked down on at first by the "veterans" of
one campaign, and for a time were kept in open-mouthed admiration by a
few true, and many apocryphal, stories of the valor and endurance the
story-tellers declared they themselves had so lately displayed. The men
of '62 that D received were all good men and true, and added no little
to the good fellowship of the company as well as to its strength. Many
of them coming from seaboard towns, some of them seafaring men, they
brought a new and rather desirable element, a jovial, adventurous one,
into the ranks, until now almost entirely made up of plodding farmers.

Two expeditions were fitted out from Yorktown, in both of which D took
a part, one to Matthews County and the other to Gloucester Court House.
As Captain Maxfield, then a private of Company C, was an active
participant in both these movements, and the compiler of these sketches
was in neither, Captain Maxfield will tell of what befell the troops of
these expeditions.


MATTHEWS COUNTY.

Nov. 22, '62. Nine companies of the regiment left camp between 8 and 9
p.m., and embarking on the gunboats Mahaska and Putnam and the tugboat
May Queen, proceeded down the York River and up the Chesapeake Bay.
They entered the Mob Jack Bay about 8.30 a.m. on the 23d, and proceeded
up the East River, where they landed in Matthews County, Va., at 11.30
a.m. The force was divided and sent to different plantations, where
they destroyed large quantities of salt and salt works, or salt
kettles. The male portion of the community were taken and held as
prisoners while we remained. The writer was in the detachment commanded
by Captain Libby of Company A, and went to the plantation of Sands
Smith. We shall never forget the warlike picture of little Pete Neddo
of Company A breaking the big kettles with a sledge hammer, or the poor
old negro woman, whose son had run away a few months previous and had
accompanied us as one of the guides of the expedition, at sight of the
boy. She threw herself on her knees and with hands upraised, exclaimed
"Is this Jesus Christ! Is it God Almighty!" Nor could we refrain from
expressing the wish that this "cruel war" was over when we made
prisoners of the old gentleman and the young men who had come to his
house to spend the pleasant Sunday afternoon in the society of his
lovely daughters. We returned to the gunboats soon after dark.

At 9 a.m. on the 24th, as we were about getting under way for our
return, a farmer came in with a flag of truce, who said a supply train
was passing at a short distance and could be easily captured. The force
on the Putnam, consisting of Companies A, C and D, was landed, and
under command of Captain S. H. Merrill of Company I, ordered to
reconnoitre for one hour. We advanced about three miles, which brought
us in sight of Matthews Court House, where there appeared to be a small
force. After commencing our retreat we found we were pursued by a body
of cavalry. Lieutenant F. M. Johnson and Corporal J. F. Keene of
Company D, who allowed themselves to be separated from the command,
were taken prisoners. We immediately returned to Yorktown, where we
arrived about sundown.

No field officer of the Eleventh accompanied this expedition, it being
under the command of Major Cunningham of the Fifty-second Pennsylvania
Volunteers.


GLOUCESTER COURT HOUSE.

Dec. 11, '62. The regiment left camp before sunrise, crossed the York
River to Gloucester Point, and in company with the Fifty-second
Pennsylvania, Fifty-sixth and One Hundredth New York, and Battery H,
First New York Artillery, took up the line of march for Gloucester
Court House, where we arrived at 4 p.m. We remained in the vicinity of
the Court House, sending out foraging parties in different directions,
who captured herds of cattle, sheep, mules and some fine horses. The
cavalry, which led the advance from Gloucester Point, advanced to
within a few miles of the Rappahannock. The expedition was commanded by
General Henry M. Naglee, and was intended as a diversion in rear of the
rebel army during the battle of Fredericksburg.

We commenced our retreat just after sunset on the 14th, and arrived in
camp at 3.30 a.m. on the 15th, without the loss of a man, bringing our
captured herds and the prisoners captured by the cavalry.

One of the incidents of this expedition occurred when a member of the
Eleventh attempted to pay for certain articles of food at a house near
the Court House. The occupant absolutely refused to accept greenbacks,
but one of his comrades perceiving the dilemma, produced a bill on the
Bank of Lyon's Kathairon, a patent medicine advertisement, which the
lady readily received, supposing it to be genuine Confederate money.


THE DEPARTMENT OF THE SOUTH.

In December we began to hear rumors that our brigade was to take part
in an expedition to the further South, and soon active preparations for
a movement were going on around us. The sick were sent North,
ammunition and other supplies were plentifully provided, transports
began to swing at anchor in the bay, and the 26th of the month we of
the Eleventh found ourselves sailing away on the old steamer Cahawba in
company with the 98th New York, General Naglee and staff, and the
brigade band, bound for Morehead City, where we arrived the first day
of January, 1863.

We had a stormy passage, especially off Cape Hatteras. Here we saw the
original Monitor in tow of the transport steamer Rhode-Island, passing
closely enough to them towards night to see the heavy seas washing over
the Monitor's low decks, to the evident discomfort of the bare-legged
seamen. Before morning the Monitor had gone down, but her crew was
saved by the Rhode-Island.

We landed at Morehead City and marched to Carolina City, a few miles
away, where we went into camp. The term city as applied to these and
other Southern places is usually mighty misleading. For example,
Carolina City consists even now of little more than a railroad depot,
and Morehead City is but a little larger.

Our brigade remained comfortably encamped at Carolina City for a few
weeks, our idea being that we were intended to form part of a force to
descend upon Wilmington.

And, when the Eleventh went on board the Cahawba again, this time in
company with the 104th Pennsylvania instead of the 98th New York, and
put to sea in company with a fleet of transports carrying our new
division, we thought that Wilmington was our objective point. General
Naglee, now the commander of the division our expedition consisted of,
was on board the Cahawba with his staff, as was Colonel Davis, now
again in command of our brigade, and his staff. We soon learned that we
were bound for Port Royal, S.C., and that to capture Charleston was the
object of our expedition.

But though we went on board the Cahawba the 20th day of January, it was
not till the afternoon of the 29th that we put to sea. We arrived at
Port Royal January 31st, and entering the harbor, found ourselves one
of a large and growing fleet of transports and gunboats. The 3d of
February we sailed up Port Royal Sound to Beaufort, where we landed
that the Cahawba might be cleaned, then reembarked on it the next day
and returned to Port Royal. We were not landed again for some days, and
the warm Southern sun operating on men as crowded together as we were,
without opportunity for exercise and proper cleanliness, was not
conducive to good health. Sickness cropped out, ship fever prevailed to
an alarming extent, and a number of the Eleventh died before the troops
were landed at St. Helena Island, which they were on the 10th of
February. Landing, our regiments went into camp, and winter as it was,
we found it necessary to cover our tents with an awning of palmetto
branches spread on a frame work of crotched uprights and cross sticks.

The health of the men improved rapidly. Their life was rather
monotonous--drill, dress parades, reviews by Major-General Hunter and
guard mountings taking up the time. The enemy was not near us, the
labyrinth of rivers and waterways surrounding the nest of Islands known
as Port Royal, enabling the light draught gunboats of the fleet to keep
them on the inland, well out of our way.

Captain Stanwood of D had resigned before now, its First Sergeant,
Brady, had been promoted to Second Lieutenant of Company G, and Second
Lieutenant Butler, of Company H, was made First Lieutenant of D, and
commanded the company.

The 4th day of April, the regiment, the 104th Pennsylvania, with
General Naglee, Colonel Davis, and their staffs again reembarked on the
old Cahawba, and the 5th sailed in a fleet for the North Edisto Inlet.
Anchoring in that now crowded roadstead, we waited the success of the
fleet's attack on Charleston, when the division was to land and march
on that city. But the fleet found the forts guarding Charleston Harbor
beyond their weight, so clearly so that as Admiral Ammen puts it, "even
the common sailors knew that Charleston could not be taken without a
protracted siege." The only thing left for us all to do, was to return
to Port Royal, which we did the 10th of April, the old Cahawba leaving
the swiftest of the fleet out of sight on the run, even sacrilegiously
running by the "Flag Ship" of our transport squadron, and entering Port
Royal while that seat of authority was still hull down.

It was our last cruise on the steamer Cahawba. Afflicted as it was with
the third plague of Egypt, it had been our home for so many days, had
borne us safely over such a stretch of water, in storm and calm, that
we had a rough affection for the stout old transport; and for Mr.
Davis, her second mate, too. We had heard the command from the
wheel-house so often of "Stand by your anchor, Mr. Davis," and the
hoarse return of that old mariner, "Ay, ay, Sir," that he seemed part
of the ship itself. As the regiment came alongside in a small steamer
to go on board the Cahawba, to take a part in this very expedition, and
our men saw the head of the rough old sailor peering over the side of
the Cahawba at them, what a yell of "Stand by your anchor, Mr. Davis,"
rang out of five hundred throats. I am sorry to have to state that
instead of the orthodox reply to this nautical command, Mr. Davis only
growled "There's that damned Eleventh Maine again." The Cahawba steamed
up the Sound to Beaufort with us the 11th of April, where the regiment
landed and went into camp.

Lieutenant Butler, who had been ill for a day or so, now grew worse
rapidly. His disease proved to be a malignant fever. He died April
14th. We buried him in the cemetery in Beaufort, with the military
honors due his rank. His grave was near that of another young officer,
one who had died in the Mexican war, and whose body had been brought
home to be buried. I remember that over the young South Carolinian's
grave stood a monument representing the trunk of a young palmetto tree,
its top broken off. Where Butler is buried I do not know, at his old
home, I hope; and if he sleeps under the marble representation of a
young, prematurely splintered pine tree, it is fitting. Young,
handsome, intelligent, respected and admired by his men, cut down at
his post in his years of high promise, wherever his grave is, it is
that of a true son of our old Pine Tree State.

Our sojourn at Beaufort was a pleasant one. The town, though now sadly
neglected, retained all its beauty of semi-tropical flowers and plants,
and, under a beautiful sky, in an enervating climate, we took lazy
comfort in our camp on the bank of the river. Besides a plentiful
supply of regular rations, the men of D were here regaled with luscious
blackberries. They grew abundantly in the neighborhood, and the negroes
were delighted to exchange quantities of them for our broken victuals.
We had a big Quartermaster's "fly" pitched for our company and a long
table built down the center of the space it covered, with benches
fitted on each side of it. And when the table was set for breakfast
with bright tin dishes--the men's plates and cups--with a ration of
good white bread by each plate that our own Prince Dunifer had baked
for us at the post bakery, with hot coffee in the cups, and mess-pans
filled with baked beans strewed along it, that table was a sight for a
hungry soldier. And at dinner, with boiled beef and rice in place of
the beans, it looked appetizing enough, too But at supper, with tea in
place of the coffee, and with each plate well filled with ripe
blackberries to eat with the white bread, and with dishes of brown army
sugar to pass around among the sweet-toothed, it bordered on the
luxurious. But where was the soldier that was ever satisfied with his
rations? Not in Company D, anyway. Under the leadership of one or two
past masters in the art, the men growled at even these rations until
the cooks threatened to reduce themselves to the ranks. This would not
do. The Articles of War didn't seem to cover the case, providing
neither shooting nor hanging for this particular offense. When, lo,
some one in authority had a bright thought. It was adopted, the cooks
returned to the ranks, and the leaders in the grumbling mutiny,
somewhat aghast, found themselves in charge of the cook house. They
were told that such excellent critics of cookery must needs be good
cooks, but the argument didn't hold good, though seemingly logical, for
they proved not to be good cooks; nay, they were the worst ones D ever
had. The men tried to swallow their discontent from very shame, but
they could not swallow the victuals. The discontent became an uproar,
with the result that the old cooks returned to the cook house, and if
the men of D grumbled thereafter beyond the wide latitude military
custom allows, they took good care to do so, as Corporal Annis used to
smoke, with their heads under their blankets.


FERNANDINA, FLORIDA.

The fourth day of June the Eleventh went on board the steamer Boston
and sailed for Fernandina, Fla., to relieve the 7th New Hampshire.

Fernandina, a city of two or three thousand inhabitants, is situated on
the Cumberland Sound side of Amelia Island, a large island off the
Florida coast particularly, though from Fernandina in sight of a
southeastern bit of the State of Georgia.

For four months we garrisoned Amelia Island; those of the Eleventh that
did not go from there to Morris Island with Lieutenant Sellmer of D,
who took a detachment made up of men from Companies C, E, G and K, to
the siege of Charleston, they manning the famous Swamp Angel battery.
We that were left behind at Fernandina, excepting Companies A,
stationed at the Railroad Bridge, and C, garrisoning Fort Clinch at the
mouth of the harbor, were languidly occupied for these four months with
our camp and picket duties, the picket one being the only duty at all
arduous. This picket service was entirely confined to guarding the
railroad that comes into Fernandina from across a bridgeable point of
the sound. In fact, this was the only way the enemy could get at us
except by boats, the road running through a series of the swamps, the
south half of Amelia Island seeming to be formed of hummocks of
comparatively dry ground. It was on some of these hummocks that our
picket posts were stationed, on rises of ground in the middle of
alligator and snake-invested swamps, where a breed of the most
sanguinary mosquitoes imaginable filled the air at night to an extent
that not only made it impossible for a man to sleep, but forced him to
keep his already net-covered head in a thick smudge of smoke.

Admiral Ammen says that Amelia Island contributed so little to the
purpose of the Confederates, that, though they fought for Port Royal,
they made us a present of Amelia Island, evacuating it so thoroughly,
Fort Clinch and all, that but a few rifle shots were fired from
thickets on the fleet that captured it. Still, whether from pride or
wholesome military caution I know not, still our commander would have
it that we occupied a post of extreme danger, and that we were liable
to be surprised and overwhelmed by a superior force at any time. And
one night for some reason yet unknown to me, there came a general
alarm, routing out all of our little army, even the peaceful camp guard
being aroused from its slumbers and its sergeant ordered to fall his
men in and follow the commander of the post. The commander led us to
the road that runs from Fernandina to Old Town (once _the_ Fernandina
itself), near Fort Clinch, and we followed him into the swamp that lies
between the old and the new towns, a swamp that is an impassable jungle
of trees and tangled grape vines, the haunt of alligators and snakes
and the breeding place of the most blood-thirsty breed of mosquitoes
I ever had fasten upon me, led us down into the head of the narrow
corduroy road running across this swamp, and bade us stand there and
hold the pass at all hazards, for all I now remember throwing out a few
encouraging words about the fame of Thermopyle and the Immortal Three
Hundred, then turned and rode away towards Fernandina, with his orderly
dangling at his heels, leaving us in the midst of a dense and
ever-thickening cloud of bayonet-billed mosquitoes.

The enemy? Suppose he was to land at Old Town, take Fort Clinch, and
put Captain Nickels and its garrison to the sword, must we stand there
and be eaten alive for a little thing like that? Not if we knew it. We
forthwith resolved ourselves into a council of war, with the result
that we marched ourselves to the high land overlooking the swamp, where
the night breeze swept the pursuing mosquitoes back into their haunts.
Then, after stationing a guard between us and Fernandina to prevent our
alert commander from surprising us, we went into bivouac, confident
that our danger did not lie towards Fort Clinch, for neither loyal nor
rebel was yet so desperate as to tread that stretch of mosquito,
alligator, snake-infested swamp road in the darkness of a moonless
night. After some weeks spent on this, then isolated island, where a
mail steamer from Port Royal put in only about once in three weeks, and
no other vessel, except the gunboat cruising on the Cumberland Sound
station, ever put in except when forced to by an extraordinary Atlantic
gale, the Eleventh was relieved by the 97th Pennsylvania, and October
6th went on board the Boston again to proceed to Morris Island, that it
might take part in the siege of Charleston.


MORRIS ISLAND.

Morris Island is but a strip of white sand on the Atlantic Ocean, at
the mouth of Charleston Harbor. It runs north and south nearly, and is
about four miles long. Its broad southerly end lying well out of the
range of the enemy's fire, served as a camp-ground for troops not
actively engaged in the siege and for headquarter and depot purposes.
Narrowing as it approaches Sumter, till Fort Wagner completely barred
all further progress at fairly high water, the island ends in a hooked
projection known as Cummings' Point. It was on this point that
Beauregard built Battery Gregg as long ago as when Sumter was forlornly
garrisoned by Major Anderson.

From Cummings' Point it is but 1300 yards to Sumter, due northwest, and
but four miles to Charleston City, looking about directly west across
the bay, and is but about a mile and a half across to the batteries on
Sullivan's Island, where Moultrie and its batteries lay beyond Sumter
and to its east Sullivan's Island running about east for a short
distance and then bearing rapidly towards the northeast, the north end
of Morris pointing to about the western end of Sullivan's. To the west
of the upper part of Morris Island, across a marshy tideway, through
which flows Vincent Creek, James Island points a blunt end to Morris,
the length of James forming the southern boundary line of Charleston
Harbor. Outside of James, on the Atlantic, and separated from James by
the Stono River, lies Folly Island, with Black Island wedged in between
Folly, James and Morris.

When we reached Morris Island the tragedy of the siege was over, the
whole of the island was in Union possession, and Wagner and Gregg were
being rebuilt from the wreck occasioned by the terrible bombardment
they had undergone, were being turned and armed to operate on the
enemy's batteries on James and Sullivan's Islands, Sumter standing no
longer as the chief, though still as an important factor in the problem
of getting into Charleston, it having been battered from its aggressive
symmetry into a silent, crumbling ruin. But from something like
sentimental reasons it was still considered the central point of
offense and defense, the rebel flag still flying defiantly over its
ruined bastions, the garrison burrowing in bomb proofs that every
shrieking shell of ours but added to the strength of, crumbling and
tumbling the broken stone work in yet deeper depths above them. From
these burrows they watched for night sallies from shore and fleet, and
by the aid of the enfilading fire of the guns of James and Sullivan's
Islands, succeeded in beating all off that were made upon them.

As the fatigue parties worked with shovel and spade in the sand of Fort
Wagner and of Battery Gregg, the lookouts on the parapets would see a
round cloud of white smoke fly into the air, from James Island perhaps.
Then, with a cry of "James Island," they would leap from the parapets
to cover, while the busy shovelers would scatter for shelter,
instinctively taking cover under the sand walls next James Island till
the projectile, shot or shell, from gun or mortar, had exploded and the
fragments had buried themselves deep in the sand. Or, the cry might be
"Sullivan," then the cover was sought for under the sand walls next
that island. As soon as the danger was over, all rushed back to their
work again. But sometimes this enfilading fire would become so vigorous
a one as to force the men to quit work for a time and take shelter in
the great bomb proofs and magazines, built of squared logs, banked and
heaped with such depths of sand that even the fifteen-inch shells of
the ironclads has failed to make any impression on them during their
bombardment. All this time our own batteries on Morris Island were
keeping up a steady fire upon Sumter and the other rebel
fortifications, the fleet taking advantage of good weather to leave
their stations outside the rebel line of fire to steam in and join in
the roaring chorus.

Our regiment was encamped in the shelter of some sand hills about
halfway down the island. From this camp details of men for fatigue duty
were sent to the upper part of the island to take part in the
fortification building going on there, D men with the rest. But in a
short time a number of D were detailed to serve as artillerymen in
Battery Chatfield, a work on Cummings' Point, and so many of D were in
this detail that it may be said that the Company was on artillery
service in the mortar battery of Chatfield, where, under Lieutenant
Sellmer's practical tuition, they soon became able heavy artillerymen.
The men of C, E, G and K, who had served with Lieutenant Sellmer in the
Swamp Angel Battery, were in this detail also.

Our battery work was mainly directed against ruined Sumter. Day after
day we trained the mortars on that crumbling fortress, sending their
ten-inch shells high in the air to drop into Sumter and burst there.
After a shot was fired it was watched by Lieutenant Sellmer through
glasses, and its effect noted, whether it fell into the fort or outside
of it, whether it burst in the air or after striking its objective
point, the men at work in the magazine filling the flannel bags each
charge of powder weighed out was enclosed in, receiving orders to put
in more or less powder as the Lieutenant noted the effects of the
shots, and those cutting the fuses receiving their orders to cut them
shorter or longer from the same observations. As Lieutenant Sellmer
observed the effects of the shots, Lieutenant Charles H. Foster of
Company K, detailed to assist Lieutenant Sellmer, as he had in the
Swamp Angel Battery, would note on a prepared form the results given
him by Lieutenant Sellmer, so keeping a tabulated statement of each
day's work during its progress, the number of shots fired and their
individual results.

Sometimes these results were plain to all of us. A shot would fall into
the fort and a whirl of flying fragments of stone or a leaping barbette
caisson would tell us just where it had struck, and just what its
effect was, and a few times we succeeded in our unceasing endeavor to
bowl the rebel flag down. But to the credit of the garrison of Sumter,
it must be said, that no sooner was it down than some brave fellow
would mount to the parapet and set it flying again.

There is rarely any great loss of life through artillery firing. While
the singing of minie balls has an ominous sound in the ears of the most
hardened veteran, the roar of a battery, except at close quarters, when
throwing grape and canister, is not very alarming to him. Why, at the
great artillery duel of White Oak Swamp, in June, 1862, our loss,
except in artillerymen, was slight, and the artillerymen killed and
wounded were mostly picked off by the rebel sharpshooters, while
General "Dick" Taylor, who commanded the Confederate troops immediately
across the bridge, says that severe as was our fire, their loss from
shells was but a small one. So, in all the wild uproar at the siege of
Charleston, our loss from flying shells was ridiculously small, viewed
from the standpoint of infantry engagements, the careful watch the
outlooks kept from the parapets, the facility for shelter, and the
promptness of the men in getting into safe places, saving many lives
and limbs. But there were several narrow escapes, and some curious ones
too. How shall we account for that of Lieutenant Foster, who after
remaining comfortably seated for hours upon an empty ammunition box on
the parapet of Chatfield, entirely ignoring the fast coming shots of
the enemy, suddenly rose and stepped off the parapet, and just as he
stepped off it, the box he had been seated on went into the air, struck
by a piece of shell! And that of Private Darling, who, working at a
mortar, suddenly stepped backwards just in time to save himself from
being cut in two by the whistling copper bottom of a Brooks' rifle
shell that went flying right across the spot he had just stood on. But
it was not all so bloodless. One day, the 8th of December, a mortar
shell struck the magazine of Chatfield in its weakest spot, and went
crashing into it. For a moment we outside the magazine were panic
stricken, expecting the immediate bursting of the shell and the blowing
up of the magazine, in which we had many barrels of powder stored. But
fortunately the shell was so surrounded with the tons of sand that
poured into the magazine with it, that its bursting flame was
completely smothered and did not touch a grain of our powder. We
hastened to dig our buried men out, and found Corporal Albee, of C,
killed by a piece of the shell, Private Kimball, of E, mortally
wounded, and Sergeant Howard, of K, Corporal Bearce and Privates Maddox
and Bragdon, of D, more or less severely injured.

We worked at our batteries during the day only, as a rule, returning to
the regimental camp each night, leaving the batteries to be defended
from any attempt of the enemy to occupy them by the heavy and light
guns of direct fire, and by the infantry force that was marched up the
island each night and ensconced in the bomb proofs of Wagner and Gregg.
But such an attack never came, the Confederates contenting themselves
with long range demonstrations, though frequently indulging in a heavy
night shelling of our works, as if to cover a landing.

At these times the air would be full of artillery pyrotechnics, the
flaring of bursting shells, and the sparkling arcs of mortar shells
with their flaming fuses, described by an old writer as appearing in
the night to be "fiery meteors with flaming tails, most beautifully
brilliant." A fine exhibition for those out of range.

In December, reenlistments began from among the original men of the
regiment, though they had a year yet to serve, proving to us that the
government had settled down into the conviction that the war was far
from being near its end. Many of D put their names on the reenlistment
roll.

Later on, the 23d of January, 1864, D, with B, entered Fort Wagner as
part of its garrison. It was really a sort of going into winter
quarters--without the winter--for you could lie out of doors, under
one blanket, in the nights of December and January, and sleep as
comfortably as a soldier need to.

The siege of Charleston was really abandoned by now, and the troops
that had been engaged in it were only held in hand until the time
should come for them to go to Virginia to engage in graver operations.

Though regularly trained to use the thirty-two and the one-hundred
pound Parrot guns Wagner was mainly armed with, we did not fire them
often now except for range practice, or to send a shell now and then
shrieking into Charleston. We usually aimed at the tall white steeple
of St. Michael's Church, the most prominent object in the foreground of
the city, and a most useful one to the Confederates, for a bright light
kept burning at night from this steeple served as a guide to blockade
runners. Getting the light within a certain range of one on Sumter and
they could keep the channel and glide safely into the harbor. Not
always, though. Early one foggy morning, that of February 2d, just
after daybreak, a sentry called the attention of the sergeant of the
guard to a patch of harder color in the soft atmospheric gray of the
fog bank that lay between us and Sullivan's Island. A hasty inspection
and a sudden lift of the fog showed us that there was a blockade runner
fast ashore under Moultrie.

The alarm was quickly given, and in a few minutes a hundred-pound shell
was whirling through the fog at the grounded blockade runner, the
powerful impact of the shell serving to lift the fog enough to show us
the lead colored vessel, with hundreds of men swarming in and out of
it, engaged in a desperate attempt to unload freight before the Yankees
should discover her presence. There was a wild scattering at the sound
of the coming shell, the runner was left to serve us as a target, and
we sent shell after shell into her until she was but a wreck.

Our Confederate friends would still favor us with a serenade of shot
and shell in spite of our peaceful demeanor. And once or twice they did
this so vigorously as to cause the commanding general to think they
were really on the point of attacking us with infantry. Beauregard says
that he made one of these night bombardments to give our commander just
that idea to cover his own withdrawal of troops to Florida to General
Finegan, about the time the battle of Olustee was fought in that state.
Regiments of our troops would then come to Wagner to stand at the
parapets all night, while we artillerymen worked the guns to keep down
the enemy's fire. It was in one of these bombardments, that of
Christmas night, that Private Laffin, of D, was so badly wounded, a
piece of shell striking the bayonets of some stacked rifles, one of the
pieces of shattered steel penetrating a leg.

This night our gunners paid particular attention to Charleston, I
remember, throwing shells into that city until a large fire broke out
in it, and then throwing shells at the glare of the fire. The men
fighting the fire in the city, largely colored non-combatants probably,
would succeed in getting the flames somewhat under control. We could
see them lower and lessen, then they would suddenly flare up bright and
red again, telling us that the screech of one of our going shells had
driven the fire fighters to cover.

A "cruel war" it was, especially to non-combatants that circumstances
of situation or greed placed in dangerous positions. Just think of the
terror the enterprising sutler must have been in who had pitched a big
tent outside of Fort Wagner that none of our boys having money need go
without such delicacies as pickled pig's feet, canned condensed milk,
ginger cakes, strong butter and slabby skim milk cheese, just think of
the terror he must have been in when he would leave all these precious
goods to destruction for the sake of his unexpectedly endangered
person.

For a few days after his arrival he did a thriving business, then came
one of the nights of heavy bombardment from James and Sullivan islands.
In the morning the tent was still on the beach, but with certain
suggestive looking holes in it. An investigation showed a medley of
goods shattered and piled into a chaotic mass by invading shells, but
the sutler was not to be found. He did not appear to us again, but it
was said that he evacuated his bed and fled to the lower extremity of
the island, as the first shell broke unceremoniously in upon his
private apartment. That afternoon men came with an army wagon and
carried away what Lieutenant Nel Norris would call the "debris" of
boxes and barrels with what little remained of the stock of goods. That
there was little besides shattered boxes and barrels to cart away, may
be somewhat due to the fact that the men of D and B had been busily
engaged during the forenoon in buying goods in the absence of their
frightened owner.

At last the time came for leaving Morris Island. The reenlisted men had
gone away on their veteran furlough, and finally D and B rejoined the
regiment, which had been camping on Black Island since early in
February. The Eleventh proceeded to Hilton Head, from where it sailed
away with other troops the 21st day of April for a point on the York
River, Virginia, from where our fleet had sailed a little more than a
year before for the purpose of capturing Charleston. That the attempt
had been a failure is to be attributed largely perhaps to the route of
approach chosen. Beauregard says that there were three routes of attack
from the sea, and that Morris Island was the worst of the three. He
says that had we effected a lodgment on James Island instead, and have
overcome the garrison there, as we did that of Morris Island, we had
but to erect batteries within such easy distance of Charleston as to
make it untenable, and as we would also be in the rear of their outer
line of defense, they would have been obliged to evacuate Sumter,
Moultrie and Wagner, and give up the city. That a similarly successful
descent upon Sullivan's Island would have given the control of the
inner harbor to the fire of our ironclads, with a similar result. But
that when we had Morris Island, our occupation of it neither involved
the evacuation of Sumter and the other forts, the destruction of the
city by a direct fire, nor the control of Confederate movements in the
inner harbor by the ironclad fleet. Be this as it may, beyond the
destruction of Sumter, and the taking of Wagner, little had been
accomplished, and we left Charleston and its defenses much as we had
found them, the fleet riding outside the bar, the rebel flags still
flying over Sumter, Sullivan's and James, Charleston still in the
distance, now as exultantly defiant as it had been sullenly so in the
height of the siege.


THE CAMPAIGN OF 1864.

The regiment arrived at Yorktown, Va., April 24th, and landing at
Gloucester Point, on the opposite bank of the York River, went into
camp. Here the reenlisted men rejoined the regiment from "veteran"
furlough, bringing with them 176 stalwart recruits. These new recruits
were distributed through the companies, and though almost without drill
or preliminary discipline, they marched, fought, bled and died in the
rough campaign of '64 as manfully as did the seasoned veterans they
strove in their pride to emulate, both in bravery and endurance.

Yorktown was a very familiar spot to most of us. It stood just across
the York River from our camp, on a high bluff-like shore, and still
surrounded by the earthworks captured from Magruder, turned and
strengthened by ourselves; grass-grown in the months that had passed
since we sailed away from them.

The plains below the town, where the camps of our brigade had been,
were now white with the tents of a part of the troops of the newly
organized army of the James. This new military organization was
composed of the Tenth Corps, drawn from the troops in South Carolina,
consisting of three divisions, commanded by Generals Terry, Turner
and Ames; the Eighteenth Corps of three divisions too, commanded
by Generals Brooks, Weitzel and Hinks; and of a cavalry division
commanded by General Kautz. These corps were commanded respectively
by Major-Generals Q. A. Gillmore and W. F. "Baldy" Smith, the whole
army by Major-General Benjamin F. Butler.

Our regiment was in the Third Brigade of Terry's Division. The other
regiments of the brigade were the 24th Massachusetts, 10th Connecticut,
and the 100th New York.


BERMUDA HUNDRED.

On the night of the 4th of May the transports the army had embarked on
set sail for Fortress Monroe, and on the 5th moved up the James River,
reaching Bermuda Hundred the afternoon of the 5th, and by morning of
the 6th had disembarked. Bermuda Hundred is a peninsula, made by a
sweep of the James River to the east and by its tributary, the
Appomattox. It is at the mouth of the latter river, on its north bank,
City Point lying opposite it on the south bank. Petersburgh is twelve
miles up the Appomattox on its south bank, and Richmond twenty-three
miles north of Petersburgh, directly connected by a railroad and
turnpike.

On the morning of the 6th of May our disembarked forces advanced to the
neck of the peninsula, about six miles from the landing. This neck is
here about three miles across from river to river, two miles and a half
beyond our halting point the railroad runs, the pike running between.
The ground we took up was superficially intrenched at first, the plan
not looking to a protracted stay there, but to an advance on the
railroad and pike, the taking of Petersburgh and a march on Richmond
and its southern communications. The force ready to oppose us was a
small one, no larger than our brigade, and our army numbered some
30,000 men. But before vigorous steps were taken to capture
Petersburgh, it had been reinforced by troops hurried forward from
North Carolina by General Beauregard, our old opponent of the
Department of the South, now in command of the Department of North
Carolina and Southern Virginia. It was the head of this reinforcing
column that successfully held Port Walthall Junction the 7th of May
against a portion of our army. On the 9th we moved out to the front and
destroyed the railroad between Swift Creek and Chester Station, a
length of about six miles. On the 10th, the Confederate General, Ransom
attacked this outlying force, but was repulsed. On the 12th we moved
towards Richmond, Smith's corps on the right and ours on the left. We
did not meet with any serious resistance this day. At night our line
camped on Proctor's Creek. On the 14th we meet with more resistance.
Smith found the works in his front too strong to be assaulted, but our
corps moving to turn the enemy's right, resting on Wooldridge Hill,
succeeding in forcing them to abandon their position there, and by
night of the 15th we had driven them out of their whole outer line and
into their interior one, and we were in position before Drury Bluff.
But while we had been moving so slowly, Beauregard had been acting with
such rapidity that he was now in the Drury's Bluff intrenchments with
an army gathered from North Carolina and Richmond, and felt so strong
that on the morning of the 16th he assumed the offensive, attacking
Smith's right flank in the early morning, and capturing General Heckman
and some hundreds of his brigade. Beauregard's plan miscarried
somewhat, or he might have ended the career of the army of the James
before it had fairly begun. He intended to get around our flank, while
General Whiting should move out from Petersburgh with 5,000 men and
attack our rear. His attack against Heckman was successful, but the
other attacks on Smith's line failed, though the rebels captured four
pieces of artillery, but his attacks on the line of our corps were all
repulsed. Still we were pressed back, partly by the numerical force
thrown against us and partly from our anxiety to cover our trains and
keep our connections with Bermuda Hundred, where we had left but a
small force. By night our army had given back until the rebels occupied
their whole outer line again, but Whiting's force failing to advance,
Beauregard could not press his advantage as he wished to, and before
morning our whole force was safely behind the Bermuda Hundred
intrenchments. The truth is that General Whiting was not a
prohibitionist by any means, and this day of all days in his military
career, he chose to exemplify that fact by getting drunk. Colonel
Logan, of General Beauregard's staff, who took General Whiting written
orders to move out the morning of the 16th, delivered them to him the
night of the 15th, and was with General Whiting when on the morning of
the 16th, beginning at daylight, he made his advance. Striking the
Union picket line, his force was placed in line of battle, but made no
advance during the day, in spite of Colonel Logan's expostulations and
those of General D. H. Hill, "spending the day in arranging and
rearranging his line," according to Colonel Logan, who does not doubt
but had General Whiting followed his instructions the result would have
been the capture of the entire force of General Butler.

Company D had not yet been actively engaged. It had been under fire a
number of times though, quite enough to show the good stuff its new men
were made of. It had taken an active part in tearing up the railroad,
and had done a little long range skirmishing in which its only casualty
was Private Annis, wounded on the 14th; but I think that the members of
it who had been in the most serious danger were those on the picket
line the night of the 13th.

The picket line of this night was in charge of Captain Mudgett. In
running it he placed some of us before the open grounds in which stood
the house before which Lieutenant Brannen, of Company I, was killed,
and then by some devious piloting placed another line between us and
our line of battle, a bit of duplication that was decidedly unpleasant
to us of the outer picket line, for the Confederates were terribly
uneasy that night, firing heavily all along their apparently very
strong picket line, we replying, of course, but--_zip_, _zip_, in front
of us was all very well, but where did the bullets that flew around us
from the rear come from? The unpleasant fact speedily dawned on us
that a picket line lay behind us firing too at the Confederate rifle
flashes, as they supposed, but really at our own, so that we poor
fellows were between two fires. To attempt to go back to expostulate
with the pickets behind us was impossible, for the inevitable crashing
through the underbrush between us and them would concentrate sure death
upon the messenger. So all we could do then was to stay where we were,
cease firing, and lay low. This last we did literally, lying flat on
the ground while the bullets zipped viciously back and forth over us,
one every now and then striking this or that side of a tree with a
suggestive spat.

But Private Day would fire, to lie still and be shot at was contrary to
his nature. Every once in a while his gun would bang from his position
on the left of the line, giving the enemy in front and the line behind
us a range by which to pelt us most dangerously. Again and again I had
to go down the line and expostulate with John, but it was of no use,
and at last I was forced to take my position with him and by sheer
ill-temper keep him repressed, while he foamed with wrath at the idea
of being compelled to lie still and silent to be shot at.

The night of the 15th our regiment took a position on the extreme left,
where we threw up a sort of intrenchment in anticipation of an attack.
But in the morning the heavy firing and the shouting told us that the
other flank was the one attacked. We remained in our position a short
time in the thick fog, hastily getting coffee boiling and the inner man
strengthened for what seemed to be a coming day's work. Soon an order
came for us to move to a position in support of the assailed line. As
we moved rapidly along the line, we passed General Terry's
headquarters, a small house, out of which the General rushed in his
shirt-sleeves to admonish us to double quick "for God's sake." Then,
striking a panting gait, we soon took position under a heavy fire.

Here we lay watching the give-and-take going on in front of us,
expecting each minute to be obliged to fill a gap, but instead we were
suddenly ordered to march rapidly to the rear and push down the pike
toward Petersburgh till we should meet the supposed to be approaching
Whiting.

And we did march rapidly. The fog was long gone, and the sun was
beating down hot and strong. Men fell right and left, not bullet
struck, but sun-struck. Caps were filled with green leaves,
handkerchiefs were soaked in water and tied around swelling temples,
but still it was "Forward," "Forward." The desperate pace seemed
endless, but at last we were halted, formed in a strong skirmish line,
and moved through woods till we reached a creek where we awaited the
Confederate advance.

We could hear them talking and moving beyond the creek, but for reasons
now known to you, they did not cross it. We remained in this position
until night, then by a circuitous route, down one ravine and up
another, under the piloting of Lieutenant Newcomb and Sergeant Payne we
stole away, and soon found ourselves behind the outworks of Bermuda
Hundred.

The 17th of May was passed by the men in necessary recuperation, and by
the commanding officers in a rearrangement of lines, now looking to
defense. That night the pickets at Warebottom Church reported a
movement down the pike. The sound of trampling horses and the rattling
of heavy wagons came clearly to their ears. It was conjectured that a
wagon train was moving down the pike from Richmond to Petersburgh, and
it was determined to attack it. Troops were hurried from the inner
lines to the front, and the Eleventh was formed in line of battle and
moved through the woods toward the pike. As it was a bright moonlight
night, and the woods were fairly clear of underbrush, this movement was
rapidly made, but suddenly, click, click, all along in front came the
sound of cocking guns, and as our men threw themselves upon the ground,
a crash of musketry came from a line of battle the Eleventh had almost
run into. For an hour fierce firing was kept up by both sides, a
battery of artillery on ours, placed near the church, adding not a
little to the uproar by throwing shells over our heads. At last, when
our ammunition had become exhausted, and while the men, their blood up,
where clamoring for a fresh supply, orders came to fall back.

The wagon train proved to be Beauregard's trains and batteries moving
down from Richmond, and well sheltered from us by a strong line of
battle.

Of D, Private Carver received a severe flesh wound in this affair and
Private George L. Butler was mortally wounded, the loss of the regiment
numbering 26 men.

The 20th of May the enemy made a most determined but entirely
unsuccessful attack on our outer line. We were not engaged, however. It
was this day that the rebel General Walker was wounded and captured.

Only heavy skirmishing took place for some days after this, the night
firing between pickets being especially continuous. During this
comparative lull, and accounting for it partly, the enemy was building
the Howlett House line, extending from the Howlett House Hill on the
James to the Appomattox, by this line of intrenchments effecting the
famous "bottling up process," and most effectually protecting their
lines of communication between Richmond and Petersburgh.

As soon as General Grant learned of the futile result of Butler's
movement, from which he had hoped so much, the destruction of
Confederate communication with North Carolina, the investment of
Richmond, and the consequent withdrawal of a large body of Lee's army
from his own front, he directed that all the troops not actually needed
to hold Bermuda Hundred be sent to him under command of General Smith.
In consequence of this order, 16,000 of our army with 16 guns embarked
the night of the 28th, and the 29th sailed for White House Landing on
the York River, leaving a force of about 15,000 infantry and cavalry in
the Bermuda Hundred intrenchments.

At about the same time General Lee ordered Beauregard to send him all
the men he, too, could spare, which he did, retaining about 12,000
infantry and cavalry. There seems to have been a desire on the part of
General Lee that still more of Beauregard's force be sent to him; even
that Beauregard himself should go to him with all his available troops
and take command of the right wing of Lee's army, leaving Petersburgh
with a small force to take care of itself. But Beauregard was tenacious
in his determination to hold his position on the south side of the
James, and to keep his lines of intrenchments strongly manned. He
argued that Butler's force was still large enough to endanger
Petersburgh, even against the force he had retained, and it was to test
this theory that he made the reconnoissance in force on the 2d of June
which proved so disastrous to Company D.

The regiment went on picket duty the evening of June 1st, D taking
position at Warebottom Church. The pickets had by this time settled
into a state of armed neutrality, the more venturesome of them even
trading in coffee and tobacco. Private Bridges, of D, was especially
active in this sort of barter. He frequently went across the strip of
ground that lay between the picket lines to drive lively trades with
the enemy for tobacco, which was scarce with us, bartering coffee
therefor, which was scarce with them.

Private Bridges, "Old Turk" as he was called, was a character. A half
surly look in his eyes, something like that in those of a half tamed
steer, caused him to receive the bucolic nick-name. He had ideas of his
own about guns; the Springfield rifles we were armed with he despised.
He wanted a gun that would carry a bullet to the spot he aimed at.
Somewhere, at Gloucester Point I think, he got hold of a sporting
rifle, a heavy, thick barreled, strongly grooved piece, and then the
bother was to get suitable ammunition for it, our cartridges being much
too large for its bore. After a deal of wandering through camps, he
secured, through a good-natured cavalryman, a suitable cartridge for
his gun, a carbine cartridge that fitted it perfectly. With a stock of
these in his cartridge box he was ready for the enemy. Of course the
carrying of this gun had to be winked at by his officers, and when he
went on inspection, parade or guard duty he had to borrow a despised
Springfield rifle from some one off duty to appear with, giving rise to
a lately heard of story of his carrying two guns.

This evening of the 1st of June, Corporal Weymouth made himself the
medium of exchange between the pickets.

He went towards the rebel picket line in the early evening and was met
by one of their number whom he arranged to meet at the same spot in the
early morning for the exchange of goods agreed upon.

The night was a moonless one, I remember, for, as we were not allowed
fires, or to light matches on the outposts, when we wanted to learn the
time of night we had to catch a fire-fly and make him crawl across the
face of a watch, that when he flashed we might catch the positions of
the hands. In the early part of the night the rebel batteries opened on
our lines, firing most vigorously for a time, but as we did not reply
they ceased firing after about one hour. It is probable that it was
Beauregard's purpose to aggravate our batteries into replying that he
might gather an idea of their positions and the number of their guns.

Morning came at last and the daylight broke. As soon as the light was
strong enough to see clearly, Lieutenant Maxfield made a tour along the
line of D, from right to left. He found Corporal Weymouth wide awake
and in readiness to go out to meet his rebel friend when he should
appear coming over the rebel works.

"There he is, Corporal," said some one as a form darted over the rebel
line. "But he has a gun in his hand," Weymouth answered, and sure
enough Lieutenant Maxfield saw that the man they were looking at had a
gun in his hand, and that he was accompanied by a long line of other
gray clad men, reaching out from his right and left, all with guns in
their hands, too, and all moving swiftly toward our works.

In a moment the Lieutenant had shouted the alarm to his men, and as the
sharp word of command rang out, every man, were he asleep or awake,
sprang to his feet, every gun was to a cheek, and a rapid and effective
fire was opened upon the now swiftly approaching enemy. So sure and
cool were our men, far from being surprised, that in less than a minute
the long line of the enemy in front of D was gone, those of them not
fallen back to cover, lying on the ground dead or dying, the not too
desperately wounded slowly crawling for spots sheltered from our fire.

The new rifle of Private Bridges was especially effective that morning
every shot from it seeming to tell. His usually half closed eyes were
wide open now and sparkling with joy. As he fired he would peer after
his flying shot, and "I have hit him," he would triumphantly shout, and
then proceed to reload his rifle with cool care. We were jubilant, for
we had beaten the enemy off, but we speedily found that the pickets on
our left had not been so fortunate. We could see them falling hastily
back, and then over the open space before us that we had just cleared
of one rebel skirmish line, a heavier one came rushing.

We fell back to a reserve pit on the run, entering it pell mell. Here
we found Captain Lawrence and his company, H, and at his command a
smart fire was opened on the pursuing enemy, driving them to cover. But
unfortunately there was an unoccupied reserve pit to our rear and left
that the enemy entered, and from which they poured a galling fire on
our rear. Captain Lawrence, as commander of our little force, was ably
assisted by Lieutenant Thompson of his own company, and by Lieutenant
Maxfield, of D. These officers exposed themselves recklessly while
urging the men to keep up their fire on the enemy in their front, not
forgetting those in the reserve pit behind us.

Of course we could not stay where we were unless we proposed to go
to Richmond before its evacuation. A hasty council of war was held
by the officers, and it was agreed that the plan should be to fight
desperately until a lull in the attack should give an opportunity to
gain the woods behind us, then that we should break for it with a
sudden and combined rush that would carry us right through the enemy of
the reserve pit should they sally out as we ran by them, which we must,
and within a few feet of them. The rebels in our front made several
vain rushes at us. Once a sergeant of theirs led his men almost to
the muzzles of the guns on the left, at a moment too, when the most of
the guns there were uncharged. Corporal Weymouth was on the extreme
left, "shoot that sergeant, Weymouth," was shrieked at him, and like
lightning Weymouth's gun was pointing straight at the gallant rebel,
and Weymouth's sharp eye was looking down the barrel as if to give
the death stroke. Even rebel human nature probably fighting for a
commission could not stand it, and the sergeant turned and fled, his
men flying with him, not knowing that Weymouth's gun was as empty as a
last year's bird's nest.

A movement of the rebels in our front that checked the fire of their
men in the reserve pit indicated a sudden onslaught. The moment for
retiring had come, "now, all together," said Lieutenant Maxfield, as he
ran along to the left, "pour it into them when Captain Lawrence shouts
'fire,' and then run for the woods." "Fire," the order came, a crash of
rifles answered it, and then we ran like deer for the sheltering
timber.

The enemy in the reserve pit was nonplussed for a moment, for it looked
as if we were charging straight upon them, but catching the idea in a
moment they arose and poured a sharp fire into us as we ran by. Within
a minute those of us not killed, made prisoners, or too badly wounded
to be carried off the field, had rejoined the Eleventh, which we found
in line of battle not many rods in rear of the scene of our desperate
defence.

Of D, Private Bridges was killed in the reserve pit, Sergeant Brady,
Corporal Bailey, Privates Conforth, Moses E. Sherman, Smith, Dawe, Dyer
and Bragdon were wounded, Captain Mudgett, Sergeant Blake, Privates
Bryant, Kelley and Bolton were prisoners, Private Bolton having been
too badly wounded to be taken from the field. Of these prisoners all
were eventually exchanged and discharged, except Private Kelly, who
died in Andersonville Prison.

We find it reported that of Company H, Privates Cumner and Rogers were
killed, and that Lieutenant Thompson and Private Green were wounded.
The loss of the Regiment for the day was 41 in killed, wounded and
prisoners. Lieutenant-Colonel Spofford, who was in command of the
Regiment, was mortally wounded before the line was broken and the
command then devolved on Captain Hill, of K, shortly Major and then
Lieutenant-Colonel, and from this day on the most conspicuous
commanding officer the Regiment ever had.

The picket skirmishing that had died out to a large extent during the
last week in May, became continuous again from this attack of June 2d.
Our own Regiment when not on the picket line engaged in this desultory
sort of warfare, was lying in line of battle behind the heavy inner
works of Bermuda Hundred, consisting of strong redans, or batteries,
connected by infantry parapets, all with stout abatis in front, and
with slashings wherever possible, and from Beauregard's report, his men
lay behind their somewhat similar works as anxiously as we did behind
ours, both we and they in continual expectation of an assault. The
truth is that both Butler and Beauregard were afraid that their long
and thinly manned lines might be assaulted and carried at any moment,
each knowing his own weakness full well, and magnifying the strength of
his opponent.

Beauregard had the best ground for his fears. As the strongest
numerically and occupying the inner and therefore the shorter lines of
the opposing works, and with a strong fleet of gunboats in the river to
fall back to the shelter of in case of disaster, the initiative
belonged to us. And indeed a force did move out from our line the 9th
of June to attack Petersburgh. General Gillmore with 3,000 infantry,
accompanied by General Kautz with 1,500 cavalry, crossed the Appomattox
on the ponton bridge at Port Walthall in the early morning. Gillmore
moved out on the City Point Road, and Kautz moved to the left four or
five miles to reach the Jerusalem Plank Road. Gillmore finding the
works before him strong ones, and apparently well manned, did not
attempt to assault them, returning to Bermuda Hundred that afternoon.
Kautz attacked on the plank road with indifferent success at first, but
finally flanked the enemy's line, forcing them out of their ranks, then
marched on the city, but reinforcements coming to the enemy and
Gillmore not supporting him, Kautz was forced to withdraw. But more
formidable opposing forces than were those of Butler and Beauregard,
forces commanded perhaps by greater chieftains than they, too, were now
moving to the position of which Petersburgh was the central figure, now
to become the most important position of the war.

Before the battle of Cold Harbor was fought by the Army of the Potomac
and the portion of the Army of the James sent to Grant under General
Smith, Grant had about given up all hope of breaking through Lee's
defence on the north side of the James, and had planned, if this
last effort failed, to move across the James to a position before
Petersburgh, hoping to be able to move so unexpectedly to Lee as to
effect the capture of Petersburgh, the turning of Beauregard's Bermuda
Hundred line, and to cut off Confederate communication with North
Carolina before Lee should realize Grant's object sufficiently to
checkmate it by throwing the Army of Northern Virginia across the
James and into the Confederate intrenchments at Bermuda Hundred and
Petersburgh in time to save them. The part of the Army of the James
under General Smith marched to White House, reembarked and sailed for
Bermuda Hundred, arriving in the afternoon of June 14th. Smith's force
crossed the Appomattox by the ponton bridge at Broadway Landing, two
miles from Port Walthall and eight from Petersburgh. Assaulting the
works they found in their front, they succeeded in carrying a long line
of them. Divisions of the Army of the Potomac began to reach Smith's
position that afternoon, crossing the James on a ponton bridge laid
down from Wilcox Landing on the north side and Windmill Point on the
south, just below City Point, but owing to the exhaustion of troops,
missent orders, and various other causes, the success of the forenoon
was not followed up, and the 16th and 17th were spent by our forces
there in making assaults on the strong and, though mainly defended by
artillery, still well defended rebel works. The results were varying
during these two days, but without our gaining a position of sufficient
strength to enable our columns to overcome the defence of the 18th,
when Beauregard's small, almost exhausted and somewhat provisional army
was heavily reenforced by Lee's veteran troops.

During this time we were holding the lines of Bermuda Hundred, in
hourly expectation on the 16th and 17th of the Army of Northern
Virginia assaulting us, it having to pass so near us in moving down the
pike and the Richmond and Petersburgh to Beauregard's assistance, that
it might easily hurl an assaulting column on our lines and breaking
through the inadequate force with which we held them, assail Grant on
the flank.

While Beauregard, thoroughly alive to Grant's real purposes through the
stories of scouts and spies, and the sifted admissions of the prisoners
he captured on the 15th, was showering telegrams on Lee and sending his
aides with personal messages to Richmond, Lee was still on the north
side of the James throwing out reconnoissances in every direction in
search of Grant's real course. This delay of Lee forced Beauregard to
hold his lines with a very small force against a constantly augmenting
one. But these lines were formidable ones. A born engineer as well as
an educated one, Beauregard had from sheer restlessness already
entrenched every practicable position around Petersburgh, planting
enfilading batteries on all commanding points, and generally had
already planned and arranged the lines of works that, with little
modification of position, held Petersburgh so long against our armies.

Knowing that the force in his front was steadily growing as divisions
of the Army of the Potomac came on the ground and went into position,
and that the 16th would be a day of trial to him, Beauregard the night
of the 15th determined to abandon the Bermuda Hundred line, trusting to
the coming of Lee's troops to regain them.

That night he withdrew the force that held the Bermuda Hundred lines,
leaving only a mask of pickets, virtually abandoning his whole line
from the Howlett House to the Appomattox. He says he had the guns and
caissons of the Howlett House Battery removed and buried, the ground
above them rearranged with sticks and leaves as not to arouse any
suspicion, and that this prize remained safely hidden until the
Confederates had regained their line.

The night of the 15th Lieutenant-Colonel Greely of the 10th
Connecticut, which regiment was on picket at the Warebottom Church
position, hearing movements on the rebel line, crept out and made up
his mind from what he heard and saw that the rebels were moving away.
Reporting his belief and his reasons for it to General Terry, that
officer ordered a movement in the early morning of the 16th that
resulted in the capture of the whole rebel line with their pickets and
such troops as they had left there.

A force of one hundred day's men from Ohio had reported to General
Butler, good material enough, but in the nature of things quite
undisciplined, mere raw recruits, and without the veteran organization
of officers and men that enabled our own new men to do such good work.
These new troops were placed in the captured lines, while we held our
own outer line just across the slashing dividing the two lines of
intrenchments. They now held their position beautifully so long as they
were not troubled by the Confederates, but along in the afternoon a
commotion was visible among them, then a few came hurrying over the
works they were in, then more and more, a confused firing was heard,
then the "rebel yell" rose clear and shrill and the whole force of Ohio
men came flocking over the works and across the slashing, a strong
skirmish line of gray clothed soldiers moving after them--the van of
Lee's army. The hundred day's men came tearing towards us at the top of
their speed without order or orders so far as could be seen. We opened
ranks to let them through, the scared white faced flock of sheep, one
of them, I remember, holding up a hand from which the blood was
trickling from a scratch probably made by a limb of a fallen tree of
the slashing, lamentably crying "I'm wounded," "I'm wounded," while our
men roared with laughter. What would have become of them--whether they
would have stopped short of Ohio--I do not know, had not the 10th
Connecticut, on reserve, deployed with fixed bayonets and fenced the
mob back.

But we had no time for enjoyment of this part of the comedy. Closing up
as the Ohio men passed through us, we turned so heavy a fire on the
advancing lines of the enemy that they stopped, staggered, fell back
and finally retired to their recaptured works.

At day-break of June 17th, General Osborn says that the Confederates
assaulted the Union line in our front and were repulsed, but when they
assaulted in the afternoon they broke through a portion of the line,
driving it back.

Captain Maxfield's diary states that in the evening of the 17th, the
Eleventh charged to support the left of the 24th Massachusetts, where
some one-hundred day men had given way, our Ohio runaways again. It was
in this charge that Corporal Bearce was wounded. And for the 18th this
diary states that we had fallen back to the old line of rebel rifle
pits, back of the church, and that either intentionally or by accident
the rebels set fire to the recaptured church, and it was burnt to the
ground.

The night of June 18th, after the corps of the Army of the Potomac had
made a series of desperate and bloody assaults on the Confederate works
at Petersburgh, works that military authorities agree should have been
taken the 15th, could have been the 16th, might have been on the 17th,
but that were impregnable for the time now that the lines of the Army
of Northern Virginia were stretched behind them, General Grant,
recognizing the futility of further direct efforts against Petersburgh,
gave orders that all assaults should cease, and that the positions
gained by the several corps close against the enemy's lines should be
intrenched, and as General Humphreys says of the intrenchments threw up
that night by this order, "the two opposing lines of works before
Petersburgh remained substantially the same in position to the close of
the war."


DEEP BOTTOM.

In the afternoon of the 20th of June, the Regiments of our brigade
broke camp and marched to the James River, crossing it by ponton boats
after dark, landing at Deep Bottom, on the north bank of Bailey's
Creek, emptying into the James. The position so quietly taken was three
miles east of the Howlett House Battery, and though four miles north of
it by terra firma measurement, it was fifteen miles below it in the
flow of the river, so crooked is the James at this point of its course.
Deep Bottom was a well wooded bluff when we seized it, but 'twas bare
enough before many days, so vigorously were axes plied by the men of
our regiment, and while they were renewing their youth as axemen,
fatigue parties from regiments more used to the spade were throwing up
a strong line of works, batteries connected by infantry parapets and
with outlying rifle pits, forming when completed and with gunboats
anchored on the flanks, a practically impregnable "bridge head" for the
ponton bridge now laid across from the south bank of the James to Deep
Bottom.

We remained at Deep Bottom for several weeks, within easy reach of
strong outlying works of the rebels, partly thrown up and strengthened
after our arrival. Their main outer line on this side of the river, the
Chapin's Bluff one, was about four miles northeast of Deep Bottom. The
opposing lines at Deep Bottom were some distance apart, from half a
mile to a mile, but portions of the picket lines were very near
together, particularly in the extensive fields to the north of Deep
Bottom. In the immediate front, looking east, there was a wide stretch
of woods, a tongue of the woods that ran along both sides of Bailey's
Creek from its wide mouth, a mouth of such uncommon depth as to give
the position we held on its north shore the name of Deep Bottom. But
without the animus of a momentarily expected attack, the picket of both
sides were amicably disposed, meeting in a big corn patch in the open
field to gather green corn and to barter. There used to be a story that
some of them occasionally visited a secluded spot to indulge in
friendly games of cards together, with coffee and tobacco for stakes.

An occurrence that will interest fatalists took place at Deep Bottom. A
member of the 24th Massachusetts had deserted from that regiment to the
enemy while the regiment was in North Carolina. It was undoubtedly his
plan to take an early opportunity to desert from his new service to our
lines again and get sent North out of the way of any possible casualty,
for he took an early opportunity to get taken prisoner at Deep Bottom
during one of our reconnoissances there, the Confederate regiment he
had joined having been sent to Virginia and located before Deep Bottom.
But, strange to say, the double deserter passed directly back into the
arms of his old company of the 24th Massachusetts. A dramatic situation
it must have been both to him and his old comrades. Recognized in a
moment, he was imprisoned, tried and sentenced to be shot, and the
sentence was carried out in the fields between our works and those of
the Confederates.

Little of memorable moment took place for a time. Captain Maxfield's
diary has these entries for the month following our arrival at Deep
Bottom. For June 22d, that men of the 10th Connecticut had found a pot
of gold. He does not record whether they did so at the end of a rainbow
or not. For July 1st, that Brigadier General R. S. Foster took command
of our brigade, and that Colonel Plaisted, who had been Brigade
commander so far on the campaign, returned to the command of the
Eleventh. For the 3d, that Captains Hill and Baldwin were mustered as
Lieutenant-Colonel and Major respectively, and that Company A was sent
across Bailey's Creek "to hold it." This entry argues a large liquid
capacity for that company.

It was about this time that General Hill, then our Lieutenant-Colonel,
had an adventure that would have been a misadventure but for his
characteristic readiness. General Foster requested him to go out
through the big corn field already told of, and learn what he could of
the force of the rebels in our front, and to do it in his own way,
having learned that as a daring, long-headed scout, General Hill was
without a peer in our brigade. Taking a couple of orderlies with him,
General Hill rode into the interior until he judged he was a mile from
the river, not seeing any rebels yet, then he bore to the left to
strike the river away above us, intending to ride down along the river
bank to Deep Bottom. After riding for about a half mile towards the
river, he suddenly rode into the rear of an undeployed rebel picket
force of about twenty-five men. Clustering around him, their officer
laughingly asked the General "where he was going." Personally the
General felt very sure that he was going to Richmond, however much
against his will, but putting on a bold face, he answered, "that he had
rode out to get the news by exchanging papers with them." "This is
pretty cool," said the rebel officer, "let me see your papers." Luckily
the General had a copy of the _New York Tribune_, and one of the
_Philadelphia Inquirer_ in his pocket, and luckily too, a rebel
sergeant here said "this is the same officer that sent us a paper the
other day." This was so, the General, a week before, when officer of
the day, having effected an exchange of papers with this sergeant
through the medium of one of our men, when the sergeant must have taken
a sharp look at the officer who moved so cooly along a dangerous picket
line. "Well," said the good-natured rebel lieutenant, "I guess I will
let you go, you look as though you were telling the truth. But I must
say you took a good deal of pains to come so far, and to come in our
rear, too." Our General with the guileless face answered "that he got
lost in riding out, and was trying to find his way into camp when he
rode up to them." Drifting into a general conversation with the
officers and his men, each party covertly tried to learn a little
something concerning the other's force on that side of the river, until
the General, having learned all he wished to, embraced a good
opportunity to make his adieus. As he rode away with his eager
orderlies riding on his heels, the Confederate officer, on whom the
real purpose of the General's mission had dawned, but who was too
honorable to take back his given word, called out, "Remember this, you
can't play at exchanging papers with me again." With this friendly
warning from the "good fellow," as the General rightly calls him,
ringing in their ears, the little Union party spurred its horses into a
magnificent burst of speed that quickly took it out of all possible
danger of having to obey a recall.

For July the 10th Captain Maxfield's diary states, that (among others)
First Sergeant Bassett, of D, reported for duty from recruiting service
in Maine, where he had been for some months. For the 12th, that an
expedition from the 10th Connecticut went up the river and captured a
lieutenant and fourteen men, besides burning a mill. For the 13th, that
two prisoners were taken by a scouting party under Major Baldwin and
Captain Nickels, and that some of D were in this party. Possibly it was
this expedition that Private William Sherman, of D, shot the rebel
"stone dead," as he declared, but while he was reloading his gun the
supposed to be dead man jumped up and ran away regardless of Sherman's
hilarious expostulations.

For the 14th, the diary states, that the rebels opened fire with a
battery they had stationed in a ravine and that their shells killed "a
horse and six men" on the gunboat Mendota. It would appear from this
that there were veritable "horse marines" in our navy.

For the 21st, the diary states that our regiment moved across to
Strawberry Plains, on the south bank of Bailey's Creek, and that we
captured eleven prisoners, but that the enemy appeared in force and
caused us to fall back into our intrenchments. For the 22d, that the
regiment went to the Plains again, "we taking all we wished to," as the
Captain modestly phrases it. For the 23d, that the regiment went to
Strawberry Plains again, and met a strong force of the enemy, we losing
two killed and four wounded, and that we remained that night on the
ground we had taken during the day. For the 24th, that we were relieved
by two regiments of the Nineteenth Corps, that Corps having just
arrived from the Red River, and, by the way, its commander was our old
brigade commander, General Emory. For the 25th, the diary tells us that
the pickets of the Nineteenth Corps on the Plains were driven in, and
that we were ordered out to retake the position they had lost. For the
26th, that we were still skirmishing on Strawberry Plains in an effort
to retake the lost position, and that by night, when we had recovered
it, we had lost one man killed and twenty-one wounded, and that we were
relieved by the Tenth Connecticut that night. For the 27th, that the
Second Corps crossed to the Plains early in the morning.

These operations of our regiment on Strawberry Plains in the last days
of July were in connection with a movement planned against the enemy's
left flank, resting on our side of the James, and directly in our
front.

After the assaults of the 18th of June, the immediate attempts of Grant
to overcome Lee were confined to flanking movements from the right and
left, north and south of the James. The plan of the movement we were
initiating was that Hancock should move to Deep Bottom with the Second
Corps and two divisions of cavalry under Sheridan, and that the Second
Corps should try and break through the rebel line near Chapin's Bluff,
at about the spot we operated in the following October; then if the
infantry succeeded in breaking the rebel line, the cavalry was to make
a dash on Richmond, while Hancock should operate to prevent rebel
reenforcements crossing from the south bank of the James by the ponton
bridge they had laid down between Chapin's and Drury's Bluffs. And
that if the dash on Richmond could not be made, then the railroad
communications of the rebels on the north side should be destroyed as
far as practicable. It was thought, too, that this movement, if
unsuccessful in itself, might force the rebels to reinforce the north
side so heavily as to cause such a reduction of their force holding the
Petersburgh lines as to give a fair promise of success in the assault
to be made when the mine in front of Burnside's Ninth Corps was sprung.

As a necessary preliminary to these movements, and to give the idea
perhaps that the contemplated attack, which they could not help
learning of the preparations for, through spies, prisoners and
deserters, was a flanking one, by the way of Bailey's Creek, as, in
fact, it finally became, the Eleventh crossed to Strawberry Plains,
just on the other side of Bailey's Creek, having to cross the James
twice to get there, once to the south side by the ponton bridge we held
the head of, and then to the north side again by another ponton bridge
laid down with its north side head debouching on the great cleared flat
known as Strawberry Plains. Across the head of these Plains runs the
River road, a connecting link of the system of roads leading into
Richmond. Working our way up through the woods bordering Bailey's
Creek, by night we had driven the enemy into his works guarding the
road and outer lines, his main one lying on the Deep Bottom side of
Bailey's Creek and running along that side of the Creek to Fussell's
Mill at the head of the Creek, from which point his line was refused,
as the military phrase is, that is it turned sharply back.

It was the position we had gained before this outer line that we turned
over to the Nineteenth Corps and that they lost the 25th of July. The
next day we pressed the enemy steadily back until we were lying close
to their outer line, the gunboats firing sharply this day, throwing
their heavy shells over our heads at the enemy's lines, the enemy
replying as best they could with a battery of artillery they had
brought down and stationed in the road. During the day a shell from a
gunboat fell so unfortunately short as to fall just behind our right
rifle pit, lightly scooped out pits, unconnected, each sheltering a
half dozen men. It fell at just the most dangerous distance from our
men, burst, and threw its fragments right among them, killing and
wounding several.

During this night Hancock and Sheridan arrived with their troops.
Halting their men on the other side of the river, they rode over to
Deep Bottom and had a consultation with General Foster, who described
to them what he had learned of the enemy's works in our front. Hancock
then telegraphed to General Meade, his immediate superior, stating what
had been told him, and doubting the advisability of assaulting so
strong an intrenched line with the force at his command, and suggesting
a flank movement by way of Strawberry Plains instead. General Meade
coinciding with him in his opinion, Hancock moved his troops over the
river to Strawberry Plains, and attacked soon after daylight on the
27th of July, the cavalry on his right.

General Miles moved to the front across the open field with a brigade
in open order, charged and captured the enemy's battery, four 20-pound
parrot guns, in a handsome manner. Then swinging to the right on its
pivot, the position held by the Eleventh on the creek, the whole line
moved out across the enemy's roads until it had invested his whole
line, extending from our position on the creek to Fussell's Mill. The
part of the infantry in the plan was now completed. The cavalry then
proceeded to carry out the flanking operation it was charged with, but
the rebels had been reinforced, four divisions of infantry and two of
cavalry having come across the James and taken position in the works we
were threatening, so that when Sheridan's cavalry moved out beyond
Fussell's Mill they found the road barred by a heavy force of cavalry
supported by infantry.

General Grant came across the river to the Plains that afternoon and
made a personal observation of the rebel position, and deciding that
not much could be done there, returned to his headquarters, from which
he telegraphed General Meade that he did not wish Hancock to assault,
but for him to hold his position for another day. For, though foiled in
his attempt to make a dash on Richmond, Grant had learned that the
reinforcements the rebels had hurried across the James had left their
Petersburgh lines guarded by three infantry divisions only, while but
one cavalry division remained on that side of the river, and now hoped
by threatening demonstrations to keep the rebel force on the north
side, out of the way of the column he was already forming to assault
the Petersburgh lines. In obedience to Grant's wishes, Hancock and
Sheridan spent another day in holding the heavy rebel force far from
the scene of Grant's new hopes, hurrying back to Petersburgh with their
troops the night of the 29th, to take part in the assault that was to
follow the mine explosion set for the morning of July 30th. The
explosion took place as planned, but for various reasons the results
were as disastrous to the Union as to the Confederate army. Returning
to our camp at Deep Bottom, we spent a few days in comparative
quietude, while a new movement in which we were to take part was in
process of evolution.

General Grant had received information that General Lee was strongly
reenforcing Early, now operating in the Valley, and believed the
reenforcements were so largely taken from the troops on the north side
of the James as to give a chance for a more successful operation on
that side of the river than our late one had been. The troops to be
engaged in this second attempt were largely those engaged in the first,
the Second Corps, part of the Tenth, and a cavalry force under General
Gregg, all to be under Hancock's command. But instead of marching
directly across the river as before, Hancock's corps was to embark on
transports at City Point and move down the river in the afternoon, to
give the Confederate spies the idea that it was going to the Valley,
but under the cover of the night the transports were to run back to
Deep Bottom, the troops were to disembark at Strawberry Plains, move
rapidly in the morning, turn the enemy's line on Bailey's Creek, and
push for Richmond. But through lack of proper landing places the second
corps was not disembarked until eight o'clock instead of at daybreak.

The part of the Tenth Corps men in the programme was that we were to
assault in our front, which we did promptly at daybreak, the Second
Corps' historian stating that we opened fire at five o'clock.

The Eleventh held the part of the picket lines running through the
woods in front of Deep Bottom the night before the 14th of August.
Though so far from the river we pickets had a suspicion that something
was on foot. The ponton bridge crossing to Strawberry Plains was
muffled, yet we could distinctly hear the rumble of the artillery and
the tramping of the horses of Gregg's cavalry division as they crossed
it, and the screeching of steamboat whistles was too continuous for
secrecy too, though necessary from the darkness of the night and the
crowding of so many boats in the narrow channel. If we heard it, and
our suspicions were aroused by it, then our contiguous friends, the
enemy, whose pickets could hear it all as well as we could, must have
been forewarned of what was coming in the morning.

But we of the Eleventh had no idea that we were to take the sharp
initiative that we did. In the early morning of the 14th Colonel
Plaisted rode up to the reserve of D and directed Lieutenant Norris to
deploy the reserve, move out to the picket line and advance with it
until he met the enemy, then to press forward and capture his exterior
lines. (Lieutenant Grafton Norris, of Company F, was in detailed
command of D, Lieutenant Maxfield having gone North on an overdue leave
of absence). The movement directed by the Colonel was immediately
proceeded with, and in less time than it takes to tell it we had moved
out, and our skirmish line was moving rapidly through the woods and was
on the enemy's pickets. We forced them back on their reserve, stationed
behind a strong line of rifle pits, with partly open ground before them
immediately in front of D's skirmishers. This line ran along the top of
the reverse side of a dip of the ground, covering a wood road that ran
directly down this dip before crossing their line. As the men of D
reached this road in hot pursuit of the enemy, its inviting smoothness
led them to converge on it, and, frantic now with anticipation, to
charge the enemy's works without orders. Lieutenant Norris and Sergeant
Young saw the danger and tried hard to prevent this movement, rushing
among the men to drive them out of the road, but before they had an
appreciable time to enforce their commands in a withering rifle fire of
the enemy swept the road, killing and wounding several of our men. In
spite of this severe check the officers held their men close up to the
enemy's works, on which we opened an eager fire. For a time our line
was kept back by the enemy, but suddenly the exertions of our men were
rewarded, the rebel line beyond our company's left giving way just as
the enemy in our front had ceased firing; and D took so quick an
advantage of the opening that before the startled and momentarily
confused enemy fairly knew what was happening we had mounted their
works and were in possession of them.

We found that their slackened fire meant that they had not had their
breakfasts any more than had we, and that they had relinquished firing
in fancied security until they should have strengthened the inner man.
Their untouched rations of freshly cooked bread, cooked in Dutch ovens
after the peculiar Southern style, with the side of fat bacon left
behind them, satisfied the sharp monitions of several Yankee appetites.

The enemy had retreated to the main line, from which they opened a
sharp artillery fire on us. This line across a wide field was so very
formidable in appearance that an assault was not ordered.

Of D, Privates Hall, Shepard and Stanley had been killed, Corporals
Keene, Weymouth and Privates Samuel A. Bragdon, Collins, Wm. Sherman,
Adelbert Stratton and Alfred C. Butler had been wounded; Weymouth
mortally so. It is notable that Butler, an impetuous youth, fell close
to the enemy's works, wounded in three places, and that his friend
Bragdon received his mortal wound in a brave attempt to rescue him from
his perilous position.

During the rest of the 14th we lay on the ground we had won, General
Birney, our new Corps commander, having been ordered to suspend his
operations on account of the delay attending the movements of the
second corps. It was a terribly hot day in open ground, General Mott
reporting that of two small regiments of his Second Corps division
exposed to it 105 men were prostrated by the heat.

This intense heat may have had something to do with the slowness and
weakness of the Second Corps assault, for it was not delivered until
four o'clock, and then with but one brigade, others intended for the
attacking column having become too demoralized to make it wise to push
them forward. The only effect of this movement was to draw enough of
the enemy from our front to enable part of our corps to capture a
battery of four eight-inch howitzers.

The record states the night of the 14th the greater part of our Corps
was marched to the vicinity of Fussell's Mills at the head of Bailey's
Creek, and that the order for the 15th was that our Corps should find
the enemy's left and attack Gregg's Cavalry covering our flank, but
that General Birney took so wide a circuit that it was night before he
found the enemy's left and took position.

As for the Eleventh, we seem to have been placed on the left for the
15th, near the pivot, for we moved but little. The recollection is that
we lay along a road most of the day, sheltering ourselves from falling
rain in the bordering woods as best we could. At night we went into
bivouac in a handsome grove of trees, and our wagons coming up to deal
out company rations, D had a company supper, First Sergeant Bassett
having arrived with the cooks and the men who, for one reason or
another other than sickness, had been left in camp when we went on
picket.

The morning of the 16th broke clear and cloudless, too cloudless, for
it was soon evident that the 16th was to be a day like the 14th, when
the men of the Second Corps suffered so terribly in men and morale. The
regiment was on the move very early in the day. In moving for position
we were soon under an aggravating fire, marching and counter-marching
with men dropping out wounded or killed, until we took position in a
dense wood where we were somewhat sheltered by a bend of ground. Here a
column for attack was formed, the 1st Maryland Cavalry dismounted,
serving as infantry and temporarily attached to our brigade, on our
right.

Anticipating the coming assault, the enemy had thrown a heavy skirmish
line into a line of rifle pits running along enfilading points, to
sweep the woods with a galling fire. It is very unpleasant to lie in
action under such a fire and see comrades to your right and left struck
by unseen foes. If a man has nerves they are soon in a quiver, and if
he has not known he had any before, he learns that he is not made quite
of iron after all. We found it so in the half hour we lay in this
position and it was really a relief when scudding aids dismounted and
darting through the woods from tree to tree brought the order to
charge. Quickly we arose to our feet, and rushed forward with the wild
cry which seems as necessary to a charging force as the breath with
which they give it. Almost immediately we were subjected to the most
severe fire we were ever under. No mere skirmish line this, but an
outlying line of battle. The woods fairly rang with the screeching of
the bullets; still we pushed on, when suddenly the 1st Maryland fell
back, not directly back, but obliquing into our own now swaying line,
and in another second in spite of the shouts of their maddened
officers, the men of the two regiments were falling back in confused
mass.

But the men of the Eleventh were not at all panic stricken. Getting
themselves out of the line of fire they turned voluntarily, and shaking
themselves clear of the dismounted cavalry, closed up their shattered
line. In a minute they were ready to go in again, and as General Foster
rode on the scene, galloping along the line of his brigade to make sure
that his regiments were making ready for another rush, and rode up to
the Eleventh calling out "Forward, Boys," we dashed ahead, and before
the enemy could repeat the withering tactics of a few minutes before,
had driven them headlong from their rifle pits and were pursuing them
to their main intrenchments under a heavy fire poured on us from their
main line, which ran along a ridge of ground covered by a wide slashing
of heavy bodied trees, felled in all directions. In charging through it
the men were somewhat protected by the heavy logs, and fortunately,
too, the enemy must fire down hill, giving a tendency to over shooting,
else not so many of us as did would have reached the crest of the hill.
Before we did, many had tumbled headlong among the fallen logs, and how
any of us reached it, few can tell, but we did, the rebels retiring
with more rapidity than grace as we poured into their works.

Beyond the captured line we found a smooth field of perhaps a hundred
and fifty yards in width, dipping into a wood bordered run. It was to
this run that the enemy had withdrawn, and from it they kept up a rapid
fire on us, our men returning it with the more spirit that we had found
boxes of cartridges strewed along the enemy's side of the works,
cartridges that fitted our guns perfectly, so furnishing us with a much
needed supply of ammunition.

But the fire that annoyed us most was an enfilading one from across a
run beyond the left flank of our regiment. Beyond this run, on higher
ground than we occupied, the enemy had built works to sweep the front
of the works we had just taken. From here, snugly ensconced behind a
difficult run, and hid from us by a stout growth of trees, left
standing to mask their position, they swept our flank with a terrible
fire. Efforts were made to dislodge them by sending brigades down our
front to charge the run, but the cross-fire the charging brigades were
subjected to forced them to retreat to cover. Suddenly fierce yells
from the rebel lines announced that they were receiving reenforcements.
The position was becoming serious.

As Colonel Hill and Major Baldwin had been badly wounded the command of
the Regiment devolved on Captain Merrill of Company I. Our men were
falling rapidly and those left were exhausted by the efforts they had
made under a blazing sun, yet when a thin line of the Second Corps
moved out of the woods behind us and advanced as if to support us in a
charge we were to make by way of our left on the aggravating work on
that flank, our men raised a glad hurrah and gathered their energies
for a mighty rush. But, alas, the Second Corps men could not endure the
murderous sweep of the fire the alert enemy poured upon them from their
flanking position, and quickly melted back into the timber.

Movements in our front indicated a gathering of Confederates for an
assault. Anticipating it somewhat, and its result, of which there could
be but one, the colors of the regiments were sent to the rear, and the
word was passed along the line that when broken the regiments were to
rally at the line of rifle pits we had taken in the morning, where the
men would find their colors planted. Then came the roar and rush of the
assault, a minute of fierce firing and yelling, and we were flying back
to the sheltering woods, a storm of bullets whistling around us.

A citizen seeing how badly we were broken, our men fleeing into the
woods without apparent formation or visible control, would have sworn
that none of us would have stopped short of the James River, but I
don't believe that a man of ours anyway went back a foot further than
the captured rifle pits. There we gathered on our colors, every man in
his place, and as the enemy came dashing through the woods after a
supposed-to-be flying foe they quickly learned what it was that Paddy
gave the drum. Of D, Private Hanscom was killed this day, and Privates
Day, Googing, Leighton, McGraw, Bubier and White were wounded.

While these operations were going on, Gregg's cavalry, supported by
General Miles with a brigade from the Second Corps, had moved up the
Charles City road, driving the enemy's cavalry before them, until our
cavalry had reached White Tavern, only seven miles from Richmond.
Reenforcements reaching the Confederate cavalry, Gregg was in turn
forced back upon Miles, both finally falling back to Deep Creek, a
tributary of Deep Run, fighting as they retreated, holding one position
until a portion of their men had taken a second one a half mile or so
back of their advance one, then the advance line would fall back behind
the new line and take up a position about half a mile or so further in
the rear in their turn, all this time carrying their dead and wounded
with them, the dead strapped across the led cavalry horses or in front
of the troopers. Finally the hard pressed men reached the creek, behind
which Gregg reestablished his line, Miles returning to Fussell's Mill
to take position on the right flank of our corps. And Mott had been
threatening the enemy along Bailey's Creek with a strong skirmish line
to learn their force, finding their works strongly held everywhere.

General Birney, "Old Mass and Charge," proposed that we assault at five
o'clock that afternoon, but the force the advance of his skirmish line
developed made him abandon this idea. Besides, about then Gregg's line
before Deep Creek was so strongly attacked as to compel him to cross
the creek to the bank nearest us to sustain himself, it seeming clear
enough that an advance would only bring us disaster. General Grant gave
up the idea of pressing the movement further, determining though, as in
July, that we must hold a threatening position for a few days longer to
keep the heavy force of the enemy in our front while he launched a
force from the other flank at the Weldon Road.

The night of the 16th we took position close to the enemy's works and
began to throw up intrenchments. By morning, working in relays, we had
a strong line of works thrown up right under the enemy's nose. Our
position, that of the Eleventh, lay along the side of a steep hill, so
that the battery crowning it could fire directly over our heads. Here
we lay the 17th, so near the enemy that we could see into his works
from the crest of the hill. The picket lines, really heavy skirmish
ones, kept up a steady fire all along the line until in the afternoon
of the 17th, when General Grant allowed a flag of truce to be sent out
and a truce arranged to continue from four to six o'clock. Perhaps,
springing from this truce, there was an almost voluntary cessation of
firing between the pickets until a little after five o'clock in the
afternoon of the next day, the 18th, when it broke out with a fury that
indicated a pending assault on us.

The skylarking and frolic of the men ceased as the fire of the
skirmishers increased in rapidity and volume, and every man went to his
post sober and alert. Suddenly the battery behind us opened with a
roar, our skirmishers came flying out of the woods and over our works,
while behind them sounded the wild yell of a rebel charging column. As
soon as our skirmishers were over our works, the herculean form of our
Sergeant Young bringing up the rear, to be struck by a bullet as he
leaped the parapet. As soon as they were out of the line of fire we
opened a terrible fire, every man loading and firing for his life, but
steadily, swiftly the heavy columns of the enemy poured from the woods,
yelling and firing wildly, those behind pushing those in front, until
it seemed as if the pandemonium of shrieking, rushing demons would
roll over our works, by sheer weight of numbers, in spite of the fire
mowing their front lines down. And just then, as if to complete our
destruction, for to lose our line and be driven back into the tangled
woods just at night, chased by a superior foe, far from a supporting
column, meant the loss of our batteries and Andersonville for hundreds
of us. Just then the 100th New York, on our right, broke and left their
part of the works in spite of shrieking officers, General Foster
himself dashing among them, yelling like a madman and brandishing his
sword in a vain attempt to hold them. But the old 10th Connecticut had
been held on reserve and was just rushing to the support of the
Eleventh, and the men of the two regiments confident of each others
support, strung along the gap like lightning until they had filled it
after a manner, every man redoubling his efforts to hold the enemy, now
surging at the rough abatis planted in the front of our hastily built
line.

They had stood our terrible fire well until now, but they could not
stand the cold steel we were ready to meet them with should they
persist in crossing the works; they wavered, broke and fell back into
the heavy woods between us.

That this was one of the most stubborn assaults of the war is shown by
its lasting for twenty minutes, during which time General Walker of the
Second Corps notes in his history of that corps, that the fire of
musketry was tremendous.

Scarcely had we breathed ourselves, when word was passed that we were
to retire at dark, and that we must do so very quietly, without noise
or gun rattling, even the tin cups and plates of the men must be so
placed in their haversacks as not to give out the monotonous clinking
that usually tells that a line of troops is on the march. Then a little
latter we stole through the dark woods, leaving Colonel Plaisted with a
thousand men of various commands to cover our retreat to a new
position. This change of position, or "contraction of the line" as the
military historians call it, was rendered necessary to let Mott's
division march away to Petersburgh to take the place of the Ninth Corps
in the intrenchments there, so that Corps could support Warren's
movement on the Weldon road. Nothing of interest took place in the
remainder of the movement, and finally, after a few days spent in
skirmishing and reconnoitering in the unrealized hope that a weak spot
might be discovered in the enemy's line, we fell back to the river; the
Second Corps and Gregg's cavalry went to Petersburgh, and we returned
to our camp at Deep Bottom.

We had been away from it a week, a week of disaster to the regiment,
and especially to D, for nineteen of the best men of the company had
been killed or wounded during it--one half of its available duty
members--and as its thin line filed into the familiar company street
those that remained behind gave it a sober greeting, looking sadly for
the many familiar faces they would never see again, it is no wonder the
eyes of all were dimmed, or that emotional tenderhearted Sergeant
Francis should break into tears of manly mourning. We slept the deep
sleep of exhaustion in our rude canvas homes that night, but the next
night, in the early darkness, the regiment was suddenly ordered to fall
in and the men soon found themselves across the ponton bridge and on
the road to Bermuda Hundred. Then it was whispered that we were on our
way to take part in an assault to be made on the Howlett House Battery
at daybreak. It is not strange that we were more surprised than
gratified at this proof of confidence in our assaulting abilities, nor
is it to be wondered at that the men murmured wrathfully at the idea of
assaulting so strong an intrenched position as they knew the Howlett
House one to be, armed with heavy guns, and always strongly supported.
But for all their hopelessness they would have dashed forward none the
less gallantly at the word of command, for they had seen too many dead
men lately to fear death greatly, or to hope that if Richmond was to be
taken they could long escape him; in short, had about adopted the
philosophy of the old Confederate Colonel, who, in Magruder's desperate
charge at Malvern Hill, was heard to shout to his shrinking men,
"Forward men, Forward! Do you expect to live forever?" But we were not
put to the test, for while we were yet _en route_ a galloping aid
brought us word that the idea of the assault had been abandoned, and we
returned to our camp.


BEFORE PETERSBURGH.

The brigade broke camp at Deep Bottom the 26th of August and marched to
a position in the lines before Petersburgh, pitching the camp near the
Jerusalem Plank Road. The routine of our duty as closely investing
troops ran thus: one day of twenty-four hours we would be on the picket
line in our front, placed along a run that intersected an exposed
field, the enemy's picket line lying on the other side of the run. Here
in the head-high holes some of our predecessors had dug, we shivered
through the night, and broiled through the day, not daring to lift our
heads above our rude earth-works until dark; firing and observing
through the rude embrasures the banks of earth before our picket-holes
were pierced with. When relieved, always at night, and just after dark,
we would only fall back into the front line of works, (batteries
connected by infantry parapets,) to remain there forty-eight hours.
Then relieved by in-coming pickets we would fall back to our camp and
remain until morning, the next day being spent on fatigue duty,
strengthening the lines of works. Then after another twenty-four hours
spent in camp we went on picket again. All this time in camp and out of
it, we were under fire, the bullets of the enemy ever singing around
our ears, whether we were on the picket line, the main one, the reserve
one or in camp, an invested one lying behind a parapet and flanked with
batteries of field pieces and gatling guns. And often in camp, in the
night, a sudden commotion would take place, to tell that some poor
fellow had been severely wounded or perhaps killed, while curling up to
his tent-mate under their blankets. But we dreaded the picket line the
most, especially the day hours of it, not on account of its danger, for
it was a comparatively safe one, all knowing the danger of exposure and
conforming to the necessity of keeping closely covered, but to lay for
so many hours under a hot sun in a hole in the ground, with only "hard
tack" and greasy boiled pork to eat, and the warm water of our--the
night before filled--canteens to drink was very disagreeable. Then the
certainty that a rush of the enemy meant death or imprisonment for all
pickets on the line of attack was not a quieting one.

It was on this picket line that First-Sergeant Bassett was killed the
night of the 15th of September. It was a bright, moonlight night, we
had just relieved the 1st Maryland, our men crept forward, each squad
well informed of its assigned position, and all suddenly hurried for
their positions, getting under cover as speedily as possible, the
relieved pickets stealing as quietly away for the main line. This was
the method of relieving here, but this night some of the relieved
pickets moved up the hill somewhat carelessly, their plates and cups
clanking noisily and themselves visible in the bright moonlight, so
drawing a sharp fire from the enemy's pickets, by which several of the
careless fellows were wounded.

Sergeant Bassett was to enter the extreme left picket hole to be
occupied by our regiment. Lieutenant Maxfield returned from leave, and
commanding D again, was assisting in placing the line, and was in the
picket hole when Sergeant Bassett came running to it, in a crouching
position, just as the enemy opened fire on the careless Maryland men.
Reaching it, Captain Maxfield says, the Sergeant thoughtlessly stood
erect on the edge of the pit, while saying, "Well, boys, I'm here,"
then fell forward into the Lieutenant's arms, a bullet having pierced
his throat. Sergeant Bassett was my friend and tent-mate as well as my
comrade. Only the night before his death he had talked long of the soon
coming end of his term of service, a service he considered already
ended by the law of right, he having enlisted on the 7th day of
September three years before. But the constituted authorities
considered that the three years he had enlisted for must date from
October 19th, the date of his muster into service. The point was
acknowledged to be a debatable one and Bassett was told that it was his
privilege to stay in camp if he chose not to expose himself to the
chances of the front line. But Frank was too high spirited a man to
split hairs with his honor; he was either a soldier or a civilian, and
if held would be as a soldier and not as a prisoner, declaring that
until he was free to go North he would be with D wherever its lot was
cast. And with D our bright, brave, true-hearted comrade died, heaping
the measure of his duty with his life. The tour of duty in the main
line, although affording more liberty of movement, was a dangerous one,
especially for those stationed in front of the "Elliott" salient of the
Confederates. It was under this salient that the mine had been exploded
in the dim of a July morning. From its protruding point hundreds of men
had been hurled from sleep into eternity, and for its mutilated
possession hundreds more had died. From this grim point of the
Confederate line, the hillside before it rough with hillocks of bare
earth and rugged with yawning chasms, the result of the explosion, the
enemy kept up a sharp and almost continuous night fire, for it was so
close to our line that pickets were not thrown out before it by either
side. And on dark nights their artillery at this point of the line
would be frequently fired to throw a flashing light over the rough
ground between the lines of works. Our heavy artillery was not averse
to trying its weight with the Confederates at any time. General
Humphreys praises the proficiency attending the gunners of this branch
of artillery service in silencing the fire of the batteries of the
enemy. They had an especial fancy for every now and then opening just
at sunrise with every gun they had a roaring, shrieking salute to his
rising majesty. Sometimes they did it for practice, sometimes to
disconcert and alarm the enemy, sometimes to jubilate over some
advantage some one of our armies had somewhere gained. One morning at
daybreak, when a detachment of the regiment, including D, was in the
little horseshoe shaped outwork we had before "Fort Hell," a messenger
came along the line to let us know that at sunrise all our heavy guns
would open. I was awake and in charge of a line of guards along the
line of D, while the rest of the men, tired with a sleepless night
watch, were dozing and napping here and there, crouching, lying,
leaning in all possible positions but an erect one, but every man with
his rifle clutched by a hand. It was my duty to awaken them and
acquaint them with the coming bombardment, but I thought it would be a
good joke to let the roar of the guns do the awakening. In a few
minutes it came, a sudden roaring of batteries and the shrieking and
bursting of shells just as the first ray of sunlight flashed from the
east. The men of D not awake, awoke promptly, every man after his
nature, some plunging for the bomb-proof, some springing for the
parapet, and some just jumping to their feet and whirling around and
around during a minute or so of desperate bewilderment. The men who
leaped to the parapet to repel any coming enemy thought it a very good
joke indeed, the momentarily bewildered ones had seen better jokes, but
the ones that plunged for the bomb-proof were loud in expressing their
indignation at the severest joke of their experience. It was on this
line that the informal election was held by the regiment, Lincoln or
McClellan, and the only vote cast for McClellan in D was by stout old
Private Maddox. When rallied on his "disloyal" choice, as many
preferred patriots thought it, Maddox wrathfully shouted, "My
grandfather was a democrat, my father was a democrat, and by the
Almighty, I'll not go back on either of them." If his argument did not
convince his questioners of the soundness of his logic, his blazing
eyes and stalwart form gave it a respectful consideration.

Private Maddox was not a conventional thinker anyway. On Strawberry
Plains when a bullet went zipping through his cap, instead of raising a
loud thanksgiving for his narrow escape, just by the hair of his head,
he boiled over with rage at the injury to his cap, vowing that if he
could get his hands on the rebel who fired the damaging shot, he would
whip him within an inch of his scoundrelly life.

The twenty-four hours passed in camp gave us time for necessary
domestic labors--washing, mending, gun and equipment cleaning. Though
still under fire, we were released from the necessity of bearing guns
and accoutrements, for which reason these few hours were looked forward
to as a sort of turning out to grass, and as gladly as any old horse
ever scuttled out of harness to roll in the clover, did we strip off
our galling belts to stretch ourselves and enjoy our short space of
comparative liberty, those of us not so unfortunate as to lose it in
some detail of fatigue or other detested duty. Thus time ran in the
entrenchments before Petersburgh until the 24th of September, when we
moved back to a distance from the line of fire, making a new camp and
giving an opportunity for the commanding officers to gratify their
passion for drills, they revelling, according to Captain Maxfield's
diary, both the 26th and the 27th in Company and Battalion drills.


THE NORTH SIDE OF THE JAMES.

In the afternoon of the 28th of September we left this camp and marched
for Deep Bottom, arriving there in the early morning very tired and
sleepy. This was a hard march, so hard a one that when the Second Corps
made it on their return from Deep Bottom in August, General Hancock
considered it a very exhausting night march for troops to make that
were to attack in the morning. Night marches are particularly weary
ones. The monotony of plodding through silent darkness, hour after
hour, is as wearing to the men as is the distance.

It is rarely that a gleam of enjoyment illumines the dullness of such a
march; but as we plodded along through the darkness of this night and
were passing a half slumbering camp, the fires were low and the lights
were few, a voice rang out from it calling, "What regiment's that?" At
the answer "The Eleventh Maine," a wild yell came from the quiet camp,
dark forms rising from it in groups and companies, to shout in
stentorian volleys "Who stole the butter?" It was the 98th New York,
the regiment that sailed in the old Cahawba with us from Yorktown to
Morehead City, on which cruise the sutler of the 98th lost his never to
be recovered tubs of butter, and the question now waking the echoes of
the dark night was the one to which even a drum-head court-martial
failed to find the answer. The expedition we were a part of was
intended to surprise the Confederate works on the north side of the
river, where they were known to be thinly guarded. It was hoped that
our unexpected onslaught would not only force their covering lines,
such as the works before Deep Bottom and along Bailey's Creek and the
works centering on Fort Harrison, near Chapin's Bluff, but would enable
us to get possession of Fort Gilmer, of their main line too, really the
key to the position of Chapin's Bluff.

General Ord, now commanding the Eighteenth Corps, was in immediate
command of the expedition, consisting of all of the Tenth and
Eighteenth Corps that could be spared from the investing lines and of
Kautz's cavalry division. Ord was to cross the river from his Bermuda
Hundred front, crossing by a ponton bridge laid down at Aiken's in the
darkness of the night, we were marching through, was to gain the Varina
road, here abutting on the river, move up sharply in the early morning
and assail the enemy, taking such works as he could, at all events was
to prevent the enemy from crossing troops by the ponton bridge between
Drury's and Chapin's Bluffs, to attack Birney's Tenth Corps. Birney's
Tenth Corps was to cross the river at Deep Bottom in the early morning,
gain the New Market and Darbytown roads--lying beyond the Varina road
in the order named and running along the river and parallel with
it--the infantry to move along the New Market road with Kautz's cavalry
moving on their flank by the Darbytown road, the line to overrun the
Confederate outworks before Deep Bottom and sweep forward towards Fort
Gilmer's flank, while Ord attacked its front. We moved through Deep
Bottom, crushed the light force found before it and moved rapidly up
the New Market road, driving the enemy before us. Ord had followed the
river road and attacked so strongly with Burnham's brigade as to carry
all before him, capturing Fort Harrison with sixteen guns and a large
number of prisoners. General Burnham was killed in the assault on the
fort. General Ord then moved his forces to the right and left of Fort
Harrison, capturing two batteries of three guns each. He then
endeavored to sweep down from the captured intrenchments and take the
works on the river bank that covered the enemy's ponton bridge, but the
Confederate gunboats opening the attempt was unsuccessful.

General Ord was severely wounded in directing this movement, and
General Heckman took command of the Eighteenth Corps, but scattered his
brigades in the woods so that he could not concentrate them on Fort
Gilmer until it had been so heavily reenforced that he was repulsed
with a heavy loss. In the meantime, we of the Tenth Corps had captured
the enemy's outworks lying across the New Market and Darbytown roads,
and were making ready to move on his main line a little over a half
mile to their rear. General Grant was now on the ground. Sending our
division over to the Darbytown road, about a mile across from the New
Market one, to support Kautz, he directed Birney to move forward with
his other brigades. Then Ames' division and Brigadier-General William
Birney's colored brigade moved on Fort Gilmer by the New Market road,
but they were forced back by the grape and musketry when so close to
the works that some of the colored brigade jumped into the ditch and
tried to climb to the parapet of the fort by each other's shoulders.
We of Terry's Division were now pushing through the captured works,
Kautz on the right, all moving under a heavy fire and in momentary
expectation that the assault on Gilmer would be successful, when we
proposed to force our way into Richmond. So vigorously did we move
forward that when the announcement of the failure of the assault
reached us we were actually less than four miles from Richmond, and it
required rapid movement and severe fighting on our part to get out of
the precarious position our own sanguine advance had placed our
inadequate force in. Rejoining our line, light works were thrown up in
the night.

The next day was one of heavy skirmishing only, until the afternoon,
when a heavy force of the enemy assaulted Fort Harrison and were beaten
back three times before abandoning their attempt to recapture it.
General Stannard who so gallantly held the fort for us, lost his arm in
the second assault. While these north side operations where going on,
General Meade was moving on the left, partly to keep reenforcements
from the north side, where so much was hoped for, and partly to try to
gain ground on that flank. The results of his movements were desultory,
although rather in his favor. We held our now well intrenched position
on the north side of the James with only heavy skirmishing, while
threatening demonstrations were made by brigades of both sides from day
to day, but without a real collision until the 7th of October. The
right flank of our force on that side of the river--our brigade held
the extreme infantry position on that flank--was covered by Kautz's
cavalry. His position was across a swamp from us, on the Darbytown road
at the Confederate line of intrenchments we captured the 29th of
September. Here he had 1700 men and two batteries. So threatening was
this position that two divisions of Confederates moved out the night of
October 6th, and at sunrise of the 7th attacked on his front and his
right flank. He could not stand up against such an attack as this, and
in falling back through the swamp, by the narrow road crossing it,
found the rebel cavalry there before him. Leaving them his eight guns,
his men made desperate attempts to get under the wing of our division,
scouting through the woods in flying groups. About as soon as the roar
of the enemy's sudden attack on Kautz came to our ears the advance of
his broken cavalry squadrons came dashing through the woods on our
flank, riding recklessly through tearing brambles and matted copses.
Almost immediately our division left its intrenchments at the
double-quick for a position at about right angles to the one left,
quickly forming front to intercept the enemy's advancing force, now
closely following Kautz's flying men. But as the enemy swept through
the woods he fell on the heavy skirmish line we had thrown out, and
his immediate advance was halted until assaulting columns could be
formed. At last his heavy columns were ready for the assault and his
skirmishers began to press ours in an attempt to break them, their
columns hoping to get close to our line under cover of an advancing
skirmish line.

But our men were stubborn. I remember that Colonel Plaisted sent me
with orders to Lieutenant Dunbar, in command of the skirmishers of our
regiment. The fire was furious, and the lines lay close on each other,
it was a murderous one, but neither Dunbar nor his men were inclined to
yield an inch. "We can hold a line of battle" yelled one bold Yankee.
But they couldn't, for when the roar of the assault came rolling
through the dense woods in which the fight took place, we had to hold
the fire of our line until the flying skirmishers should get behind us,
in this way getting the shrieking, dingy lines of the enemy within
short rifle range before we opened on them. The grey lines pressed
forward through the hail storm of bullets our brigade was pouring on
them, when suddenly from our left broke out the volley roar of the
seven-shooters of the New Hampshire men. Seven volleys in one. Flesh
and blood could not stand such a cyclone of lead; and they stopped,
broke and fled, leaving the woods piled with their dead and dying. Just
as our victory was assured, reenforcements came up the road on the
double-quick, to protect our extreme right. Panting and exhausted as
they were with their efforts to reach us in time to be of service, they
had breath enough left to give hearty cheers for our stand-up victory.
We are particularly proud of this victory, as we won it without the
protecting works so necessary to break the headlong impetus of an
assaulting force, and in beating off the enemy's heavy charging columns
stood in about single rank, having to stretch our line to a length that
would oppose any flanking movement the enemy might combine with his
front attack. And curiously enough our right regiment, the 10th
Connecticut, just lapped the enemy's lines. I can see the 10th now as
it stood on our immediate right, every man of it fighting with
impetuous vigor to protect our flank, even its Chaplain, Henry Clay
Trumbull, vying with the rest of its officers in encouraging their men,
not only by his words but by flourishing a most unclerical looking
revolver. It was here that Chaplain Trumbull won the name of "Fighting
Chaplain" and high honors as he has since won in his chosen calling as
Editor of the _Sunday School Times_, I'll venture that he is prouder
of the title he received from the rank and file on that day of mortal
warfare than of any theological one his service in the spiritual army
has brought him. In this affair of the New Market Road, of D, its
Commander, Lieutenant Maxfield and Corporal Horace Whittier of the
Color Guard, were wounded.

The 13th of October our regiment was part of a force that moved out on
the Darbytown road on a reconnoissance in force. We found the enemy's
works of the most formidable character and strongly held. A brigade of
Ames' division assaulted a promising part of them, but was beaten back,
and a movement of ours made in conjunction with that of Ames, failed,
we falling back under a very heavy artillery and musketry fire. While
we lay in the woods before these inhospitable works, this storm of war
sweeping over us, the cooks of D, then John Day and Prince Dunifer,
appeared with camp kettles filled with hot coffee, and persisted in
serving it to the men in spite of the great danger they had to expose
themselves to in doing so. Cook Day, always excited in action, was none
the less so that he was running the risk he then was, and as some slow
member of the company lying flat upon the ground would fumble for his
tin cup as John stood over him, John's ire would boil till he would
shout in that stentorian voice of his, "Hurry up, hurry; do you want me
to be killed?" And so amusing was John's tribulations to Prince
Dunifer, walking behind John to carry the reserve kettle, that he
forgot all about his own danger in laughing at John. But neither John
nor Prince ever shirked a duty or a danger--both good cooks and good
fighters, John only excelling in the intensity with which he performed
every duty, whether it was to cook, fight or to run away. Who is more
worthy of honor than are these comrades? They followed our marching
column day after day, loaded with kettles, spades and provisions, at
every opportunity making hot coffee and taking it to the men on the
line of skirmish or battle; at night preparing a fiery bean hole in
which to bake their beans, standing guard all night if need be over the
simmering delicacies, that in the morning their men might have
something tangible for their belts to tighten over. And what welcome
did a rushing reenforcement meet with at some desperate moment of a
raging battle, equal to the one that used to greet old John Day as he
came plunging through the woods to our hungry, shivering line on some
gray morning, his broad shoulders sturdily bearing a yoke from which
depended kettles of steaming coffee and smoking beans. Of D, Private
Woodbury was the only man wounded on this expedition.

In the latter part of October, Grant pushed a strong force from the
left towards the South Side Railroad. In connection with the movement
we made one on the right.

Moving out at daylight of the 27th of October, we drove the enemy's
pickets in on the Darbytown and the Charles City roads, and moved
forward to threaten their works without intending to assault them.
While we were maneuvering before the works, General Weitzel, in command
of the Eighteenth Corps, was moving with that corps to turn the
Confederate left flank by pushing through White Oak Swamp and taking
possession of the unoccupied rebel works on the Williamsburgh and New
Bridge roads; then was to move on Richmond. But General Longstreet, now
in command of the Confederate forces on the north side of the James,
anticipated the movements so effectually that Weitzel found the
supposed-to-be unoccupied works so thoroughly occupied as to make his
attack on them a complete failure, he losing heavily in both men and
colors, each of his two attacking brigades losing three colors. About
the hour of the afternoon that Weitzel met with this defeat, we were
ordered to press our demonstrations and, if possible, to carry the
works. The attempts made to carry out this order were unsuccessful. We
had to lie on the ground in the rain that night to cover the retreat of
Weitzel's men, who wearily plodded back through the rain, mud and
darkness, not reaching a safe position in our rear until early morning.
We then moved back into our own works. On the 29th of October our
cavalry pickets were driven in from their position of observation on
Johnson's farm, the position that Kautz was driven from on the 7th of
the month. Anticipating an attack of the same sort as was the one we
then repelled, our division moved out across the intervening swamp
Kautz left his guns in. Reaching a position on the other side, we
formed a strong skirmish line and charged the captured picket works,
the enemy running from them as we neared them. Sergeant Brady of D was
wounded as we entered the now recaptured works. This was the last
engagement of the war on the north side of the James.


CHAPIN'S FARM.

The night of the 7th of October we bivouacked on the ground of Chapin's
farm that we had fought for during the day, not thinking that we should
remain in nearly the same position until the Spring campaign opened.
But we did, first pitching our camp near the bivouac ground to move out
from on expeditions into the enemy's country, finally building our
winter quarters on the camp ground. But before the regiment went into
winter quarters the three years service its original members yet
remaining with the regiment had entered upon had ended, and the
preparations for the mustering out of those of them who had not
reenlisted were completed. And on the 2d day of November, after taking
leave of their old comrades, these freed veterans marched away from the
colors they had helped place in the front of many battles. Jubilant as
they undoubtedly were, happy in anticipation of the coming meeting with
loved ones, there was yet a visible tinge of sadness in their parting
from the old comrades to remain and endure the hardships and privations
they themselves would no more know. And those left behind with the
colors, though they sped their parting comrades with hearty good will,
could not help a faint heart sinking at the thought that perhaps before
they could march away to their homes the fate of hundreds they had
known might be theirs, and they too be lying in the shallow graves
hurrying burying parties can only spare the time to give the dead of a
battle field. But there was little time given the men remaining with
the colors for sentimental considerations. The day after their comrades
left for Maine, they in company with the 10th Connecticut, marched to
Deep Bottom and sailed from there to Fortress Monroe, where a
provisional division was forming to proceed to New York City for the
purpose of keeping the peace there during the pending Presidential
election. This division, consisting of the 11th Maine, the 6th, 7th and
10th Connecticut regiments, the 3d and 7th New Hampshire, the 13th
Indiana, 112th New York, Battery M, of the 1st U.S. Artillery and other
troops, was under the command of General Hawley, and sailed from
Fortress Monroe the 4th of November, the Eleventh being one of the
regiments on the steamer General Lyon.

Lieutenant Maxfield was in command of the Eleventh at this time, as he,
a reenlisted veteran, was the ranking officer with the regiment, so
many of its officers had been mustered out by the reason of the
expiration of their terms of service, or were detached on headquarters
service. Arriving in New York harbor the morning of the 6th of
November, on the morning of the 7th the troops landed at Fort Richmond,
on Staten Island, and went on board steamers which took them to points
along the river front of New York City. The 11th Maine, 3d New
Hampshire, 13th Indiana and 112th New York regiments and Battery M, of
the 1st U.S. Artillery, went on board the ferryboat Westfield and
proceeded to Pier 42, North River. The force lay there through the 8th
(election day), the 9th and 10th, and until the 11th, when the
authorities becoming satisfied that the knowledge of the short, sharp
fate rioting mobs would meet with at the hands of the grim veterans on
the river front, had secured a peaceful election period; the force
returned to Fort Richmond, and after a couple of days spent in this
stronghold, embarked the 14th (the Eleventh on the steamer North
Point), and put to sea that night. Arriving at Fortress Monroe, the
provisional division formation was discontinued and the regiments
proceeded each to its own camp ground, the Eleventh reaching its camp
ground on Chapin's Farm the 17th of November. In its camp, in charge of
the guard left to care for the regimental baggage, the regiment found
201 recruits to be distributed through its skeleton companies. The
strengthened Eleventh then proceeded to prepare its winter quarters.
The personnel and the organization of the regiment of the winter of
1865 were largely changed from what they were when the regiment first
landed at Bermuda Hundred. For the field and staff, it was now Colonel
Hill instead of Colonel Plaisted, Lieutenant-Colonel Baldwin instead of
Lieutenant-Colonel Spofford, Adjutant Fox had accepted a commission in
a regiment destined for adventurous service among the Indians of the
western frontier, and Chaplain Wells had gone to sow his pearls of
truth in a less porcine parish, and its companies were about as
completely changed. Take D for a fair example--Captain Mudgett was
still a prisoner; First Lieutenant Sellmer, who had been on detached
service at division headquarters for months, was promoted to the
Captaincy of Company B; Second Lieutenant Maxfield, who had been made
First Lieutenant of D when Lieutenant Sellmer was promoted, was now
made Captain of H, a rapid promotion but fairly won by his conspicuous
service in the campaign just ended, where he had shown marked executive
ability as commanding officer of D since the 2d of June, when he took
up the charge Captain Mudgett then laid down. Lieutenant Perkins, who
joined the company in July as Second Lieutenant, had been promoted to
First Lieutenant and was now the commanding officer of D. Of the
Sergeants of D in May, Bassett was dead, Blake was yet a prisoner,
Francis had been mustered out, Brady was First Lieutenant of Company I,
and the only one remaining with the company was Young, now its Second
Lieutenant, a deserved honor for the gallantry he had displayed in many
engagements, and for the fidelity with which he had served the company
as Acting First Sergeant in 1862, and again in 1863, and as Acting
First Sergeant and First Sergeant in 1864. Of the Corporals and
Privates making up the strength of D when it landed at Bermuda Hundred,
some had been killed, many had died of wounds, many more were too
disabled by wounds to reenter active service, and others had served
their full three years and had been mustered out. Although the Eleventh
Maine of the campaign of 1865 was largely different in material and
organization from that of 1864, yet the work it did in the assault on
Petersburgh and in the pursuit of Lee showed that the regiment was
still worthy of its honored name. The changes were not confined to the
regiment. A new brigade commander was given us in Colonel Dandy of the
100th New York, the ranking Colonel of the brigade now that Colonel
Plaisted had resigned, General Foster had become division commander,
and the corps was no longer the Tenth, but the Twenty-fourth, and in
command of General Gibbon, formerly a division commander of the Second
Corps, while the army of the James was now commanded by General Ord,
formerly of the Eighteenth Corps, which corps was now the Twenty-fifth.
The newly organized Twenty-fourth Army Corps was fortunate in its
composition of veteran troops, and in its commander a West Pointer with
a practical military experience since the opening of the war and always
in positions of responsibility, till his bravery and his devotion to
every duty devolving on him had won him the command of the corps.
Though a strict disciplinarian, and a stern man at need, as we soon
found, General Gibbon was a kindly man and with a bit of sentiment in
his make-up, for when he selected a heart as a badge for our new corps
he promulgated an order in which he said: "The symbol selected
testifies our affectionate regard for all our brave comrades, alike the
living and the dead, and our devotion to our sacred cause." True and
well said, every word touching a sympathetic chord, and for this
assurance that he was one with them in sympathy, hope and devotion, the
hearts of his men went out to the General, and from then on he could
look for unswerving fidelity from both officers and men. A happy
beginning for the new corps; contributing no little to the brilliancy
of its services in the short and glorious campaign of 1865, when it
assaulted and carried strongly entrenched and strongly held positions,
and marched day and night with a speed and endurance unequalled in the
history of the war, until it flung itself across Lee's path and
withstood the last charge of the Army of Northern Virginia.

The winter of 1864-5 was passed by our men in the rude huts they
erected of logs, boards and canvas, getting height by digging a few
feet into the ground, sealing and flooring the sunken portion. These
huts were heated by sheet iron stoves, and were fitted up with
ingeniously contrived bunks and home-made furniture, so that the men
were very comfortable in them; the officers were really no more so in
their more commodious log houses with their chimneys fitted with fire
places. The duties of the winter were the usual military ones of drill,
fatigue, guard, and picket, supplemented by the carrying out of an
order to have the troops in line of battle every morning at from
shortly before daybreak until sunrise, that they might rush to the
parapets and repel any attempted surprise by the enemy, who were
doubtless standing in a shivering line behind their works as we were
behind ours, both lines with an identical fear. The picket duty, always
an uncomfortable one, was particularly so this winter from the extreme
cold--a remarkable thing for a Virginia winter--but by keeping great
log fires blazing on the reserve lines, and changing the outposts every
hour, there was little suffering, no more than the men were willing to
endure in consideration of the generous ration of whiskey served out to
the relieved pickets as soon as they reached their camps. Winter passed
and spring came, and with it the inspections and reviews that indicate
impending movement to experienced troops. Finally our corps was
reviewed by President Lincoln. It was the first and the last sight we
had of our beloved President. And for his sake we will ever have a kind
remembrance of the great field of dull green, with enveloping woods,
that the review was held in, and of the long steel-tipped lines of
troops, and of the gaily appareled cloud of officers galloping behind
the plainly dressed man, with the rugged, seamed, but kindly face,
whose long legs reached nearly to the ground from the rather short
legged horse he was astride of, Mrs. Lincoln rolling along in a
carriage behind the reviewing party.


THE FALL OF PETERSBURGH.

General Humphreys says that late in the winter of 1865, General Grant
became aware that General Lee had determined to abandon Petersburgh and
Richmond in the early spring and unite with General Johnston, then in
front of General Sherman, in North Carolina. Briefly the Confederate
plan was to evade Grant, crush Sherman, and then face Grant with a
united and victorious army. But Grant thought it wise to take the
initiative, drive Lee from his intrenchments before he was ready to
leave them, and try to crush him before he could unite with Johnston.
In response to an invitation from General Grant, General Sherman
visited him at City Point, the 27th day of March, and they arranged
that Sherman should suddenly move away from his works before Johnston,
march northward, and either join Grant before Richmond, or if Lee was
moving south--either of his own volition or because driven
south--should head him off, and unite with Grant in decimating his
forces before he could get aid from Johnston.

That very night, General Ord, in command of the Army of the James,
moved from the north side of the James with two divisions of the
Twenty-fourth Corps, one of the Twenty-fifth and his cavalry, making a
forced march over terrible roads, in the dark, rainy night, and the
stormy day succeeding it, we took position at a late hour of the 28th
of March in the rear of the Second Corps at Hatcher's Run, having
traveled thirty-six miles to do so. The morning of the 28th, General
Sheridan had moved out with the cavalry of the Army of the Potomac, and
working to the left of our army, sought to reach the right and rear of
that of the enemy. This movement was supported on the 29th by the
Second and Fifth Corps, when we moved to the front to take the position
vacated by the Second Corps. This movement to the left had the effect
desired by General Grant, General Lee strongly reenforcing the force
opposing Sheridan, having to weaken his lines before Petersburgh to do
so. Sheridan pressed forward the 29th, the 30th, the 31st, the enemy
growing in his front as he forced them backwards until April 1st, when
with his cavalry force and the Fifth Corps he fought the battle of Five
Forks, capturing Pickett, 4,500 men, 13 colors and 6 guns.

While the battle of Five Forks was raging, General Grant, from
information brought him from Sheridan, pushed the Second Corps forward
to carry the enemy's intrenchments, those to our left. Their attack
failed. The order issued by Grant that night called for an assault in
the early morning of the 2d of April, by the Sixth, the Ninth and so
much of our corps as Ord had marched across the river. The Sixth Corps,
on our immediate right (the Ninth Corps lying beyond it) was to break
the enemy's line. Its formidable attack, calculated to carry any sort
of work it might find before it, and howsoever defended, was made at
daylight by its three divisions, formed by brigades with regimental
front, and swept all before it, quickly beating down the enemy's sharp
resistance and capturing a long line of three miles with many guns and
prisoners. The Ninth Corps attacked at the same time, taking the works
so familiar to us, on both sides of the Jerusalem Plank Road, but
finding a line of works in the rear of those they captured, and
strongly held by General Gordon's Corps, they made no further advance.
The Eleventh had moved out to the front the 29th of March with the rest
of its corps, when the Second Corps moved to the left. The night of the
29th the regiment lay in the woods before an outlying line of the
enemy. The 30th it pressed forward with its division, driving the enemy
into their works. The picket line of the regiment then thrown out
before the part of their works in our front, becoming heavily engaged,
company after company was sent to its reenforcement until the whole
regiment was engaged. In its immediate front, just across a wide
slashing, and sweeping our lines, was a rebel battery. Its fire
became so distressing to our men, that they determined to silence it.
Carefully concentrating their fire upon its guns mounted _en barbette_,
it was not long before the battery's fire slackened, and was finally
completely silenced, the gunners flatly refusing to man their guns in
the face of the uninterrupted storm of bullets sweeping across the
parapet. Night came on with the regiment in the same position it had
occupied during the day. As it grew dark we fell back into the woods a
few rods. Then a numerous fatigue party, made up from the regiments of
the brigade, was sent out to throw up a line of intrenchments, a heavy
picket line covering this fatigue work, with the regiments of the
brigade some rods in the rear lying in line of battle behind their
stacked guns. Towards morning the monotonous roll of picket firing that
had been kept up during the night suddenly rose in volume on our
immediate front, then the charging yell of a rebel line of battle
brought every man of us to his feet. Well, within a minute the brands
of the low burning bivouac fires were scattered to the right and left,
that their flickering light might not serve the enemy to pour a volley
into us by, (I can see Sergeant Keene jumping and kicking with
characteristic promptness and vigor at the brands of a fire D had,) and
we had seized our guns, set up an answering yell, and were rushing
through the darkness at the oncoming enemy. At our yell the enemy, who
had run over our pickets, expecting to surprise us, supposing our line
of battle to be lying right behind the picket one, the momentum of
their charge gone, their blow delivered in the air, our yell rising
from an unexpected position, caused them to stand, irresolute and
uncertain, for the brief moment we needed in which to reach the just
thrown up works, works that the enemy was not aware of the existence
of, and that the darkness prevented their seeing, and occupying the
reverse side of as a cover against our counter charge, they halting
within a rod or so of them. And before they could realize their exposed
position, and in spite of the loudly expressed determination of our
Brigade Commander, that they should not, the men of the Eleventh had
opened so severe a fire on the dark mass of agitated figures that could
be dimly seen against a background of lightening sky, that those of the
enemy who did not throw themselves flat upon the ground to escape it,
and remain so until daylight when they gave themselves up as prisoners,
went fleeing through the darkness pursued by a storm of bullets, losing
heavily in the progress of their escape. General Dandy did not
remonstrate against the orders the officers of the Eleventh were giving
their men to fire, out of regard for the Confederates, but in the
confusion and darkness of the hour he had lost the position of his
regiments, and was really confident that the mass of men in our front
was composed of our own troops. To solve the question it was shouted to
those men "What regiment is that?" "The Eleventh," was the answer. "The
Eleventh what?" They would not answer the question. Could it be that
it was really a part of our regiment in advance of us? We could not
clearly see the length of a company, much less that of our regiment, so
could not make sure by observing the length of our line that we were
not behind a part of our own regiment. "Who's your Colonel?" cried a
voice to them, "Colonel Davis," was the answer, and "Fire, Fire," rang
out along our line, and the rolling volleys did their dreadful work. It
was the Eleventh Mississippi that stood before us, and Colonel Davis,
their Colonel was in command of the assaulting brigade. This was the
morning of April 1st. We lay behind the new but already christened
works that day, with a heavy and constantly engaged skirmish line
before us. At night we went into position for the assault of the
morning of the 2d, spending the night largely in listening to the
tremendous roar of the cannon bombarding the Confederate lines, waiting
in suspense until we should move forward at the signal--a cannon shot
from a particular point--that should send the Sixth Corps men through
the stubborn works before us. It was so dark a night that it was nearly
5 o'clock before the troops could see to move at all intelligently, and
then they could see but a few yards before them. But at the cannon shot
the massed brigades of the Sixth moved forward rapidly, broke the
enemy's picket line, and poured over their main defenses. At this
moment our own picket line, a heavy one, and reenforced by the brigade
sharp shooters, picked men, commanded by Lieutenant Payne, all under
command of Captain Maxfield, as brigade officer of the day, who the
Captain had pressed forward during the night until they were close
under the works in our front, at this movement they were ordered to
charge, and regardless of the opposing numbers, dashed over the abatis
and into the Confederate works, laying about them so vigorously that
the enemy viewed them as part of an advancing line of battle, throwing
down their rifles and surrendering in such numbers that Captain
Maxfield seemed to be in command of a small section of the rebel army
to the brigade as it moved over the works to his support. He had a most
efficient coadjutor in caring for his prisoners, and separating them so
far from their thrown down rifles as to remove any temptation they
might have to pick them up again when they should realize how small a
force they had surrendered to, for he had promptly appointed Sergeant
Locke, of Company K, as his Provost. "Fall in here, the tallest on the
right," shouted that active officer, "Now count off by twos," then it
was "Right face, Forward March," and the unarmed Mississippians were
swinging off with a firm, military stride, under a new commander.

Promptly making connection with the Sixth Corps advance, General Gibbon
moved with them towards Petersburgh. By arrangement our corps took
precedence of the Sixth after crossing the captured works, the Sixth
forming on the right and left as a support. Our advance soon reached
the Confederate works, advanced before their main inner line, here
running up from the Appomattox and along Indian Town Creek. The
advanced works we moved directly on were Forts Gregg and Whitworth. Our
division was moved to the front and an assault made on these forts.

These forts, especially Gregg, made a desperate defense. General Gibbon
says that the assault on this fort was "the most desperate one of the
war." It was only taken by a determined bayonet dash led by Lieutenant
Payne, of our regiment, who was the first man to leap into the fort and
who owed his life to his skill with the use of the saber, a skill
acquired as a trooper in Mexico, and in many desperate Indian fights
during a term of service on the plains of the west. As Gregg fell,
Whitworth was carried, and the first in it too were of the Eleventh,
Companies A and B, that had been detached as skirmishers when the
regiment crossed the Confederate works in the morning. These companies
had driven the enemy's skirmishers through the fields between the
enemy's lines of works, finally forcing them into a great area of log
barracks flanking Whitworth, when the Confederates made it warm for our
men in every way, they setting fire to the barracks, and fighting from
street to street of the blazing structures. Finally the rebel
skirmishers fell back into Whitworth, A and B then crowded closely to
this work, returning its heavy fire with interest, until Turner's
brigade of West Virginians moved forward to assault the fort, when
the boys of these companies of the Eleventh darted forward at the head
of the assaulting column, entering the fort by its sallyport, and
the rebels were already throwing down their guns when Turner's men
appeared on the scene. Nor were A and B yet satisfied. Anticipating
an immediate assault on the enemy's inner and only remaining line of
works, these companies pushed across the intervening fields and secured
a skirmishing position on Indian Town Creek, where they remained for
some time, anxiously looking for an advancing Union column, and fully
determined to head it, and if possible be the first armed Yankees to
enter the Cockade City. But General Humphreys says the Sixth Corps men
were exhausted, having been under arms for eighteen hours now, and it
was concluded not to attack further until the next morning. Up to the
night of the 2d of April, of D, Privates Tehan, Mathews, Morrill, Ryan,
Stratton and Watson were wounded, Privates Ryan and Watson mortally,
and Sergeant Gowell, Privates Bickmore, Brien, Findel, Geary, Gibbs,
Seavey, Simmonds and Stevens were taken prisoners. Of the prisoners
Private Bickmore was wounded when captured. The prisoners from D were
taken while on the picket line, when the Mississippians ran over it the
morning of April 1st, and Private Peter Haegan would have been added to
their list but for his shrewdly begging permission of his captor to be
allowed to get the haversack Peter had left at the foot of a tree near
the post he was surprised on. The good natured Mississippian allowed
him to go the few feet only separating him and his provender bag, but
Peter failed to return, preferring to throw himself upon the ground and
crawl to the rear until he had reached our line.


THE PURSUIT AND THE SURRENDER.

The morning of the 3d of April it was quickly known that Lee's army had
escaped in the direction of Amelia Court House, and that his troops
from both Richmond and Petersburgh were concentrating there. But his
objective point was the question. Was he intending to move directly
west towards Lynchburg, or southwest for Danville? In either case he
must do so through Burkeville Junction, where the Southside and the
Richmond and Danville railroads cross each other. Sheridan with his
cavalry and the Fifth Corps, followed by Meade with the Second and
Sixth Corps, pushed along the south side of the Appomattox River to
keep in constant touch of Lee's movements and to strike the Danville
road between its crossing the Appomattox at High Bridge and Burkeville
Junction, while Ord with the troops of the Twenty-fourth Corps as a
flying column, in the lightest possible marching order, should directly
push for the Junction, moving along the Southside road, with the Ninth
Corps following. We reached the Junction in the night of the 5th,
having marched fifty-two miles since the morning of the 3d. And that
night General Read, of General Ord's staff, moved towards High Bridge
with a small force, his orders requiring him to seize and burn that
bridge and those at Farmville, if possible. This by order of General
Grant, and transmitted through Sheridan, then at about half-way between
Burkeville Junction and Amelia Court House. The morning of the 6th, Ord
was notified by Sheridan that Lee was apparently moving on the
Junction. As soon as Grant was informed of this, he directed Ord to
move to Rice Station, two-thirds of the way towards Farmville, when
there we were directly in Lee's road were he pushing for either
Lynchburg or Danville. At the same time messengers were hurried to
overtake General Read before he should reach High Bridge, where the van
of Lee's army already was, but it was too late to save the fated young
officer from death, and his small command from almost annihilation. At
Rice Station we found Longstreet's Command intrenched and ready for us,
Longstreet quite willing to fight for the time Anderson, Ewell and
Gordon needed to march by his rear with the wagon trains they were
convoying from Amelia Court House. But as it was about night, we
contented ourselves with taking position to attack from in the early
morning. During this day, the 6th, Sheridan and Meade were constantly
attacking Lee's army at every possible point, and successfully, too,
for they captured Ewell and his entire command, together with one-half
of Anderson's, a large part of Gordon's, and destroyed the greater part
of the trains they were making such useless sacrifices for. Longstreet
escaped us while we were sleeping before his intrenchments at Rice
Station. Marching to Farmville he crossed to the north bank of the
Appomattox, and in the morning, that of the 7th, began to move towards
Lynchburg by the road leading through Appomattox Court House. He was
followed by Gordon, and he by Mahone. Finding that Longstreet had
stolen away, Ord moved on towards Farmville in pursuit, marching by the
short cut wagon road Longstreet had gone over, instead of following the
railroad to High Bridge. Wright was now following us with the Sixth
Corps. All the bridges but one across the Appomattox had been destroyed
by the rebels after crossing, and they were in the act of destroying
that one, a wagon road bridge near High Bridge, when the Second Corps
advance, under Barlow, reached it and saved it.

The Second Corps immediately crossed the Appomattox by this bridge,
treading so closely on the heels of the Confederates that General
Barlow overtook Gordon's Corps, attacked it and cut off a large part of
the wagon train it was covering. So threatening was the Second Corps
in its movements, that Lee was forced to halt his force and take a
strong position on the crest of a long slope of ground that covered
the stage and plank roads leading to Lynchburg. Here he threw up light
intrenchments and put artillery in position. After riding along the
ground taken up by Lee, General Meade ordered the Second Corps to
attack, at the same time sending messengers to Ord to have our division
and the Sixth Corps cross the river at Farmville, and help force Lee
into a general engagement. But as there was no bridge remaining near us
for us to cross by, nor could a fordable place be found, this order
could not be obeyed. The Second Corps attack then, unsupported, was but
a partial success, but enables General Humphreys, then in command of
that Corps, to claim with reason that by the enforced detention due to
the vigor and aggressiveness of the movement of the Second Corps, Lee
lost the supplies awaiting him at Appomattox Station and gave time for
Sheridan with his cavalry and Ord with the Fifth and Twenty-fourth
Corps to put themselves across his path at Appomattox Court House. The
Second and Sixth Corps pushed directly after Lee the morning of the
8th. He had moved in the night toward Lynchburg. These Corps kept up
this direct pursuit until midnight, only halting after making a march
of twenty-six miles. The morning of the 8th, the Twenty-fourth and the
Fifth Corps pushed out from near Farmville, and accompanied by General
Grant and staff, pushed towards Appomattox Court House by the shortest
roads. All day long these Corps pressed forward, the men, although
tired and footsore, requiring neither urging nor command to put forth
every effort to head Lee off from Lynchburg, for all understood that it
was Grant's purpose for us to march by Lee's army and head him off,
while the Second and Sixth Corps should dog his heels and hamper his
speed by forcing him to turn and defend himself at every opportunity
they could get. It was a question of legs and endurance now. On and on
our men plodded, none falling out until worn out. All were too tired
even to raise a cheer in passing General Grant as he was sitting on a
roadside log resting himself while enjoying a quiet smoke. And General
Ord secured this tribute when, in response to the cries of "Coffee"
that ran along the marching line he was riding by to reach the head of
the column, he halted it as soon as he gained its advance, that the
tired, hungry men might rest a bit while they cooked their coffee,
every man his own, in his tin dipper set on one of the hastily lighted
roadside fires. Ord was one of the general officers that knew the needs
of men. "Get out of the road men," shouted one of his staff as they
rode along through a line of men resting in the dusty road. "Stop Sir,"
said the gray old general sternly, "the men are tired, rein to the
roadside and follow that." As the day passed we found ourselves on the
track of Sheridan; prisoners, guns and trains of wagons captured by his
vigorous advance, lined the roadside, encouraging our tired men to put
forth every exertion. Darkness found us still pressing on and it was
not until about daybreak that we halted for more than a few minutes
rest at a time, the Fifth Corps plodding on at our heels in dogged
determination to be there too. At about daylight we reached the
vicinity of Appomattox Station, which Sheridan's Cavalry had reached a
few hours before, and in time to capture a train of artillery and three
trains of cars loaded with subsistence supplies for Lee's army. Our
division halted near the captured cars, and details of our men set to
work to divide the fat sides of Virginia bacon they were mainly loaded
with, among their regiments, and tired, sleepy, but more hungry than
either, we made coffee, greedily ate great slices of uncooked bacon
with the few crackers of hard bread yet remaining in the haversacks,
thinking it as appetizing and satisfying a meal as we had ever eaten.
But we had not fairly wiped the bacon grease from our smacking lips
when the roar of guns and the roll of musketry rose from the immediate
front, telling us that our cavalry was heavily engaged. Falling in
quickly at the sharp voiced orders transmitted from Gibbon down, the
men were double quicked on the sound of battle. We soon came up with
the retiring cavalry, Crook's and Custer's men stubbornly fighting
Gordon's advancing infantry column. As we sped by them into the woods
Gordon's men were pushing through, a voice shouted, "There's the
Eleventh Maine," and a wild cheer rose from a body of cavalry on our
right. It was the First Maryland, now mounted and serving in its own
arm of the service. Inspired by this recognition and complimentary
tribute, the Eleventh dashed vigorously forward and crossed the road
Lee's army was now making its last advance on. The gray lines of
Gordon's men were dashing forward as the cavalry fell back behind us,
but as the swiftly deploying lines of battle of our division unrolled
before them, and the long line of blue-clad men pressed forward to
receive them, the last advance of the Army of Northern Virginia became
a hasty retreat. Negotiations that had been going on between Grant and
Lee by letter for two days were now resumed with the result that we all
know of. But while the leaders were conferring, we of the opposing rank
and file were not sitting down in the amity the histories of the war
indicate we were. Blood was shed on the hills of Appomattox that day.
As the column of Gordon fell back in the haste of consternation at the
unexpected appearance of infantry in their path, we followed after it,
and entering the wide field beyond which the Confederates were drawn up
behind planted artillery, we were ordered by General Foster to press
across it. Then, though unsupported, the Eleventh pushed forward, and
finding its progress contested by the fire of a battery before it,
broke into a yell and charged the guns. The swift advance was met not
only by a sweep of grape and canister, but by the volley fire of a
supporting line of battle. In the confusion the two right companies
were separated from the left one, rejoining the regiment as it lay in a
protecting declension of the open field before the battery it had
sought to capture, grape, canister and bullets sweeping over it in
appalling volume. Many of those remaining at the log houses the right
companies of the regiment had occupied before rejoining the regiment
were captured, the Confederate cavalry pushing forward and enveloping
this advance position about the time the main body of the occupying
companies abandoned it to rejoin the regiment. To make a short story of
it, a number of the Eleventh were killed and wounded before the
regiment got out of its untenable position before the battery, which it
did by moving down one protecting ravine and up another that led nearly
back to the position in the woods it had charged from. It was at the
moment of retreat that private Moses E. Sherman, of D, was killed,
struck dead at the feet of the First Sergeant of the company, Sergeant
Keene, who would not believe his friend dead at first, nor would he
leave the field until he was convinced that "Mustache" was dead. Poor
little "Mustache!" ever cheerfully smiling, ever ready for lark or
duty, more than liked by all of us, it seems hard indeed that one so
able and willing to enjoy life, and to make life enjoyable for others,
should lie dead on the last battlefield of the war. The lot of the
Sherman boys was a hard one. Both original members of the company, both
taken prisoners at Fair Oaks to endure the privations of Libby Prison
together, both reenlisted, William to be mortally wounded at Deep
Bottom in August, '64, and Moses to die in the last charge that our old
company was called upon to participate in. Scarcely had the regiment
reached a sheltered position, when companies A and B were thrown out as
part of a skirmish line forming to cover an attack General Ord was
preparing, and this skirmish line was moving swiftly across the field
intervening between the battle lines when a galloping aid overtook it
and announced Lee's surrender. Besides Private Sherman killed, Private
Burns and Curtis of D were wounded in making the assault on the
battery, which proved to be a liberal section of the celebrated
Washington artillery. The formal surrender of the regiments of the Army
of Northern Virginia was made to the Fifth and Twenty-fourth Corps, as
they were the Corps that, out marching the Confederates, had closed the
road of their retreat. We encamped on the battlefield during the
progress of the surrender, and it was not until the men of the last
regiment of Lee's Army had stacked arms, laid its ragged colors on the
now useless bayonets, and marched mournfully away to ruined homes to
begin the world over again, that we took up our line of march for
Richmond, the last of the Corps of the Army of the Potomac preceding us
by a few days.


AFTER THE SURRENDER.

Our Corps moved towards Richmond in a leisurely and gala-day manner,
the bands playing whenever we moved through a village or country
"city," (the white flag flying from every house in token of
acquiescence in the terms of the surrender.) Our columns, objects of
intense curiosity to sway crowds of women and children, white and
black, with swarthy, gray clothed veterans peeping grimly from out of
the background at the men they had never before been so near except in
armed violence. We arrived at Manchester, opposite Richmond, the 25th
of April, where we camped for the night. The 26th we entered the city
and were received by the occupying troops, troops of the Army of the
James, the city having surrendered to General Weitzel's advance from
the north side, on the morning of April 3d. There was a marked contrast
in the appearance of ourselves and the receiving comrades. They as
spick and span as if just turned out of military band boxes, we ragged
and dust laden, but as we marched along between their drawn up lines,
it was plainly expressed to us that they would gladly be able to change
places with Foster's division to bear its prestige of endurance and
intrepidity. Nor did the crowds of people thronging the streets we
marched through, sidewalks, steps, doors and windows, seem to think our
dusty line suffering by comparison, the many military looking men in
these throngs watching the soldierly swing of our marching column with
manifest though silent approval. And the Eleventh, with its one-armed
Colonel riding at its head, its bullet tattered banners floating above
it, and its men of '61, '62, '63, and '64 now welded by association,
discipline and common danger into a compact if conglomerate mass,
attracted no little attention as it kept step to the audacious
declarations of its band--"That in Dixies land it took its stand to
live and die in Dixies land." "Yes," drawled one ex-confederate officer
to another, "they say this regiment was in the advance at Fair Oaks,
McClellan's old boys; none better." We went into camp in a grove back
of the city. Here we remained for several months, doing such duty as
was necessary in the militarily occupied city. From Richmond the "'62"
men took their departure for Maine, the three years they had enlisted
for having expired. The company was now officered by W. H. H. Frye as
Captain, Nelson H. Norris as First Lieutenant, Lieutenant Perkins had
become Captain of K, Lieutenant Young First Lieutenant of A, and First
Sergeant Keene was made Second Lieutenant of H, a richly deserved
honor, for there was no better soldier in the regiment than Josiah F.
Keene. This reduced the "original members" remaining with the company
to First Sergeant McGraw, Corporal Annis, Privates Day, Dunifer and
Longley. The remainder of the company, now that the "'62" men were
gone, being made up of the men of '63, who had joined the regiment
at Gloucester Point, in April, 1864, and of the ones who had joined
in the fall of 1864. On the 24th of November we were moved to
Fredericksburg, the headquarters of the military department known as
that of Northeastern Virginia, then commanded by Brigadier-General
Harris, but soon by Colonel Hill, for some time now Brevet
Brigadier-General Hill. From here the companies were scattered through
the department, D going to Northumberland County in what was called the
sub-district of Essex. In January, 1866, the companies assembled at
Fredericksburg to go to City Point, where we were formally mustered
out on the 2d of February, but we retained our company and regimental
organization until we reached Augusta, where on the 10th day of
February we were paid off, and Old Company D broke ranks for the last
time.


_The 26 in service at Muster-out of Regiment were_:

    CHARLES SELLMER, Capt. Co. B.
    ALBERT MAXFIELD, Capt. Co. H.
    ELLERY D. PERKINS, Capt. Co. K.
    WM. H. H. FRYE, Capt. Co. D.
    ROBERT BRADY, JR., 1st Lieut. Co. I.
    NELSON H. NORRIS, 1st Lieut. Co. D.
    JUDSON L. YOUNG, 1st Lieut. Co. A.
    JOSIAH F. KEENE, 2d Lieut. Co. H.
    TIMOTHY MCGRAW, 1st Sergt.
    STEPHEN MUDGETT, Sergt.
    DANIEL W. WOODBURY, Sergt.
    JOHN DEACON, Sergt.
    FRANK E. YOUNG, Sergt.
    JOTHAM S. ANNIS, Corporal.
    ANDREW J. MUDGETT, Corporal.
    JAMES E. DOW, Corporal.
    FREDERICK ARNOLD, Private.
    RUEL C. BURGESS, Private.
    JOHN W. DAY, Private.
    PRINCE E. DUNIFER, Private.
    ALEXANDER B. DYER, Private.
    HERVEY B. JOHNSON, Private.
    LEONARD C. JUDKINS, Private.
    JOHN LONGLEY, Private.
    DENNIS TEHAN, Private.
    JOSEPH VANDENBOSCH, Private.


  1861          ROSTER OF COMPANY "D," ELEVENTH REGIMENT,          1890
                       MAINE INFANTRY VOLUNTEERS.
                        +_See Personal Sketch._
  ========================================================================
                           AGE.    ENTERED SERVICE.
     LEFT SERVICE.                   HOW LEFT SERVICE.
       RESIDENCE WHEN ENLISTED.        FINAL RECORD OR P O. ADDRESS, 1890.
         REMARKS.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

       CAPTAINS.

    1. Leonard S. Harvey     30    Sept. 7,'61.
         June 22,'62.                Resigned.
           Weston, Me.                 San Francisco, Cal.
             +Original Captain.
    2. John D. Stanwood      35    Sept. 12,'61.
         Jan. 19,'63.                Resigned.
           Springfield, Me.            Winn, Me.
             +Original First Lieutenant.
    3. Albert G. Mudgett     34    Sept. 25,'61.
         May 13,'65.                 Mustered out.
           Newburgh, Me.                Greenleaf, Kansas.
             +Prisoner at Bermuda Hundred, Va.
    4. William H. H. Frye    21    Nov. 7,'61.
         Feb. 13,'66.                Mustered out.
           Fryeburg, Me.               Rosemont, Kansas.
             +Promoted Brevet-Capt. U.S. Vols.

       FIRST LIEUTENANTS.

    1. Leonard Butler        21    July 18,'62.
         Apr. 14,'63.                Died of Disease.
           Hancock, Me.                Died in Service.
             +Died at Beaufort, S.C.
    2. Charles Sellmer       31    June 13,'63.
         Feb. 9,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Beaufort, S.C.              Zellwood, Fla.
             +Promoted Captain Co. B.
    3. Albert Maxfield       25    Feb. 27,'62.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Windham, Me.                New York.
             +Promoted Captain Co. H.
    4. Ellery D. Perkins     27    Aug. 16,'62.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Cutler, Me.             Los Alamos, Cal.
             +Promoted Captain Co. K.
    5. Nelson H. Norris      18    Oct. 1,'61.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Wayne, Me.                    Aurora, Ills.
             +Thrice Wounded.

       SECOND LIEUTENANTS.

    1. Gibson S. Budge       26   Sept. 12,'61.
         Mar. 20,'62.               Resigned.
           Springfield, Me.            Lee, Maine.
             +Original Second Lieutenant.
    2. Francis M. Johnson    31    Sept. 19,'61.
         July 13,'63.                Resigned.
           Springfield, Me.            Springfield, Me.
             +Prisoner at Mathews Co., Va.
    3. Judson L. Young       23    Sept. 23,'61.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Springfield, Me.            Lincoln, Me.
             +Promoted First Lieutenant Co. A.

       FIRST SERGEANTS

    1. Robert Brady          40    Sept. 23,'61
         Mar. 14,'63.                Resigned.
           Enfield, Me.                Enfield, Me.
             +Promoted Second Lieutenant Co. B.
    2. Abner F. Bassett      24    Sept. 7,'61.
         Sept. 15,'64.               Killed on Picket.
           Weston, Me.                 Killed on Picket.
             +Killed in front of Petersburgh, Va.
    3. Josiah F. Keene       17    Oct. 1,'61.
         Mar. 3,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Waterville, Me.             Minneapolis, Minn.
             +Promoted Second Lieutenant Co. H.
    4. George Day            23    Aug. 28,'62.
         June 12,'65.                Mustered out.
           Kennebunkport, Me.          Died July 11, '89.
             +Died in Kennebunkport, Me.
    5. Timothy McGraw        18    Sept. 29,'61.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Jackson Brook, Me.          Danforth, Me.
             +Wounded at Deep Run, Va.

       SERGEANTS.

    1. James W. Noyes        25    Sept. 19,'61.
         July 10,'62.                Died of Disease.
           Topsfield, Me.              Died in Service.
             Died in Baltimore, Md.
    2. Ephriam Francis       33    Sept. 23,'61.
         Nov. 18,'64.                Mustered out.
           Enfield, Me.                Bruce's Crossing, Mich.
             +Mustered out at expiration of term.
    3. Gardiner E. Blake     33    July 17,'62.
         Apr. 16,'65.                Disability.
           Surry, Me.                  W. Sullivan, Me.
             +Prisoner at Bermuda Hundred, Va.
    4. Robert Brady, Jr.     16    Nov. 2,'61.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Enfield, Me.                New York.
             +Promoted First Lieutenant Co. I.
    5. Alphonzo C. Gowell     18    Oct. 14,'61.
         June 19,'65.                 Mustered out.
           Litchfield, Me.              Hesperia, Mich.
             +Prisoner at Hatcher's Run, Va.
    6. Lyman M. Bragdon      24    July 17,'62.
         June 12,'65.                Mustered out.
           Franklin, Me.               Franklin, Me.
             +Wounded at Morris Island, S.C.
    7. Jeremiah Stratton     23    July 21,'62.
         June 12,'65.                Mustered out.
           Hancock, Me.                Hancock, Me.
             +Wounded at Hatcher's Run, Va.
    8. Stephen Mudgett       20    Dec. 28,'63.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Newburgh, Me.                Dixmont Centre, Me.
             Pro. Corp. May 1, '65, Sergt. June 1, '65.
    9. Summer E. Cushing     29    Aug. 10,'63.
         Oct. 16,'65.                Mustered out.
           Bangor, Me.                 Thomaston, Me.
             Pro. Corp. June 1, '65, Sergt. June 12, '65.
   10. Daniel W. Woodbury    18    July 15,'63
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Litchfield, Me.             Thomaston, Me.
             +Wounded at Darbytown Road, Va.
   11. Joel Tucker           22    Oct. 12,'64.
         Oct. 11,'65.                Mustered out.
           Millbridge, Me.             South China, Me.
             Pro. Corp. June 12, '65, Sergt. July 1, '65.
   12. John Deacon           29   Dec. 15,'64.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Portland, Me.
             Pro. Corp. July 1, '65, Sergt. Oct. 13, '65.
   13. Frank E. Young        21    Mar. 13,'65.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Springfield, Me.            Drowned, June 22, '80.
             +Drowned at Carson City, Col.

       CORPORALS

    1. John McDonald         21    Sept. 23,'61
         May 16,'62.                 Disability.
           Topsfield, Me.
             Discharged at Washington, D.C.
    2. Richard W. Dawe       27    Sept. 20,'61.
         Apr. 20,'65.                Wounded.
           Topsfield, Me.              Calais, Me.
             +Wounded at Bermuda Hundred, Va.
    3. Hughey G. Rideout     27    Sept. 9,'61.
         Aug. 18,'62.                Disability.
           Springfield, Me.            Died Aug 11, '64.
             +Discharged at Augusta, Me.
    4. John Sherman          28    Sept. 23,'61.
         Apr. 10,'62.                Disability.
           Topsfield, Me.
             Discharged at Washington, D.C.
    5. Benjamin Gould        23    Oct. 12,'61.
         Oct. 3,'62.                 Disability.
           Springfield, Me.            Lewiston, Me
             Discharged at Yorktown, Va.
    6. Wm. H. Chamberlain    21    Oct. 24,'61.
         Nov. 3,'62.                 Disability.
           Enfield, Me.
             Discharged at New York.
    7. Ezra J. Philbrook     24    Sept. 16,'61.
         Oct. 8,'62.                 Disability.
           Springfield, Me.            Shelton, Neb.
             Discharged at Washington, D.C.
    8. Freeman R. Dakin      35    Sept. 28,'61.
         Nov. 22,'62.                Disability.
           Jackson Brook, Me.          Mulvane, Kas.
             +Prisoner at Fair Oaks, Va.
    9. John Gihn             26    Sept. 23,'61.
         June 1,'63.                 Disability.
           Topsfield, Me.
             +Discharged at Beaufort, S.C.
   10. Leonard M. Witham     28    Oct. 11,'61.
         Nov. 18,'62.                Died of Disease.
           Enfield, Me.                Died in Service.
             +Died at Yorktown, Va.
   11. Wm. B. Davis          45    Sept. 25,'61.
         Sept. 23,'62.               Disability.
           Enfield, Me.                Died April 20, '87.
             +Discharged at New York City.
   12. Nathan C. Messer      28    Sept. 24,'61.
         Sept. 2,'62.                Disability.
           Enfield, Me.                Lincoln, Me.
             Discharged at Augusta, Me.
   13. James E. Bailey       18    Sept. 23,'61.
         Dec. 20,'64.                Wounded.
           Topsfield, Me.              Topsfield, Me.
             +Wounded at Bermuda Hundred, Va.
   14. Patrick Doherty       36    Sept. 17,'61.
         Dec. 7,'62.                 Disability.
           Carroll, Me.                Died Sept. 16, '64.
             +Discharged at Yorktown, Va.
   15. John Dyer             18    Sept. 17,'61.
         Nov 18,'64.                 Mustered out.
           Springfield, Me.            Killed May 23, '69.
             +Killed at Springfield, Me.
   16. Horace Whittier       30    Aug. 27,'62.
         June 7,'65.                 Mustered out.
           Haynesville, Me.            Glenwood, Me.
             +Color Guard, wounded.
   17. Shepard Whittier      28    Aug. 27,'62.
         June 28,'65.                Mustered out.
           Sidney, Me.                 Campello, Mass.
             +Color Guard.
   18. Stephen R. Bearce     27    Sept. 23,'62.
         June 17,'65.                Mustered out.
           Carroll, Me.                Springfield, Me.
             +Twice wounded.
   19. Amaziah Hunter        24    Oct. 11,'61.
         June 30,'65.                Mustered out.
           Whitefield, Me.             E. Providence, R.I.
             +Reenlisted First Sergeant Co. I.
   20. Wm. P. Weymouth       30    Aug. 15,'62.
         Sept 2,'64.                 Died of Wounds.
           Springfield. Me.            Died of Wounds.
             +Twice wounded at Deep Bottom, Va.
   21. James B. Williams     33    July 17,'62.
         June 17,'65.                Mustered out.
           Franklin, Me.               Drowned June 20,'81.
             +Drowned at South West Harbor, Me.
   22. Alphonzo O. Donnell   21    July 17,'62.
         June 12,'65.                Mustered out.
           Franklin, Me.
             Promoted Corporal, Feb. 1,'65.
   23. Edward Kennedy        20    Oct. 15,'64.
         Oct 14,'65.                 Mustered out.
           Newry, Me.
             Promoted Corporal, June 12,'65.
   24. Samuel Ross           32    Oct. 14,'64.
         Oct. 13,'65.                Mustered out.
           Robbinston, Me.             N. Perry, Me.
             Promoted Corporal, July 1,'65.
   25. Jotham S. Annis       39    Sept. 9,'61.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Lee, Me.                    Lee, Me.
             +Wounded at Drury's Bluff, Va.
   26. Andrew J. Mudgett     32    Dec. 28,'63.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Newburgh, Me.               Jackson, Me.
             Promoted Corporal, Oct 13,'65.
   27. James E. Dow          23    July 6,'64.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Bangor, Me.
             Promoted Corporal, Oct. 13,'65.

       MUSICIAN.

    1. Robert A. Strickland  18     Oct. 17,'61.
         Apr. 20,'63.               Disability.
           Gardiner, Me.               Bridgeport, Conn.
             +Prisoner at Fair Oaks, Va.

       WAGONERS.

    1. Henry W. Rider        24    Sept. 20,'61.
         Feb. 7,'62.                 Disability.
           Bradford, Me.               Died May 22,'64.
             +Discharged at Washington, D.C.
    2. Wm. H. Hardison       27    July 22,'62.
         Apr. 2,'65.                 Died of Disease.
           Franklin, Me.               Died in Service.
             Died at Fortress Monroe, Va.

       PRIVATES.

    1. Allen, George         18    Dec. 17,'63.
         July 15,'64.                Died of Disease.
           Lee, Me.                    Died in Service.
             Died at Fortress Monroe, Va.
    2. Arnold, Frederick     19    Dec. 16,'64.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Portland, Me.
             M. O. with regiment.
    3. Babb, Leonard P.      19    Aug. 26,'62.
         June 12,'65.                Mustered out.
           Kennebunkport, Me.          Died Feb 22,'71.
             Died at Dover, N.H.
    4. Bartlett, Bartimus    18    Sept. 30,'61.
         Mar. 18,'62.                Died of Disease
           Lee, Me.                    Died in Service.
             Died at Washington, D.C.
    5. Bartlett, Wm.         19    Sept. 30,'61.
         Aug. 20 '62.                Disability.
           Lee, Me.                    Lee, Me.
             Discharged at Augusta, Me.
    6. Bates, Thomas J.      21    Oct. 9,'61.
         Apr. 8,'62.                 Died of Disease.
           Whitefield, Me.             Died in Service.
             Died at Newport News, Va.
    7. Bearce, Philo         22    Sept. 10,'61.
         July 14,'62.                Died of Disease.
           Springfield, Me.            Died in Service.
             Died at New York.
    8. Betts, Bela W.        43    Sept. 19,'61.
         Aug. 28,'62.                Died of Disease.
           Weston, Me.                 Died in Service.
             Died at Philadelphia, Pa.
    9. Bickmore, Albion P.   18    Aug. 18,'64.
         June 15,'65.                Mustered out.
           Oldtown, Me.                Hyde Park, Mass.
             Wd. and Pris. at Hatcher's Run, Va., April 1, '65.
   10. Blaine, Thomas R.     21    Feb. 18,'62.
         Feb. 28,'65.                Mustered out.
           Frederickton, N.B.
             Wd. at Fair Oaks, Va., May 31, '62.
   11. Bolton, Sumner M.     32    Aug. 19,'63.
         Apr. 1,'65.                 Wounded.
           Bangor, Me.                 Bangor, Me.
             +Wd. and Pris. at Bermuda Hundred, Va.
   12. Bragdon, Samuel A.    19    July 24,'62.
         Aug. 15,'64.                Died of Wounds
           Franklin, Me.               Died of Wounds.
             +Twice Wounded.
   13. Bridges, John E.      18    Sept. 9,'61.
         June 2,'64.                 Killed in Action.
           Springfield, Me.            Killed in Action.
             Killed at Bermuda Hundred, Va.
   14. Bridgham, Leland F.   20    Sept. 2,'63.
         June 5,'65.                 Mustered out.
           Charleston Me.              Boston, Mass.
             M. O. at Baltimore, Md.
   15. Brien, Patrick        21    Aug. 23,'64.
                                     Mustered out.
           Woodstock, N.B.
             Pris. at Hatcher's Run, Va., April 1, '65.
   16. Brown, John           21    Dec. 7,'64.
         Aug. 10,'65.                Deserted.
           Sherbrook, N.S.           ------
             Deserted at Richmond, Va.
   17. Bryant, James W.      21    Aug. 23,'62.
         June 12,'65.                Mustered out.
           Springfield, Me.            N. Lee, Me.
             M. O. at Richmond, Va.
   18. Bryant, Martin V.     21    Aug. 8,'62.
         Oct. 3,'65.                 Mustered out.
           Hermon, Me.                 N. Carmel, Me.
             +Prisoner at Bermuda Hundred, Va.
   19. Bubier, Frank         19    Aug. 25,'63.
         Sept. 13,'64.               Died of Wounds.
           Lewiston, Me.               Died of Wounds.
             Wounded at Deep Run, Va., Aug, 16, '64.
   20. Burgess, Ruel C.      23    Aug. 1,'63.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Vassalboro, Me.             N. Vassalboro, Me.
             M. O. with Regiment.
   21. Burke, Charles H.     18    Sept. 28,'61.
         Apr. 5,'62.                 Disability.
           Lee, Me.                    Lee, Me.
             Discharged at Washington, D.C.
   22. Burns, John           23    Dec. 16,'64.
         Dec. 19,'65.                Mustered out.
           Limington, Me.              W. Oakland, Cal.
             Wounded at Appomattox, Va., April 9, '65.
   23. Buswell, Silas, Jr.   24    Sept. 24,'61.
         Apr. 14,'62.                Disability.
           Enfield, Me.                Antigo, Wis.
             Discharged at Washington, D.C.
   24. Butler, Alfred C.     21    Feb. 29,'64.
         Sept. 19,'65.               Wounded.
           Eastbrook, Me.              Waltham, Me.
             +Thrice Wounded at Deep Bottom, Va.
   25. Butler, Geo. L.       24    July 23,'62.
         May 20,'64.                 Died of Wounds.
           Eastbrook, Me.              Died of Wounds.
             +Wd. at Bermuda H'dred, Va., May 17, '64.
   26. Butterfield, Geo. M.  18    Sept. 16,'61.
         July 28,'62.                Disability.
           Springfield, Me.            Springfield, Me.
             Discharged at Harrison's Landing, Va.
   27. Buzzell, Wm. A.       30    Sept. 30,'61.
         Apr. 28,'62                 Disability.
           Enfield, Me.                Died Nov. 16,'62.
             Discharged at Yorktown, Va.
   28. Cain, Henry H.        21    July 30,'63.
         Sept. 10,'65.               Disability.
           Vassalboro, Me.             Jacksonville, Vt.
             +Discharged at Washington, D.C.
   29. Cannavan, John        21    Oct. 11,'64.
         Oct. 11,'65.                Mustered out.
           Portland, Me.
             M. O. at Richmond, Va.
   30. Carlow, John P.       31    Oct. 3,'64.
         May 25,'65                  Mustered out.
           Wesley, Me.
             M. O. at Richmond, Va.
   31. Carver, Alonzo        18    Oct. 9,'61.
         Nov. 15,'64.                Mustered out.
           Lee, Me.                    Stacyville, Me.
             Wd. at Bermuda H'dred, Va., May 17, '64.
   32. Cilley, Clark         36    Sept. 30,'61.
         Dec. 17,'62.                Disability.
           Springfield, Me.            Springfield, Me.
             Discharged at Washington, D.C.
   33. Clark, Samuel S.      25    July 17,'62.
         Aug. 14,'65.                Mustered out.
           Franklin, Me.               Franklin, Me.
             Promoted Fife Major, Nov. 18, '64.
   34. Cline, Joseph         28    July 28,'62.
         Dec. 9,'62.                 Died of Disease.
           Hancock, Me.                Died in Service.
             Died at Yorktown, Va.
   35. Collins, Francis      21    July 17,'62.
         Mar. 23,'65.                Wounded.
           Franklin, Me.
             Wd. at Deep Bottom, Va., Aug. 14, '64.
   36. Collins, Josiah       28    Oct. 8,'61.
         Mar. 28,'62.                Disability.
           Springfield, Me.            Died Dec. 25,'77.
             +Discharged at Washington, D.C.
   37. Conforth, Melvin      21    Sept. 9,'61.
         Nov. 18,'64.                Mustered out.
           Springfield, Me.            Minneapolis, Minn.
             Wd. at Bermuda H'dred, Va., June 2, '64.
   38. Cook, Joseph          35    Oct. 18,'61.
                                     Mustered out.
           Levant, Me.
   39. Cooper, Geo. L.       32    Sept. 30,'61.
         May 15,'62.                 Died of Disease.
           Springfield, Me.            Died in Service.
             Died at New York City.
   40. Cooper, Hiram A.      23    Sept. 30,'61.
         Apr. 1,'62.                 Disability.
           Prentiss, Me.               N. Newport, Me.
             Discharged at Washington, D.C.
   41. Cote, George          23    Dec. 12,'64.
         Dec. 16,'65.                Mustered out.
           Oldtown, Me.                Burling Falls, N.H.
             M. O. at Richmond, Va.
   42. Crabtree, Isaac N.    37    July 17,'62.
         Nov. 27,'62.                Disability.
           Franklin, Me.               E. Sullivan, Me.
             Discharged at Washington, D.C.
   43. Cronin, Daniel        22    July 29,'62.
         Oct. 31,'62.                Died of Disease.
           Eastbrook, Me.              Died in Service.
             Died at Yorktown, Va.
   44. Crosby, Thomas A.     23    Aug. 5,'63.
         Aug. 27,'64.                Died of Disease.
           Swanville, Me.              Died in Service.
             Died at Point-of-Rocks, Va.
   45. Cross, Simon          40    Sept. 20,'61.
         Mar. 26,'62.                Disability.
           Topsfield, Me.              Died Feb. 5,'64.
             +Discharged at Washington, D.C.
   46. Curtis, Elijah B.     18    Sept. 30,'61.
         Mar. '62.                   Disability.
           Enfield, Me.                Died June 12,'62.
             +Discharged at Washington, D.C.
   47. Curtis, John T.       22    Aug. 5,'63.
         May 29,'65.                 Mustered out.
           Byron, Me.                  Boston, Mass.
             Wd. at Appomattox, Va., April 9, '65.
   48. Curtis, Phineas       42    Sept. 30,'61.
         July '62.                   Died of Disease.
           Enfield, Me.                Died in Service.
             Died at Yorktown, Va.
   49. Darling, Wm. H.       22    Sept. 25,'61.
         Nov. 18,'64.                Mustered out.
           Enfield, Me.                Enfield, Me.
             M. O. at Augusta, Me.
   50. Davis, John E.        18    Sept. 7,'61.
         May 26,'62.                 Died of Disease.
           Chelsea, Me.                Died in Service.
             Died at Baltimore, Md.
   51. Davis, Thomas A.      19    Sept. 7,'61.
         '63.                        Disability.
           Whitefield, Me.             Killed Sept. 27,'64.
             +On Gunboat Service, Feb 17,'62.
   52. Day, John W.          31    Sept. 9,'61.
         Feb. 9,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Springfield, Me.            Springfield, Me.
             Wd. at Deep Run, Va., Aug. 16,'64.
   53. Dolly, Charles        24    Sept. 11,'61.
         Dec. 18,'61.                Died of Disease
           Springfield, Me.            Died in Service.
             Died at Washington, D.C.
   54. Downs, Charles        20    Sept. 30,'61.
         May 9,'63.                  Disability.
           Springfield, Me.            Springfield, Me.
             Dis. at Hilton Head, S.C.
   55. Driscoll, John H.     21    July 18,'62.
         June 12,'65.                Mustered out.
           Franklin, Me.               Cherryfield, Me.
             M. O. at Richmond, Va.
   56. Dunifer, Prince E.    26    Sept. 9,'62.
         Feb. 9,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Springfield, Me.            Winn, Me.
             M. O. at Augusta, Me.
   57. Dyer, Alexander B.    20    Feb. 22,'64.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Eastbrook, Me.              Franklin, Me.
             Served also in Co. C, 26th Me.
   58. Dyer, Geo. E.         29    July 17,'62.
         Jan. 16,'63.                Disability.
           Franklin, Me.               Died '63.
             Died at Franklin, Me.
   59. Dyer, Hudson K.       22    Feb. 22,'64.
         Feb. 9,'65.                 Died of Disease.
           Eastbrook, Me.              Died in Service.
             Wd. at Bermuda Hundred, Va, June 2,'64.
   60. Ellis, Daniel S.      18    Sept. 16,'61.
         Aug. 18,'62.                Disability.
           Springfield, Me.
             Dis. at Augusta, Me.
   61. Findel, Wm. II.       24    Oct. 12,'64.
         June 20,'65.                Mustered out.
           E. Machias, Me.             Barrington, N.S.
             Pris. at Hatchers Run, Va., April 1,'65.
   62. Fogg, Geo. M.         18    Oct. 15,'61.
         May 15,'63.                 Died of Disease.
           Lowell, Me.                 Died in Service.
             Died at Beaufort, S.C.
   63. Folsom, Jeremiah      48    Oct. 9,'61.
         Mar. 26,'62.                Disability.
           Burlington, Me.             Died.
             Dis. at Washington, D.C.
   64. Foss, Augustus I.     24    July 24,'62.
         Mar. 7,'63.                 Died of Disease.
           Hancock, Me.                Died in Service.
             Died at Hilton Head, S.C.
   65. Foss, Charles M.      21    Sept. 16,'61.
         Sept. 2,'62.                Disability.
           Lee, Me.                    Lee, Me.
             Dis. at Augusta, Me.
   66. Freeman, Geo. L.      19    Sept. 9,'61.
         Dec. 16,'61.                Died of Disease.
           Vassalboro, Me.             Died in Service.
             Died at Washington, D.C.
   67. Frost, Stephen        26    Sept. 30,'61.
         June 8,'62.                 Deserted.
           Prentiss, Me.               ------
             Deserted at Bottom's Bridge, Va.
   68. Geary, George         24   Oct. 10,'64.
         May 24,'65.                Mustered out.
           Baldwin, Me.
             Pris. at Hatchers Run, Va., April 1,'65.
   69. Gerry, Geo. H.        18    Sept. 9,'61.
         Aug. 18,'62.                Disability.
           Springfield, Me.            S.H. Togus, Me.
             Dis. at Augusta, Me.
   70. Getchell, Isaac J.    42    Oct. 4,'64.
         June 24,'65.                Mustered out.
           Millbridge, Me.             Millbridge, Me.
             Dis. at York, Pa.
   71. Gibbs, Elisha W.      23    Aug. 23,'63.
         June 19,'65.                Mustered out.
           Oldtown, Me.                Died May 24,'78.
             +Pris. at Hatchers Run, Va., April 1,'65.
   72. Googing, Amaziah T.   19    July 18,'62.
         Jan. 23,'63.                Disability.
           Hancock, Me.                Cornell, Ills.
             Dis. at Yorktown, Va.
   73. Googing, Augustus N.  18    July 18,'62.
         Nov. 19,'64.                Wounded.
           Hancock, Me.                Died Aug 16,'70.
             Wd. at Deep Run, Va., Aug 16,'64. Left Arm Amp.
   74. Gould, Ira            20    Sept. 10,'61.
         Aug. 18,'62.                Disability.
           Springfield, Me.            Caribou, Me.
             Dis. at Augusta, Me.
   75. Gray, Daniel          26    Oct. 16,'61.
         May 31,'62.                 Missing in action.
           Enfield, Me.                Probably killed.
             +Missing at Battle of Fair Oaks, Va.
   76. Hall, John            28    Aug. 4,'63.
         Aug. 14,'64.                Killed in action.
           Lewiston, Me.               Killed in action.
             Killed at Deep Bottom Va.
   77. Hanscom, Elbridge E.  22    Sept. 30,'61.
         Aug. 16,'64.                Killed in action.
           Topsfield, Me.              Killed in action.
             Killed at Deep Run, Va.
   78. Harrington, Cornelius 22    Oct. 17,'64.
         Oct. 18,'65.                Mustered out.
           New Bedford, Mass.          New Bedford, Mass
             M. O. at Richmond, Va.
   79. Hayden, Greenlief     40    Oct. 7,'61.
         Mar. 27,'62.                Died of Disease.
           Skowhegan, Me.              Died in Service.
             Died at Washington, D.C.
   80. Haegan, Ira B.        26    July 18,'62.
         July 11,'65.                Mustered out.
           Hancock, Me.                N. Lamoine, Me.
             +M. O. at New York.
   81. Haegan, Peter D.      21    July 21,'62.
         June 12,'65.                Mustered out.
           Sullivan, Me.               Died Sept. 3,'85.
             Died at Franklin, Me.
   82. Hooper, Amaziah C.    25    July 17,'62.
         June 12,'65.                Mustered out.
           Franklin, Me.               Franklin, Me.
             M. O. at Richmond, Va.
   83. House, Mathew P..     18   Sept. 13,'61.
         Nov. 18,'64.               Mustered out.
           Lee, Me.                    Frisco, Ark.
             +Pris. at Fair Oaks, Va.
   84. Hunton, Napoleon B.   21    Aug. 13,'63.
         June 26,'65.                Mustered out.
           Milford, Me.                Minneapolis, Minn.
             M. O. at Augusta, Me.
   85. Hutchinson, Eleazer   19    Sept. 14,'61.
         Apr. 1,'62.                 Disability.
           Lincoln, Me.                Shelton, Wash.
             +Discharged at Washington, D.C.
   86. Jackman, Adolphus O.  28    Sept. 20,'61.
         Aug. 11,'62.                Disability.
           Topsfield, Me.              S.H. Dayton, O.
             Discharged at Augusta, Me.
   87. Johnson, Hervey B.    19    Aug. 25,'64.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Sanford, Me.
             M. O. with Regiment.
   88. Judkins, Leonard C.   22    July 15,'63.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Lewiston, Me.               Lewiston, Me.
             M. O. with Regiment.
   89. Kelley, Lawrence.     29    Aug. 15,'63.
         Sept. 9,'64.                Died of Disease.
           Eaton Grant, Me.            Died in Service.
             +Died in Andersonville Prison, Ga.
   90. Laffin, Pierce.       19    July 18,'62.
         July 31,'65.                Mustered out.
           Hancock, Me.                Truckee, Cal.
             +Wd. at Morris Island, S.C., Dec. 25, '63.
   91. Lampson, John A.      26    July 18,'62.
         May 9,'63.                  Disability.
           Franklin, Me.               Ellsworth, Me.
             Discharged at Hilton Head, S.C.
   92. Lancaster, Sam'l. B.  28    Aug. 15,'62.
         June 12,'65.                Mustered out.
           Springfield, Me.            Montague, Me.
             M. O. at Richmond, Va.
   93. Lane, Otis            36    Nov. 9,'63.
         Jan. 10,'65.                Wounded.
           Biddeford, Me.              Died June 18, '70.
             +Wd. at Bermuda Hundred, Va.
   94. Leighton, Leonard S.  40    Sept. 30,'61.
         July 17,'65.                Wounded.
           Springfield, Me.            Died April 12, '86.
             Wd. at Deep Run, Va., Aug. 16, '64.
   95. Longley, John         28    Sept. 23,'61.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Orono, Me.                  Died Jan. 25, '73.
             Died at Orono, Me.
   96. Lowell, Charles A.    23    Sept. 30,'61.
         Jan. 17,'62.                Died of Disease.
           Springfield, Me.            Died in Service.
             Died at New York.
   97. Lunt, Joseph W.       36    Oct. 24,'64.
         Nov. 4,'65.                 Mustered out.
           Long Island Pl., Me.        Swan's Island, Me.
             M. O. at Fortress Monroe, Va.
   98. Maddox, Greenlief     32    Aug. 18,'62.
         June 12,'65.                Mustered out.
           Kennebunkport, Me.          Lyman, Me.
             +Wd. at Morris Island, S.C., Dec. 8, '63.
   99. Malkson, Daniel F.    19    Sept. 30,'61.
         Dec. 27,'64.                Died of Disease.
           Topsfield, Me.              Died in Service.
             Died at Fortress Monroe, Va.
  100. Malkson, George       21    Sept. 23,'61.
         May 9,'63.                  Disability.
           Topsfield, Me.              Elk River, Minn.
             Discharged at Hilton Head, S.C.
  101. Malkson, Wm. V.       45    Sept. 25,'61.
         Jan. 15,'62.                Disability.
           Topsfield, Me.              Topsfield, Me.
             Discharged at Washington, D.C.
  102. Mathews, Robert.      21    Aug. 18,'64.
         July 12,'65.                Mustered out.
           Eastport, Me.               Eastport, Me.
             Wd. at Hatcher's Run, Va., April 2, '65.
  103. McCormick, Wm.        22    Oct. 4,'64.
         Nov. 6,'64.                 Deserted.
           St. Johns, N.B.             ------
             Deserted at New York.
  104. McKenney, Simeon S.   27    Oct. 12,'61.
         Nov. 3,'62.                 Disability.
           Enfield, Me.                Lincoln, Neb.
             Discharged at Providence, R.I.
  105. McPhetres, John V.    18    Oct. 12,'61.
         June 6,'62.                 Died of Disease.
           Lowell, Me.                 Died in Service.
             Died at Bottoms Bridge, Va.
  106. Merrill, Charles H.   28    Aug. 13,'63.
         May 11,'65.                 Disability.
           Lee, Me.                    Lee, Me.
             Discharged at Augusta, Me.
  107. Morrill, Charles F.   18    Sept. 17,'63.
         May 29,'65.                 Mustered out.
           Corinna, Me.                Killed April 6, '82.
             +Wd. at Hatcher's Run, Va., April 2, '65.
  108. Morris, John.         28    Oct. 18,'64.
         June 5,'65.                 Mustered out.
           Naples, Me.                 S.H. Togus, Me.
             M. O. at Fortress Monroe, Va.
  109. Mullen, Guy.          25    July 18,'62.
         June 1,'63.                 Disability.
           Hancock, Me.                N. Hancock, Me.
           Discharged at Beaufort, S.C.
  110. Murdough, James.      18    Sept. 20,'61.
         June 1,'62.                 Died of Disease.
           Albion, Me.                 Died in Service.
             Died at Yorktown, Va.
  111. Newell, Loren.        27    Oct. 31,'64.
         Nov. 10,'65.                Mustered out.
           Gardiner, Me.               Bruckfield, Me.
             M. O. at Richmond, Va.
  112. Norton, James C.      24    Aug. 15,'62.
         Oct. 31,'62.                Died of Disease.
           Springfield, Me.            Died in Service.
             Died at Yorktown, Va.
  113. Norton, Thomas.       20    Aug. 15,'62.
         Mar. 17,'63.                 Disability.
           Springfield, Me.             Rice's Station, Minn.
             Discharged at Hilton Head, S.C.
  114. Orcutt, Asa D.        44    July 30,'62.
         Dec. 19,'62.                Disability.
           Franklin, Me.               Died Dec. 24, '62.
             Discharged at Yorktown, Va.
  115. Parsons, Charles L.   18    Oct. 12,'64.
         Nov. 5,'65.                 Dis. by order.
           E. Machias, Me.             Machias, Me.
             Discharged at Richmond, Va.
  116. Philbrook, Charles.   18    Aug. 15,'62.
         Nov. 26,'62.                Died of Disease.
           Springfield, Me.            Died in Service.
             Died at Yorktown, Va.
  117. Philbrook, David C.   28    Sept. 2,'61.
         Sept. 15,'62.               Disability.
           Springfield, Me.            Died Aug, '64.
             +Discharged at Yorktown, Va.
  118. Philbrook, Jeremiah.  44    Sept. 7,'61.
         June 17,'62.                Disability.
           Springfield, Me.            Died June 18, '86.
             Discharged at Washington, D.C.
  119. Robinson, George.     33    Sept. 17,'61.
         Nov. 22,'62.                Died of Disease.
           Lee, Me.                    Died in Service.
             Died at Yorktown, Va.
  120. Ryan, Otis W.         33    Nov. 11,'64.
         Apr. 2,'65.                 Died of Wounds.
           Knox, Me.                   Died of Wounds.
             Wd. at Hatchers Run, Va., Apr. 2, '65.
  121. Seavey, George.       21    Oct. 25,'64.
         June 2,'65.                 Mustered out.
           Gorham, Me.
             Pris. at Hatchers Run, Va., Apr. 1, '65.
  122. Shaw, Le Baron H.     31    Aug. 15,'62.
         Dec. 5,'62.                 Disability.
           Springfield, Me.            Moro, Me.
             Dis. at Yorktown, Va.
  123. Shepard, Geo. M.      21    Sept. 9,'61.
         Apr. 1,'62.                 Disability.
           Springfield, Me.            Springfield, Me.
             Dis. at Washington, D.C.
  124. Shepard, Harvey C.    18    Sept. 9,'61.
         Aug. 14,'64.                Killed in action.
           Springfield, Me.            Killed in action.
             Killed at Deep Bottom, Va.
  125. Sherman, Moses E.     24    Sept. 23,'61.
         Apr. 9,'65.                 Killed in action.
           Topsfield, Me.              Killed in action.
             +Killed at Appomattox, Va.
  126. Sherman, Wm.          22    Sept. 10,'61.
         Sept. 1,'64.                 Died of Wounds.
           Carroll, Me.                 Died of Wounds.
             +Wd. at Deep Bottom, Va., Aug. 14, '64.
  127. Sibley, Adoniram.     18    Sept. 19,'61.
         May 9,'63.                  Disability.
           Lowell, Me.                 Died Feb. 8, '81.
             Dis. at Hilton Head, S.C.
  128. Sibley, Sumner.       26    Sept. 9,'61.
         Apr. 1,'62.                 Disability.
           Lowell, Me.                 Died Mar. 28, '63.
             Dis. at Washington, D.C.
  129. Simmonds, James.      43    Oct. 17,'64.
         May 24,'65.                 Mustered out.
           Calais, Me.                 Died.
             Pris. at Hatchers Run, Va., Apr. 1, '65.
  130. Smith, Wm. P.         18    Dec. 5,'64.
         Dec. 20,'65.                 Disability.
           Prospect, Me.                Waldo, Me.
  131. Smith, Zelman B.      19    July 31,'62.
         May 18,'65.                 Dis. by order.
           Eastbrook, Me.              Ingalls, Mich.
             Wd. at Bermuda Hundred, Va., June 2, '64.
  132. Spaulding, Samuel H.  23    Sept. 30,'62.
         June 12,'65.                Mustered out.
           Springfield, Me.            Lakeville, Me.
             M. O. at Richmond, Va.
  133. Sprague, Darius D.    27    Oct. 3,'64.
         Oct. 3,'65.                 Mustered out.
           Millbridge, Me.             Millbridge, Me.
             M. O. at Richmond, Va.
  134. Sprague, Volney.      18    Sept. 17,'63.
         Aug. 17,'65.                Disability.
           Corinna, Me.                Lowell, Mass.
  135. Stanley, John N.      20    Sept. 16,'61.
         Aug. 14,'64.                Killed in action.
           Prentiss, Me.               Killed in action.
             Killed at Deep Bottom, Va., Aug. 14, '64.
  136. Stanley, Rufus D.     29    Feb. 10,'62.
         Dec. 12,'62.                Disability.
           Prentiss, Me.               Prentiss, Me.
             Dis. at New Haven, Ct.
  137. Staples, Wentworth.   21    Sept. 26,'61.
         July 7,'62.                 Disability.
           Lee, Me.                    Lincoln, Me.
             Dis. at Philadelphia, Pa.
  138. Starbird, Chas. D.    26    July 15,'63.
         Nov. 20,'65.                Wounded.
           Litchfield, Me.             Died May 22, '87.
             Wd. at Deep Bottom, Va., Aug. 14, '64.
  139. Sterling, John.       25    Dec. 12,'64.
         Mar. 14,'65.                Transferred.
           Liverpool, G.B.
             Returned to 4th Mass. Cavalry.
  140. Stevens, John T.      21    Oct. 8,'64.
         June 19,'65.                Mustered out.
           Bangor, Me.                 Greenville, Me.
             Pris. at Hatchers Run, Va., Apr 1, '65.
  141. Stewart, Asa L.       19    July 17,'62.
         Nov. 13,'62.                Died of Disease.
           Franklin, Me.       Died in Service.
             Died at Yorktown, Va.
  142. Stratton, Adelbert.   26    July 24,'62.
         Aug. 15,'64.                Died of Wounds.
           Hancock, Me.                Died of Wounds.
             Wd. at Deep Bottom, Va., Aug 14, '64.
  143. Sweet, Joseph.        22    Sept. 19,'61.
         July 7,'62.                 Died of Disease.
           Topsfield, Me.              Died in Service.
             Died at Portsmouth Grove, R.I.
  144. Tehan, Dennis.        21    Dec. 14,'64.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Machiasport, Me.            Newport, Ky.
             Wd. at Hatchers Run, Va., Mar 31, '65.
  145. Tibbetts, Jeremiah.   32    Oct. 13,'64.
         Oct. 13,'65.                Mustered out.
           Columbia, Me.               Died Apr. 27, '74.
             M. O. at Richmond, Va.
  146. Vandenbosch, Joseph.  22    Dec. 22,'64.
         Feb. 2,'66.                 Mustered out.
           Boothbay, Me.
             M. O. with Regiment.
  147. Versteylen, Jacob.    20    Dec. 22,'64.
                                     Mustered out.
           Boothbay, Me.
  148. Von Siebold, Alex'r.  37    Aug. 28,'63.
         May 30,'65.                 Mustered out.
           Boston, Mass.
             Prom. Sergt. Maj., Nov. 18, '64. Wd. Apr. 9, '65.
  149. Watson, Geo. W.       19    Sept. 19,'64.
         May 8,'65.                  Died of Wounds.
           Embden, Me.                 Died of Wounds.
             Wd. at Hatchers Run, Va., Apr. 2, 65.
             Died at Point of Rocks.
  150. Welch, Fred M.        24    Aug. 16,'62.
         July 10,'65.                Mustered out.
           Kennebunkport, Me.          Saco, Me.
             Trans to V.R.C. Feb. 18, '64.
  151. Welch, Wm. P.         27    Aug. 16,'62.
         Oct. 27,'62.                Died of Disease.
           Kennebunkport, Me.          Died in Service.
             Died at Yorktown, Va.
  152. White, Geo. O.        27    Aug. 6,'63.
         June 14,'65.                Wounded.
           Belmont, Me.                Monroe, Me.
             Wd. at Deep Run, Va., Aug. 16, '64.
  153. Woodman, Hiram A.     20    Sept. 24,'61.
         Nov. 18,'64.                Mustered out.
           Springfield, Me.
             +M. O. at Expiration of Term.
  154. Wooster, Alfred.      18    Sept. 20,'61.
         Mar. 25,'64.                Deserted.
           No. 7, R. 2, Me.            ------
             Deserted at Augusta, Me.




Personal Sketches.


Captain Leonard S. Harvey entered service as Captain, and resigned soon
after the Regiment entered active service.


Captain John D. Stanwood entered service as 1st Lieutenant. He
commanded Co. D, from July, '62, until December, '62, and resigned on
account of ill health January 19, '63.


Captain Albert G. Mudgett entered service as 2d Lieutenant of Co. K,
was promoted 1st Lieutenant of Co. G, December 1, '62, Captain Co. D,
June 13, '63, was taken prisoner at Bermuda Hundred, Va., June 2, '64,
and was a prisoner until the close of the war.


Captain Wm. H. H. Frye entered service as Corporal, in Co. A, was
promoted Sergeant, October 3, '62, discharged for disability December
18, '62, reenlisted Private in Co. A, November 17, '63, was promoted
1st Sergeant March 4, '64, was wounded severely in leg at Deep Run,
Va., August 16, '64, commissioned 2d Lieutenant Co. B, August 16, '64,
but not mustered, promoted 1st Lieutenant Co. C, December 13, '64, and
Captain Co. D, June 23, '65. During the spring campaign of 1865,
Lieutenant Frye served on the staff of Major-General R. S. Foster,
commanding 1st division, 24th A.C. and did gallant and meritorious
service in the pursuit of Lee's Army from Petersburg to Appomattox, for
which he was promoted Brevet-Captain of U.S. Vols. by the President.
When the regiment was ordered to the N.E. District of Va. Captain Frye
was assigned to duty in the sub-district of Essex, as Provost-Marshal
and Assistant Superintendent of Freedmen, in the Counties of
Northumberland and Westmoreland, Va., where he served until ordered to
be mustered out.


Lieutenant Leonard Butler entered service as 2d Lieutenant of Co. H. He
was promoted 1st Lieutenant Co. D, November 1, '62. He commanded Co. D
from December '62 to April 14, '63.


Col. Chas. Sellmer joined Co. D as 1st Lieutenant, June 13, 1863, from
1st Sergeant Battery D 1st U.S. Artillery, in which he had served from
November 8, 1854, to date of joining 11th Maine. During these nine
years he served in Fla., (taking part in second Seminole War,) Va.,
La., and S.C., and was present at surrender of Baton Rouge Arsenal to
the State of Louisiana in February, 1861, declining splendid offers
made him if joining the Southern Cause. Lieutenant Sellmer acted as
instructor of Artillery to the 11th Maine, and as A.A.I.G. District of
Amelia Island until ordered to command a detachment of 40 men from
Co.'s C, E, G & K, 11th Maine to serve as artillerists on Morris
Island, S.C., during the siege of Charleston and Fort Wagner, manning
mortar batteries and the famous "Swamp Angel," which fired the first
shell into the city. Upon the organization of the "Army of the James"
he was appointed A.A.I.G. 3d Brig. 1st Div. 10th A.C. and A.A.I.G. 1st
Div. 10th A.C. December 1864. Promoted Captain Co. B, July 17, 1864.
Captain Sellmer served on the staff of Major-General R. S. Foster,
commanding 1st Div. 24th A.C. during the winter of 1864, to July, 1865,
and as A.A.I.G. of Dept. Va. from that time to muster out of the
regiment. He was breveted Major for "conspicuous gallantry in the
assault on Fort Gregg, Va.," and Lieutenant-Colonel for "gallant and
meritorious services during the war." He was in the field from the
surrender of Baton Rouge Arsenal, La. 1861, until the war ended with
Lee's surrender, was twice wounded, though never reported officially.
Appointed 2d Lieutenant U.S. Army September 2d, 1867. Graduated at the
U.S. Artillery School at Fortress Monroe, Va., in 1872. Promoted 1st
Lieutenant, 3d Artillery, July 2d, 1877, which position he holds to
date, (a Lieutenant for 23 years,) with no hope for promotion before
his retirement by operation of law in 1896. During his 23 years service
as a commissioned officer of the regular army, he has served in almost
every capacity--Commissary of Subsistence, Quartermaster, Adjutant,
Ordnance Officer, Post Treasurer, Recruiting Officer, Battery Commander
of heavy and light Artillery Batteries in almost every State of the
Union.


Captain Albert Maxfield entered service as Private in Co. C, was
promoted Commissary Sergeant of the Regiment, January 3, '63.
Reenlisted February 29, '64. Promoted Sergeant-Major March 1, '64, 2d
Lieutenant Co. D, May 10, '64, 1st Lieutenant Co. D, July 18, '64, and
Captain Co. H, December 17, '64. Lieutenant Maxfield commanded Co. D,
from June 2, '64 to July 28, '64 and from August 29, '64 to December
21, '64. He was slightly wounded October 7, '64. He commanded the
regiment from November 2, '64, until after the Presidential Election,
the Eleventh being one of the regiments selected by Major-General B. F.
Butler to assist in keeping the peace in New York City during the
election. In the campaign in pursuit of Lee's Army from Petersburg to
Appomattox, there being but one field officer on duty with the
regiment, Captain Maxfield was assigned to the command of the left
wing. He was taken prisoner at Appomattox, went to Annapolis, was
declared exchanged May 1, '64 and returned to the regiment. He was
member of a Court-Martial at Headquarters 1st division 24th A.C. while
the regiment was at Chapin's Farm, and also at camp of 20th N.Y.S.M. in
the summer of '65. When the regiment was ordered to the N.E. District
of Va. he was given command of the Sub-District of Essex, comprising
the counties of Essex, Middlesex, King and Queen, Lancaster, Richmond,
Westmoreland and Northumberland, with Headquarters at Tappahannock,
where he remained until ordered to be mustered out.


Captain Ellery D. Perkins was the son of James Perkins, who served in
the war of 1812, a musician in the 17th U.S. Infantry. Captain Perkins
entered service a Private in Co. B, he was promoted Sergeant September
8, '62, Commissary-Sergeant of the regiment March 1, '64, 2d Lieutenant
Co. D, July 19, '64, 1st Lieutenant Co. D, December 18, '64, and
Captain Co. K, April 16, '65. Lieutenant Perkins acted R.Q.M. from
November 1, '64 to November 30, '64, Commanded Co. F, from December 1,
'64 to December 21, '64. Commanded Co. D from December 21, '64 to
February, '65, and from March, '65 to April 16, '65. Commanded Co. K,
from April 16, '65, until mustered out of service. When the regiment
was ordered to the Northeastern District of Va., he was assigned to
duty as Provost-Marshal and Assistant Superintendent of Freedmen for
Rappahannock County, with Headquarters at the village of Washington,
and later was appointed Provost-Marshal of the District of N.E. Va., on
the staff of Brevet Brigadier-General J. A. Hill, commanding the
district with Headquarters at Fredericksburg, which position he held
until ordered to City Point, Va., to be mustered out.


Lieutenant Nelson H. Norris entered service as Private in Co. F, was
wounded at Fair Oaks, Va., May 31, '62, was promoted Hospital Steward,
November 22, '62, resigned warrant and was transferred to Co. C as
Private, May 1, '64, was wounded at Strawberry Plains, Va., July 26,
'64, was promoted 2d Lieutenant of Co. B, August 13, '64, was wounded
at Hatcher's Run, Va., April 2, '65, was promoted 1st Lieutenant Co. D,
April 16, '65. During the summer of '65, was member of a Court-Martial
at the camp of the 20th N.Y.S.M., and when the regiment was ordered to
the Northeastern District of Va. he was Act. Assistant Adjutant-General
of the Sub-District of Essex, and afterwards Post Q.M. at Tappahannock,
Va., until ordered to City Point, Va., to be mustered out. After
leaving service he studied medicine and graduated at Dartmouth College,
in '67, since which he has practised in Maine, Wisconsin and for the
last 12 years in Illinois.


Lieutenant Gibson S. Budge entered service as 2d Lieutenant. He
resigned on account of disability before the regiment left Washington.


Lieutenant Francis M. Johnson entered service as Sergeant, was promoted
2d Lieutenant, March 18, '62. He commanded Co. D from June 22, '62
until after the Seven Days Battles before Richmond and until after the
regiment arrived at Harrison's Landing, also from April 14, '63, to
June, '63. He was taken prisoner in Mathews County, Va., November 24,
'62.


Lieutenant Judson L. Young entered service as Sergeant, reenlisted
January 16, '64, was wounded at Deep Run, Va., August 18, '64, was
promoted 1st Sergeant, September 16, '64, 2d Lieutenant December 18,
'64, and 1st Lieutenant Co. A, April 25, '65. As Sergeant, he acted 1st
Sergeant from May 31, '62, to November, '62, and from July 15, '63, to
July 10, '64. As Lieutenant he commanded Co. D from February, '65 to
March, '65, and from April 16, '65 to June 12, '65, when he took
command of Co. A, which command he retained until mustered out. When
the regiment was ordered to the N.E. District of Va., Lieutenant Young
was assigned to duty as Provost-Marshal and Assistant Superintendent of
Freedmen for Fauquier County, with Headquarters at Warrenton, and later
was Provost-Marshal and Assistant Superintendent of Freedman for
Spotsylvania County, holding alternate sessions of the Freedman's Court
at Spotsylvania C.H. and the City of Fredericksburg.


Lieutenant Robert Brady entered service as 1st Sergeant, was taken
prisoner at Fair Oaks, Va., May 31, '62, and was confined in Libby
Prison, at Prison in Saulsbury, N.C., and at Belle Isle in the James
River opposite Richmond, until November, '62, when he was paroled and
sent to Annapolis, Md., until declared exchanged, when he returned to
the regiment, then at Yorktown, Va., he was promoted 2d Lieutenant Co.
B, October 1, '62, transferred to Co. G Nov. 19, '62, and resigned on
account of impaired health, March 14, '63.


1st Sergeant Abner F. Bassett entered service as Sergeant, was promoted
1st Sergeant November 1, '62. He was taken prisoner at Fair Oaks, Va.,
May 31, '62, and was a prisoner with 1st Sergeant Brady and others
until Nov., '62, when he returned to the regiment. He was on recruiting
service at Portland, Me., from Aug. 15, '63, to July 10, '64. He was
killed on the picket line in front of Petersburgh, Va., Sept. 15, '64,
and was buried on the 16th, near our camp, "amid the booming of cannon
and whistling of bullets"--so reads the entry made in the diary of
Sergeant-Major Morton.


Lieutenant Josiah F. Keene entered service as Private, was promoted
Corporal May 16, '62. At the Battle of White Oaks Swamp, June 30, '62,
he acted as Orderly to Colonel H. M. Plaisted, commanding the regiment,
and several times volunteered to advance beyond the skirmish line to a
point where he could observe any attempt on the part of the enemy to
cross the swamp. Here also he discovered and recovered the three horses
tied to a tree, between the lines, belonging to officers of the Union
Army, to which Colonel P. refers in his report to the Adjutant-General
of Maine. For his coolness and services during the battle he was highly
complimented by Colonel Plaisted.

He was taken prisoner in Matthews Co., Va., Nov. 24, '62, and was
paroled from Libby Prison and exchanged. Reenlisted Jan. 18, '64. Was
wounded severely in left shoulder, at Deep Bottom, Va., Aug. 14, '64.
Promoted Sergeant, Sept. 16, '64; 1st Sergeant, Jan. 1, '65, and 2d
Lieutenant, Co. H, April 25, '65.

When the regiment was ordered to the N.E. District of Va., he was
assigned to duty as Provost-Marshal and Assistant Superintendent of
Freedmen, for Middlesex County, Va., with Headquarters at Urbanna,
which position he held until ordered to be mustered out.


1st Sergeant George Day entered service as Private, was promoted
Corporal October 1, '64; Sergeant, January 1, '65; 1st Sergeant, May 7,
'65.


1st Sergeant Timothy McGraw entered service as Private, reenlisted
January 27, '64; was wounded at Deep Run, Va., August 16, '64; was
promoted Corporal December 1, '64; Sergeant, February 1, '65, and 1st
Sergeant, June 12, '65.


Sergeant Ephraim Francis entered service as Corporal; was promoted
Sergeant March 28, '62. During the greater part of his term of service
he was a victim of ill health, but his faithful care of the sick and
his careful attention to the wants of the camp while the Company was on
active duty at the front, endeared him to all his comrades.


Sergeant Gardiner E. Blake entered service as Private, was promoted
Sergeant September 10, '62. While the regiment was at Fernandina, Fla.,
from June 5, '63, to Oct. 6, '63, he was Sergeant of the Provost-Guard.

He was taken prisoner at Bermuda Hundred, Va., June 2, '64; was taken
to Petersburgh, before the Provost-Marshal, where he was robbed of all
his valuables; the following day he was sent to Charleston, S.C., and
was put in the city jail, under fire of the Union guns on Morris
Island, thence, via Savannah and Macon, to Andersonville Prison, where
he was confined until the latter part of August. (We regret that we
have no space for the description of the dead line, the scanty rations,
the exposure and consequent suffering, disease and death at this
prison). From Andersonville he went to the Race Course, two miles north
of Charleston, S.C., where he remained three weeks, thence to Florence,
S.C. Early in December he was paroled and sent to Annapolis, Md., via
Savannah, Ga., where he received a thirty days furlough, from which he
reported to Augusta, where he was discharged.


Lieutenant Robert Brady, Jr., entered service as Private; was on
detached service at Brigade Headquarters from August 20, '62, to March,
'63; was promoted Sergeant January 1, '63; reenlisted January 18, '64;
was wounded in left shoulder at Bermuda Hundred, Va., June 2, '64.
Though wounded early in the thickest of the fight, he remained with the
Company, assisting the new commanding officer to rally the men on the
new line, and only when quiet had been restored, did he consent to go
to the rear to have his wound dressed. He was also wounded in left arm
at Johnson's Plantation, on Darbytown Road, October 29, '64. As
Sergeant, he was frequently called upon during the Summer of '64 for
perilous service, scouting in front of our lines to obtain information,
which service he performed to the entire satisfaction of the Regimental
Commander. He was promoted 1st Lieutenant of Company I December 18,
'64. Lieutenant Brady commanded Company A from February 10, '65, to
March 12, '65. While Captain Rolfe was on furlough, he commanded
Company B during the Spring campaign of '65, and Company I from July 1,
'65, until mustered out.

When the regiment was ordered to the N.E. District, of Va., he was
assigned to duty as Provost-Marshal on the Staff of General Harris,
later General Hill, and was especially charged with keeping the peace
of the City of Fredericksburg, which duty he performed in an efficient
manner.


Sergeant Alphonzo C. Gowell entered service as Private; reenlisted
January 4, '64, was promoted Corporal September 16, '64; Sergeant,
January 1, '65; was taken prisoner at Hatcher's Run, Va., April 1, '65.


Sergeant Lyman M. Bragdon entered service as Private; was wounded at
Morris Island, S.C., December 8, '63, by the explosion of a rebel shell
which broke through the bombproof at the entrance to the Magazine of
Battery Chatfield. He was promoted Corporal January 1, '65, and
Sergeant, April 18, '65.


Sergeant Jeremiah Stratton entered service as Private. When the
regiment left Gloucester Point, Va., for the Spring campaign of '64, he
was detailed to guard and store surplus baggage, and while on the
passage from Gloucester Point to Norfolk, near Fortress Monroe, May 6,
'64, the transport collided with another steamer and sunk. Falling
machinery attached to smoke-stack fell across his back and right hip,
he was conveyed to hospital at Fortress Monroe, where he remained until
about September 1, when he rejoined his Company and regiment, then in
front of Petersburgh, Va. Promoted Corporal February 5, '65; wounded at
Hatcher's Run, Va., April 2, '65. Promoted Sergeant April 18, '65.


Sergeant Daniel W. Woodbury entered service as Private, was wounded at
Darbytown Road, Va., October 13, '64, was promoted Corporal April 18,
'65, and Sergeant June 12, '65.


Sergeant Frank E. Young entered service as Private, was promoted
Corporal October 13, '65, Sergeant January 1, '66.


Corporal Richard W. Dawe was discharged for disability May 16, '62, at
Washington, D.C. Reenlisted December 6, '63, in same Company; was
wounded at Bermuda Hundred, Va., June 2, '64, and was discharged by
reason of wounds.


Corporal Hughey G. Rideout, after leaving Company D reenlisted Private
in Company A, 2d Maine Cavalry, November 30, '63, and died of disease
August 11, '64, while in service.


Corporal Freeman R. Dakin was taken prisoner at Fair Oaks, Va., May 31,
'62. Was a prisoner with Sergeants Brady, Bassett and others, until
November, when he returned to the regiment at Yorktown, where he was
discharged. After leaving the Eleventh he again entered service in
Company F, 9th Maine Infantry; was wounded in left arm at Bermuda
Hundred, Va., and in right elbow at Cold Harbor, Va.


Corporal John Gihn entered service as Private; was promoted Corporal
May 16, '62.


Corporal Leonard M. Witham entered service as Private; was promoted
Corporal May 16, '62.


Corporal Wm. B. Davis entered service as Private; was promoted Corporal
May 16, '62; was discharged for disability at New York, September 23,
'62. Reenlisted in 1st D.C. Cavalry; was promoted Sergeant; was taken
prisoner September 1, '64; was transferred to Company I, 1st Maine
Cavalry, and mustered out July 31, '65.

Died at Insane Hospital, Augusta, Maine, April 20, '87.


Corporal James E. Bailey entered service as Private; was promoted
Corporal September 15, '62; reenlisted January 4, '64; was wounded at
Bermuda Hundred, Va., June 2, '64. Left arm amputated.


Corporal Patrick Doherty entered service as Private; was promoted
Corporal September 15, '62. After leaving the Eleventh he reenlisted as
Private in Company H, 30th Maine Infantry, January 6, '64; was taken
prisoner at Pleasant Hill, La., April 9, '64; was exchanged and died in
service at Bolivar Heights, September 16, '64, just 3 years after his
first enlistment in the Eleventh.


Corporal John Dyer entered service as Private; was promoted Corporal
October 3, '62. Was accidentally killed in a Shingle Mill, at
Springfield, Me., May 23, '69.


Corporal Horace Whittier entered service as Private; was promoted
Corporal October 31, '62, and served on Color Guard; was wounded in
right breast, at New Market Road, Va., October 7, '64. Was discharged
from hospital at Point-of-Rocks, Va.


Corporal Shepard Whittier entered service as Private; was promoted
Corporal October 31, '62, and served on Color Guard until October 16,
'64, when he was detached for service at Portland, Me., where he was
mustered out.


Corporal Stephen R. Bearce entered service as Private, was promoted
Corporal October 31, '62; was wounded by the explosion of a rebel shell
which broke through the bombproof at the entrance to the Magazine of
Battery Chatfield, Morris Island, S.C., December 8, '63; also wounded
at Bermuda Hundred, Va., June 17, '64.


1st Sergeant Amaziah Hunter entered service as Private, was promoted
Corporal March 27, '63; was commended in orders for volunteering for
perilous service in front of the skirmish line, October 7, '64; was
mustered out November 18, '64, at expiration of term of service.
Reenlisted 1st Sergeant of Company I, December 16, '64; was taken
prisoner at Appomattox, Va., April 9, '65, and mustered out June 30,
'65.


Corporal Wm. P. Weymouth entered service as Private; was promoted
Corporal May 30, '64; was slightly wounded at Deep Bottom, Va., August
14, '64, and after having his wound dressed refused to go to the rear,
and returned to the front, where he was again wounded, from the effect
of which he died at Fortress Monroe, Va., September 2, '64.


Corporal James B. Williams entered service as Private; was promoted
Corporal December 1, '64. Was drowned by the sinking of a boat at
South-West Harbor, Me., June 20, '81.


Corporal Jotham S. Annis entered service as Private; reenlisted January
4, '64; was wounded at Drury's Bluff, Va., May 14, '64; promoted
Corporal October 13, '65.


Musician Robert A. Strickland was taken prisoner at Fair Oaks, Va., May
31, '62; was a prisoner with Sergeants Brady, Bassett and others until
November, '62. He was discharged for disability at Augusta, Me.


Wagoner Henry W. Rider, after being discharged from the Eleventh Maine,
reenlisted in Company B, 1st Regiment, Maine Heavy Artillery, December
9, '63; was wounded at Spotsylvania, Va., May 19, '64. Died of wounds
May 22, '64.


Bolton, Sumner M., was wounded in right eye and taken prisoner at
Bermuda Hundred, Va., June 2, '64. He was taken to Petersburgh, to
Popperlane Lawn Hospital, but received no medical treatment, and lost
his right eye; thence to Libby Prison. He was exchanged August 13, '64.


Bragdon, Samuel A., was wounded at Bermuda Hundred, Va., June 2, '64,
and at Deep Bottom, Va., August 14, '64.


Bryant, Martin V., was taken prisoner at Bermuda Hundred, Va., June 2,
'64; was confined at Andersonville, Ga. and various other places, in
company with Sergeant Blake, until December, '64, when he was paroled
and sent North.


Butler, Alfred C., was wounded in three places at Deep Bottom, Va.,
August 14, '64; right leg amputated, one arm totally disabled, the
other badly wounded.


Butler, George L., was severely wounded at Bermuda Hundred, Va., in the
night attack, May 17, '64. Died of wounds at Fortress Monroe, Va., May
20, '64.


Cain, Henry H., was transferred to Veteran Reserve Corps, April 1, '65.


Collins, Josiah, after leaving the Eleventh reenlisted in Company I,
16th Maine Infantry; was transferred to Company I, 20th Maine Infantry.
Mustered out July 16, '65.


Cross, Simon, after leaving the Eleventh reenlisted in Company H, 1st
Maine Cavalry, December 31, '63. Died in service at Bealton Station,
Va., Feb. 5, '64.


Davis, Thomas A., was detached on Western gunboat service, February 17,
'62, and served in the Mississippi squadron, was discharged '63.
Reenlisted as Corporal in Company L, 2d Maine Cavalry, December 12,
'63, and was killed in action at Marianna, Fla., September 27, '64.


Gibbs, Elisha W., died at Eureka, Cal.


Gray, Daniel, was not seen after the Battle of Fair Oaks, Va., May 31,
'62. It is probable that when the Company fell back from the advanced
position they at first occupied, he joined some other command, as did
many others of the Company, and was killed and buried without being
recognized. One of the unknown dead.


Haegan, Ira B., was transferred to Vet. Res. Corps. April 1, '64.


House, Mathew P., was taken prisoner at Fair Oaks, Va., May 31, '62;
was a prisoner with Sergeants Brady, Bassett and others until November,
'62, when he returned to the regiment. He was mustered out at
expiration of term of service.


Hutchinson, Eleazer, after leaving the Eleventh Maine reenlisted in
Company K, 17th Maine Infantry, August 28, '63; was wounded May 6, '64;
was transferred to Company K, 1st Maine Heavy Artillery, and discharged
for disability, June 16, '65.


Kelley, Lawrence, was taken prisoner at Bermuda Hundred, Va., June 2,
'64. Died in Prison at Andersonville, Ga.


Laffin, Pierce, was wounded at Morris Island, S.C., December 25, '63,
by a rebel shell striking a musket and throwing it against his left
leg, the bayonet entering the leg some six inches below the knee and
taking an upward course shattered the knee.


Lane, Otis, Company cook, while carrying rations to the men employed in
felling trees at Bermuda Hundred, Va., May 24, '64, was struck by a
falling tree which broke his leg. He died at Biddeford, Me.


Maddox, Greenlief, was wounded at Morris Island, S.C., December 8, '63,
by the explosion of a rebel shell which broke through the bombproof at
the entrance to the magazine of Battery Chatfield.


Morrill, Charles F., after leaving service settled in Pittsfield, Me.
He was killed by being caught in a balance wheel while sawing wood with
a horse power at Detroit, Me., April 6, '82.


Philbrook, David C., after leaving the Eleventh reenlisted August 13,
'63, private in Company A, 3d Me. Infantry. He was wounded and taken
prisoner at Spotsylvania, Va., May 5, '64. At the muster out of the 3d
Me., June 4, '64, he was transferred to Company F, 17th Me. and at the
muster out of the 17th, June 4, '65, was transferred to the 1st Me.
H.A. His death in prison at Andersonville, Ga., August, 64, is asserted
by a fellow prisoner, Mr. Oscar Thomas, of Lee, Me.


Sherman, Moses E., was taken prisoner at Fair Oaks, Va., May 31, '62;
was a prisoner with Sergeants Brady, Bassett and others until November,
'62, when he returned to the regiment. Reenlisted January 4, '64;
wounded at Bermuda Hundred, Va., June 2, '64. Killed at Appomattox,
Va., April 9, '65.


Sherman, William, was taken prisoner at Fair Oaks, Va., May 31, '62;
was a prisoner with Sergeants Brady, Bassett and others until November,
'62, when he returned to the regiment. Reenlisted January 4, '64;
wounded at Deep Bottom, Va., August 14, '64, and died of wounds at
Fortress Monroe, Va., September 1, '64.


Woodman, Hiram A., was transferred to Vet. Res. Corps, September 1,
'63, retransferred to Company D, 11th Me. early in 1864, and served
until expiration of his term of service. Was commended in orders for
volunteering for perilous service in front of the skirmish line October
7, '64, after the term of his enlistment had expired.


[Illustration: United States Flag]


_The record of those on roll of D at Muster-out of regiment was_:

    Killed,                                       8
    Died of Wounds,                               8
    Died of Disease,                             32
    Discharged Wounded,                          10
    Discharged for other Disability,             55
    Discharged by order,                          2
    Transferred,                                  1
    Resigned,                                     5
    Deserted,                                     4
    Mustered Out,                                63
    In Service,                                  26
                                                ---
                                                214


_Of the 214 on the roll of D, we have the_

    P. O. Address of                            110
    Died in Service,                             48
    Died since leaving the Eleventh,             33
    Deserted,                                     4
    Unaccounted for,                             19
                                                ---
                                                214


_Information received after printing Roster._

ADDRESSES:

    Corporal John Sherman,                         Rockville, Canada.
    Corporal John Gihn,                             Tawas City, Mich.
    Corporal James E. Dow, alias C. L. Farnsworth,     Jonesport, Me.

DEATHS:

    Corporal Alphonzo O. Donnell, Died
        Nov. 21, '83, at Big Rapids, Mich.
    Private Thomas R. Blaine,     Died.


_Error in Roster._

Curtis, John F., printed John T.




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's note:

Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note.

Irregularities and inconsistencies in the text have been
retained as printed.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROSTER AND STATISTICAL RECORD OF
COMPANY D, OF THE ELEVENTH REGIMENT MAINE INFANTRY VOLUNTEERS***


******* This file should be named 45503.txt or 45503.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/5/5/0/45503



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
