The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Art of Inventing, by Edwin J. Prindle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Art of Inventing

Author: Edwin J. Prindle

Release Date: April 30, 2014 [EBook #45541]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ART OF INVENTING ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Jana Palkova and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









THE ART OF INVENTING

BY

EDWIN J. PRINDLE, M.E., L.L.M., of the New York Bar.

  A paper read at the 23d Annual Convention of the American Institute of
  Electrical Engineers, Milwaukee, Wis., May 28-31, 1906.




  _A paper presented at the 23d Annual Convention of the American
  Institute of Electrical Engineers, Milwaukee, Wis., May 28-31, 1906._


Copyright 1906. By A. I. E. E.




THE ART OF INVENTING.

BY EDWIN J. PRINDLE.


There are many kinds of invention. The poet, the artist, the
playwright, the novelist all exercise or may exercise invention in the
production of their works. The merchant may exercise invention in the
devising of a new method of selling goods. The department store was an
invention of this class.

The subject of my paper is, however, the art of making technical
inventions, and particularly patentable inventions. And, first, of
its commercial importance; for the engineer is concerned with things
having a commercial value. By the art of inventing, wealth is created
absolutely out of ideas alone. It usually takes capital to develop an
invention and make it productive, but not always. A notable recent
example is Professor Pupin's loaded telephone line. He received a
very large sum of money, and his expenditures, as I understand, were
comparatively trivial.

The certificate of ownership of an invention is a patent, and the
importance of the art of invention will be made apparent from a brief
consideration of what rights a patent confers and of the part that
patents play in the industries.

A patent is the most perfect form of monopoly recognized by the law. As
was said in a recent decision:

    "Within his domain, the patentee is czar. The people must
    take the invention on the terms he dictates or let it alone
    for seventeen years. This is a necessity from the nature of
    the grant. Cries of restraint of trade and impairment of the
    freedom of sales are unavailing, because for the promotion of
    the useful arts the constitution and statutes authorize this
    very monopoly."

There is an enormous amount of wealth in this country that is based
upon patents. As an instance, might be mentioned the fact that the
United Shoe Machinery Company is, by means of patents, able to control
the sewing machines upon which ninety per cent. of the welt shoes
in the United States are sewed. The Bell Telephone Company, and the
Westinghouse Air Brake Company and many other corporations of the first
importance built themselves up on patents. Patents have become so well
recognized a factor in commerce that, in many lines of manufacture,
concerns do not depend simply upon cheapness of manufacture, or
quality of product, to maintain their trade, but they count on always
having a product which is at least slightly better than that of their
competitors, and which is covered by patents, so that they do not have
to compete with an article of equal merit. And they keep a corps of
inventors at work in a constant effort to improve the product, so that,
when the patents now giving protection have expired, they will have a
better article to offer, which shall also be protected by patents.

Inventing has become almost a recognized profession. Many large
concerns constantly employ a large corps of inventors, at liberal
salaries. Besides the inventors employed by large corporations, there
are many inventors who have maintained their independence, and are free
lances, so to speak. Some inventors have become wealthy almost solely
by their inventions, such as Edison, Bell, Westinghouse, Marconi,
Pupin, Tesla, and Sprague. A considerable number of the smaller
manufacturing concerns are built largely or wholly upon the inventions
of their principal owners.

Aside from the question of financial returns from inventing, the
inventor has the satisfaction of knowing that he is a producer of
the most fundamental kind. All material progress has involved the
production of inventions. Inventors are universally conceded to be
among the greatest benefactors of the human race.

The art of invention is therefore one of great commercial and
economical importance, and it becomes a matter of much interest to know
how inventions are produced. It is my object to attempt an explanation
of the manner of their production.

If it be inquired on what grounds I offer an explanation of this
apparently most difficult subject, I reply that, in the practice of
patent law, I have often had occasion and opportunity to inquire into
the mental processes of inventors, and that the subject is one to which
I have given considerable attention.

It seems to be popularly believed that the inventor must be born to his
work, and that such people are born only occasionally. This is true,
to a certain extent, but I am convinced there are many people who,
without suspecting it, have latent inventive abilities, which could be
put to work if they only knew how to go about it. The large percentage
of inventors in this country compared with all other countries, shows
that the inventive faculty is one which can be cultivated to some
extent. The difference in ingenuity is not wholly a matter of race,
for substantially the same blood exists in some other countries, but
it is the encouragement of our patent laws that has stimulated the
cultivation of this faculty.

The popular idea seems to be that an invention is produced by its
inventor at a single effort of the imagination and complete, as Minerva
sprang full grown and fully armed from the mind of Jove.

It is, undoubtedly, true that every inventor must have some imagination
or creative faculty, but, as I shall seek to show, this faculty may
be greatly assisted by method. While reasoning does not constitute
the whole of an inventive act, it can, so to speak, clear the way and
render the inventive act easier of accomplishment.

Invention has been defined as "In the nature of a guess; the mind
leaps across a logical chasm. Instead of working out a conclusion, it
imagines it." The courts have repeatedly held that that which could be
produced _purely_ by the process of reasoning or inference, on the part
of one ordinarily skilled in the art is not patentable, but that the
imaginative or creative faculty must somewhere be used in the process.
The mind must somewhere leap from the known to the unknown by means of
the imagination, and not by mere inference in making the invention. But
the inventor, consciously or unconsciously, by proper method, reduces
the length of this leap to much more moderate proportions than is
popularly supposed.

That reasoning and research frequently enter very largely into the
inventive act in aid of the creative faculty is the opinion of Dr.
Trowbridge, of Columbia University who said:

    "Important inventions leading to widespread improvements
    in the arts or to new industries do not come by chance, or
    as sudden inspiration,  but are in almost every instance
    the result of long and exhaustive researches by men whose
    thorough familiarity with their subjects enables them to see
    clearly the way to improvements. Almost all important and
    successful inventions which have found their way into general
    use and acceptance have been the products of well-balanced and
    thoughtful minds, capable of patient laborious investigation."

Judge Drummond, in a decision many years ago, said:

    "Most inventions are the result of experiment, trial, and
    effort, and few of them are worked out by mere will."

Most inventions are an evolution from some previously invented form. It
has been said:

    "We know exactly how the human mind works. The unknown--or
    unknowable--it always conceives in terms of the known."

Even the imagination conceives in terms of what is already known; that
is, the product of the imagination is a transformation of material
already possessed. Imagination is the association in new relations of
ideas already possessed by the mind. It is impossible to imagine that,
the elements of which are not already known to us. We cannot conceive
of a color which does not consist of a blending of one or more colors
with which we are already familiar. This evolution of an invention is
more or less logical, and is often worked out by logical processes to
such an extent that the steps or efforts of imagination are greatly
reduced as compared with the effort of producing the invention solely
by the imagination.

Edison is quoted as having said that "any man can become an inventor
if he has imagination and pertinacity," that "invention is not so much
inspiration as perspiration."

There are four classes of protectable inventions. These are

    Arts,
    Machines,
    Manufactures, and
    Compositions of matter.

In popular language an art may be said to be any process or series of
steps or operations for accomplishing a physical or chemical result.
Examples are, the art of telephoning by causing undulations of the
electric current corresponding to the sound waves of the spoken voice.
The art of casting car wheels, which consists in directing the metal
into the mold in a stream running tangentially instead of radially,
so that the metal in the mold is given a rotary movement, and the
heavy, sound metal flows out to the rim of the wheel, while the light
and defective metal is displaced toward the centre, where it is not
subjected to wear.

The term machine hardly needs any explanation. It may be said to be an
assemblage of two or more mechanical elements, having a law of action
of its own.

A manufacture is anything made by the hand of man, which is neither a
machine nor a composition of matter; such as, a chisel, a match, or a
pencil.

The term composition of matter covers all combinations of two or more
substances, whether by mechanical mixture or chemical union, and
whether they be gases, fluids, powders or solids; such as, a new cement
or paint.

These definitions are not legally exact, but serve to illustrate the
meaning.

In the making of all inventions which do not consist in the discovery
of the adaptability of some means to an end not intentionally being
sought after, the first step is the selection of a problem. The
inventor should first make certain that the problem is based upon a
real need. Much time and money is sometimes spent in an effort to
invent something that is not really needed. What already exists is good
enough or is so good that no additional cost or complication would
justify anything better. The new invention might be objectionable
because it would involve counter disadvantages more important than its
own advantages, so that a really desirable object is the first thing to
be sure of.

Having selected a problem, the next step should be a thorough analysis
of the old situation, getting at the reasons for the faults which
exist, and in fact discovering the presence of faults which are not
obvious to others, because of the tendency to believe that whatever is,
is right.

Then the qualities of the material, and the laws of action under which
one must operate should be exhaustively considered. It should be
considered whether these laws are really or only apparently inflexible.
It should be carefully considered whether further improvement is
possible in the same direction, and such consideration will often
suggest the direction in which further improvement must go, if a change
of direction is necessary. Sometimes the only possible improvement
is in an opposite direction. A glance at the accounts of how James
Watt invented the condensing steam-engine will show what a large part
profound study of the old engine and of the laws of steam played in
his invention, and how strongly they suggested the directions of the
solutions of his difficulties.

We now come to the constructive part of inventing, in order to
illustrate which, I will seek to explain how several inventions were,
or could have been, produced.

The way in which the first automatic steam engine was produced was
undoubtedly this--and it shows how comparatively easily a really great
invention may sometimes be made. It was the duty of Humphrey Potter,
a _boy_, to turn a stop-cock to let the steam into the cylinder and
one to let in water to condense it at certain periods of each stroke
of the engine, and if this were not done at the right time, the engine
would stop. He noticed that these movements of the stop-cock handles
took place in unison with the movements of certain portions of the beam
of the engine. He simply connected the valve handles with the proper
portions of the beam by strings, and the engine became automatic--a
most eventful result.

As one example of the evolution of an invention, I will take an
instrument for measuring and recording a period of time, known as the
calculograph, because it lends itself with facility, to an explanation
from a platform and because my duties as a lawyer have necessitated
my becoming very familiar with the invention, and have caused me to
consider how it was probably produced.

And first the problem: There was much occasion to determine and record
the values of periods of elapsed time; such as, the length of time of
a telephone conversation; as the revenue of the telephone companies
depended upon the accuracy of the determination. All the previous
methods involved the recording in hours and minutes the times of day
marking the initial and the final limits of the period to be measured,
and then the subtraction of the one time of day from the other. This
subtraction was found to be very unreliable as well as expensive. The
problem then was to devise some way by which the value of the period
could be arrived at directly and without subtraction and also by which
such value could be mechanically recorded.

The prior machine from which the calculograph was evolved is the
time-stamp, a printing machine having a stationary die like a clock
dial and having a rotating die like the hand of the clock, as in
Fig. 1. The small triangle outside the dial is the hour hand, it being
placed outside the dial because it is necessary that the two hands
shall be at the level of the face of the dial and yet be able to pass
each other. The hour hand may be disregarded here, as the records
needed are almost never an hour long. The manner of using the time
stamp to determine the value of an interval was to stamp the time of
day at the beginning of the period, and then to stamp the time of day
at the close of the period at another place on the paper, as shown in
Fig. 2, and finally mentally to subtract the one time of day from the
other to get the value of the period.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.

Time Stamp Record.]

The inventor of the new machine conceived the idea that, if the
time-stamp were provided with guides or gauges so that the card could
be placed both times in the same position, and the two records of the
time stamp thus be superimposed concentrically (as illustrated in Fig.
3), the value of the period would be represented by the arc marked off
by the initial and final imprints of the minute hand, so that, instead
of subtracting one record from another, he had only to find the value
of the arc marked off by counting the corresponding number of minutes
along the dial.

The inventor had thus gotten rid of the subtraction, but there were
several desirable qualities not yet obtained. First, he could not tell
from the record alone, whether it was the longer or the shorter arc
marked off that was the measure of the period. For instance, he could
not tell whether the period was 7 or 53 minutes. This was because the
two hand or pointer imprints were exactly alike except in position.
So he conceived the idea of making the pointer imprints different in
appearance, by providing the pointer die with a mark in line with the
pointer, as illustrated in Fig. 4.

The mark and pointer revolve together and either the dies or the platen
are so arranged that the mark can be printed without the pointer at the
initial imprint and the pointer at the final imprint as in Fig. 5, the
mark being printed or not at the final imprint, as desired. This could
be done either by allowing the pointer die or the corresponding portion
of the platen to remain retracted from the paper during the first
printing.

[Illustration:

            9:23           FIG. 2.           10:15
  Initial Time Stamp Record.         Final Time Stamp Record.
            Elapsed Time: 10:15-9:23 = 52 minutes.

To read this record, hours and minutes must be subtracted from hours
and minutes, an operation liable to much error.]

It could thus be told with certainty from the record alone whether
the longer or the shorter arc is the measure of the period, because
the beginning of the arc is that indicated by the imprint of the mark
without the pointer.

There was still something to be desired. The counting of the minutes
along the measuring arc was a waste of time, if the value of the arc
could in some way be directly indicated. If the hand were set back
to 12 o'clock for the initial imprint, the final imprint would show
the hand pointing directly at the minute whose number on the dial is
the value of the period, and it would not even be necessary to count.
But the setting of the hand back to zero would prevent its making
the final imprint of any previously begun record, so that the machine
could only be used for one record at a time. It was desirable to have
a machine that would record any number of overlapping intervals at
the same time, so that one machine would record the intervals of all
the telephone conversations under the control of a single operator,
or rather of two operators, because both of them could reach the
same machine. So it wouldn't do to set the hand back to zero, as the
hand must rotate constantly and uniformly. Then why not set the zero
up to the hand at each initial imprint? This meant making the dial
rotatable, as well as the hand. It gave an initial record like that
shown in Fig. 6.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.

Subtraction eliminated but counting still required and uncertainty
whether elapsed period is 7 or 53 minutes.]

[Illustration: FIG. 4.

Hand and zero mark revolving within stationary dial.]

The inventor then thought of securing the dial to the pointer die so
that they would revolve together, the zero of the dial being in line
with the pointer, as illustrated in Fig. 7. This would obviate the
necessity of setting the zero of the dial up to the pointer at the
initial imprint.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.

Initial imprint of zero mark alone and final imprint of hand (and
zero). Elapsed time, 8 minutes. No subtraction and no uncertainty as to
which imprint first, but counting still required.]

But again the improvement involved a difficulty. As the dial rotated,
its final impressions would never register with its initial impressions
and would therefore always destroy them. As the first imprint of the
dial was the only useful one, and as the second imprint only made
trouble, the inventor conceived the idea of not making any imprint of
the dial at the close of the period, and this he accomplished by making
the annular portion of the platen covering the dial so that it could
be advanced to print or not as desired. As the zero of the dial always
marked the beginning of the measuring arc, it served the same purpose
as the mark in line with the pointer, and the latter could now be
omitted.

The final machine then consists simply of a revolving die which, as
shown in Fig. 8, consists of a graduated and progressively numbered
dial, having a pointer revolving in line with the zero, and the machine
has a platen consisting of an inner circular portion over the pointer
and an annular portion over the dial, each portion being operated by a
separate handle so that the dial can be printed at the beginning of the
period and the pointer alone, at its close.

The final record has an initial imprint of the dial, Fig. 9a, the
zero of the dial showing the position of the pointer at the beginning
of the period, and a final imprint of the pointer alone, as shown
in Fig. 9b, the complete final record, Fig. 9c, consisting of the
superimposition of these two records, and showing the pointer in line
with that graduation whose number is the value of the period. Here is
a record not only involving no subtraction and no uncertainty but not
even, counting in its record, and, as it was made without disturbing
the motions either of the pointer or dial, any number of records of
other periods could have been begun or finished while the machine was
measuring the period in question.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.

Dial moved up to initial position of zero mark. Elapsed time, 11
minutes. No subtraction, no counting, no uncertainty; but only one
record possible at a time.]

Hiding all the intermediate steps in the evolution of this invention,
it seems the result of spontaneous creation, but considering the
steps in their successive order, it will be seen that the invention
is an evolution from the time-stamp; that logic rendered the effort
of the imagination at any one step small by comparison, and that the
individual steps might be well within the capacity of a person to
whom the spontaneous creation of the final invention might be utterly
impossible.

A most interesting example of the evolution of an invention is that of
the cord-knotter of the self-binding harvester. The problem here was to
devise a mechanism which would take place of the human hands in tying a
knot in a cord whose ends had mechanically been brought together around
a bundle of grain.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.

Dial with pointer at zero revolving together.]

The first step was to select the knot which could be tied by the
simplest motions. The knot which the inventor selected is that shown in
Fig. 10, and is a form of bow-knot.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.

Dial with pointer at zero revolving together, zero mark on pointer
being replaced by zero of dial.]

The problem was to find how this knot could be tied with the smallest
number of fingers, making the smallest number of simple movements. As
anyone would ordinarily tie even this simple knot, the movements would
be so numerous and complex as to seem impossible of performance by
mechanism. The inventor, by study of his problem, found that this knot
could be tied by the use of only two fingers of one hand, and by very
simple movements. The knot will best be understood by following the
motions of these fingers in tying the knot. Using the first and second
fingers of the right hand, they are first swept outward and backward
in a circular path against the two strands of the cord to be tied, as
shown in Fig. 11.

[Illustration: FIG. 9a.

Initial Imprint.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9b.

Final Imprint.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9c.

Complete Record.

Simple, direct-reading record. No subtraction, no counting, no
uncertainty. Any number of overlapping periods recorded on one
machine.]

The fingers continue in their circular motion backward, so that the
strands of the cord are wrapped around these fingers, as shown in Fig.
12.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.]

Continuing their circular motion, the fingers approach the strands of
the cord between the twisted portion and a part of the machine which
holds the ends of the cord, and the fingers spread apart as shown
in Fig. 13, so that they can pass over and grasp the strands thus
approached, as shown in Fig. 14.

The fingers then draw back through the loop which has been formed about
them, the fingers holding the grasped portion of the strands, as shown
in Fig. 15.

The knot is finished by the completion of the retracting movement of
the fingers through the loop, thus forming the bow of the knot as shown
in Fig. 16.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.]

The inventor found that one finger could have a purely rotary movement,
as if it were fixed on the arm and unable to move independently of the
arm, and the movement being as if the arm rotated like a shaft, but
the second finger must be further capable of moving toward and from
the first finger to perform the opening movement of Fig. 13, and the
closing movement of Fig. 14 by which it grasps the cord. The inventor
accordingly, from his exhaustive analysis of his problem, and his
invention or discovery of the proper finger motions, had further only
to devise the very simple mechanical device illustrated in Fig. 17 to
replace his fingers.

The index finger of the hand is represented by the finger _S_, which
is integral with the shaft _V_. The second finger of the hand is
represented by the finger _U_, which is pivoted to the first finger by
the pin _s_. The grasping movement of the finger _U_ is accomplished
by a spring _V'_ bearing on the shank _U'_, and its opening movement
is caused by the travel of an anti-friction roll _U"_, on the rear end
of the pivoted finger, over a cam _V"_, on the bearing of the shaft.
The shaft is rotated by the turning of a bevel pinion _W_ on the shaft
through the action of an intermittent gear. The necessity of drawing
the fingers backward to accomplish the movement between Figs. 14 and 16
was avoided by causing the tied bundle to have a motion away from the
fingers as it is expelled from the machine, the relative motion between
the fingers and the knot being the same as if the fingers drew back.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.]

Thus the accomplishment of a seemingly almost impossible function was
rendered mechanically simple by an evolution from the human hand, after
an exhaustive and ingenious analysis of the conditions involved.

It will be seen from the examples I have given that the constructive
part of inventing consists of evolution, and it is the association of
previously known elements in new relations (using the term elements
in its broadest sense). The results of such new association may,
themselves, be treated as elements of the next stage of development,
but in the last analysis nothing is invented or created absolutely out
of nothing.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.]

It must also be apparent, that pure reason and method, while not taking
the place of the inventive faculty, can clear the way for the exercise
of that faculty and very greatly reduce the demands upon it.

Where it is desired to make a broadly new invention on fundamentally
different lines from those before--having first studied the art to find
the results needed, the qualities of the material or other absolutely
controlling conditions should be exhaustively considered; but at the
time of making the inventive effort, the details should be dismissed
from the mind of how results already obtained in the art were gotten.
One should endeavor to conceive how he would accomplish the desired
result if he were attempting the problem before any one else had ever
solved it. In other words, he should endeavor to provide himself with
the idea elements on which the imagination will operate, but to dismiss
from his mind as much as possible the old ways in which these elements
have been associated, and thus leave his imagination free to associate
them in original and, as to be hoped, better relations than before.
He should invent all the means he can possibly invent to accomplish
the desired result, and should then, before experimenting, go to the
art to see whether or not these means have before been invented. He
would probably find that some of the elements, at least, have been
better worked out than he has worked them out. Of course, mechanical
dictionaries, and other sources of mechanical elements and movements
will be found useful in arriving at means for accomplishing certain of
the motions, if the invention be a machine. Many important inventions
have been made by persons whose occupation is wholly disconnected
with the art in which they are inventing, because their minds were
not prejudiced by what had already been done. While such an effort is
likely to possess more originality than that on the part of a person in
the art, there is, of course, less probability of its being thoroughly
practical. The mind well stored with the old ways of solving the
problem will, of course, be less likely to repeat any of the mistakes
of the earlier inventors, but it will also not be as apt to strike
out on distinctly original lines. It is so full, already, of the old
forms of association of the elements as to be less likely to think of
associating them in broadly new relations.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.]

[Illustration: FIG. 15.]

[Illustration: FIG. 16.]

Nothing should be considered impossible until it has been conclusively
worked out or tried by experiments which leave no room for doubt.
It is no sufficient reason for believing a thing won't work because
immemorial tradition, or those skilled in the art, say it will
not work. Many an important improvement has been condemned as
impracticable, by those in the art, before it has been tried.

A conception which an inventor has been striving for unsuccessfully
will sometimes come to him at a time of unaccustomed mental
stimulation. The slight stimulation of the movement of a train of cars,
and the sound of music, have been known to produce this effect. The
sub-conscious mind, after having been prepared by a full consideration
of the problem to be solved, will sometimes solve the problem without
conscious effort, on the part of the inventor.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.

The essential parts of the cord-knotter.]

In inventing a machine to operate upon any given material, the logical
way is to work from the tool to the power. The tool or tools should
first be invented, and the motions determined which are to be given
to them. The proper gearing or parts to produce from the power each
motion for each tool should then be invented. It should then be
considered if parts of each train of gearing cannot be combined, so
as to make one part do the work of a part in each train; in short,
to reduce the machine to its lowest terms. Occasionally a mechanism
will be invented which is exceedingly ingenious, but which it is
afterwards seen how to simplify, greatly at the expense of its apparent
ingenuity. This simplification will be at the sacrifice of the pride
of the inventor, but such considerations as cheapness, durability and
certainty of action leave no choice in the matter. It will sometimes
be found that a single part can be made to actuate several parts, by
the interposition of elements which reverse the motion taken from such
part, or which take only a component of the motion of such part, or
the resultant of the motion of such part and some other part. Where a
machine involves the conjoint action of several forces, it can be more
thoroughly studied, if it is found there are positions of the machine
in which one force or motion only is in operation, the effect of the
others in such position being eliminated, and thus the elements making
up the resultant effect can be intelligently controlled.

The drawing board can be made a great source of economy in producing
inventions. If the three principal views of all the essentially
different positions of the parts of a machine are drawn, it will
often be found that defects will be brought to light which would not
otherwise have been observed until the machine was put into the metal.

It is desirable to see the whole invention clearly in the mind before
beginning to draw, but if that cannot be done, it is often of great
assistance to draw what can be seen, and the clearer perception given
by the study of the parts already drawn, assists the mind in the
conception of the remaining parts.

If the improvement which it is sought to make is a process, it should
first be considered whether any radically different process can be
conceived of, and if so, whether or not it is better than the old
process, and the reason for its defects, and whether it is possible
to cure those defects. If the old process appears to be in the right
general direction, it should be considered whether one of the old steps
cannot with advantage be replaced by a new one, or whether the order of
performing the steps cannot be changed to advantage. I have in mind one
process in which a reversal of the order of steps resulted in giving
the product certain desirable qualities which had before been sought
for, but could not be obtained.

It is sometimes desirable not only to invent a good process of
producing a product, but to control all feasible processes of producing
the product. Such a case occurred where the product itself had been
patented, and it was desirable to extend the monopoly beyond the time
when the patent on the product should expire. There were two steps or
operations which were essential to the production of the product, and
the inventor, by reference to permutations, saw that there were but
three orders in which those steps could be performed; first, the order
A-B, then the order B-A, and then both steps together. The order A-B
was the old order, which did not produce an article having the desired
qualities. The inventor therefore, proceeded to invent ways by which
the steps could be performed together, and then by which they could be
performed in the reverse order, and the patenting such two processes
would cover generically all possible ways of making the article and
secure the desired result of putting himself in position to control the
monopoly after the patent on the article had expired, because no one
could make the article without using one of his two processes.

In inventing compositions of matter there is one inventor who, if he
is seeking for a certain result, will take a chemical dictionary and
make every possible combination of every substance that could by any
possibility be an ingredient of that which he desires to produce. It is
as if he were seeking to locate a vein of mineral in a given territory,
and, instead of observing the geographical and geological formation,
and thus seeking to arrive at the most probable location of the vein,
he should dig up every foot of earth throughout the whole territory,
in order finally to locate the vein. This method is exceedingly
exhaustive, but does not appeal to one as involving much exercise of
the inventive faculties.

Inventing has become so much of a science, that if one is willing
to spend sufficient time and money to enable a competent corps of
inventors to go at the matter exhaustively, almost any possible
invention involving but a reasonable advance in the art can be
perfected.




Transciber's Notes:

Punctuation errors repaired.

The second copyright notice before the text begins has been changed
from 1903 to 1906 to match the first notice on the title page.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Art of Inventing, by Edwin J. Prindle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ART OF INVENTING ***

***** This file should be named 45541.txt or 45541.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/5/4/45541/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Jana Palkova and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

