Project Gutenberg's The Paladins of Edwin the Great, by Clements R. Markham

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Paladins of Edwin the Great

Author: Clements R. Markham

Illustrator: Ralph Peacock

Release Date: April 30, 2014 [EBook #45543]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PALADINS OF EDWIN THE GREAT ***




Produced by Giovanni Fini, sp1nd and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                             THE PALADINS
                                  OF
                            EDWIN THE GREAT

[Illustration: Porlor and his Companions Kidnapped by Sea-thieves]




                             THE PALADINS
                                  OF
                            EDWIN THE GREAT


                                  BY

                    SIR CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, K.C.B.


                              NEW EDITION

                                LONDON

                        ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK

                                 1908




                _First published September 1896._
       _Reprinted August 1901. New Edition September 1908._




    CONTENTS


                                               PAGE

  PREFACE                                         1


                             PART I.--HOME

  CHAP.

  1. STILLINGFLEET                               13

  2. ALCA                                        22

  3. ALDBY                                       40

  4. YORK AND THE DEIRAN FRONTIER                54

  5. KIDNAPPED                                   66

  6. MYSTACON                                    77


    PART II.--EXILE

  1. FALLEN ROME                                 95

  2. IN BONDAGE AT ROME                         108

  3. THE GLORIES OF THE EAST                    126

  4. A SON OF ALARIC                            141

  5. UJJAYANI                                   157

  6. IRAN                                       181

  7. THE RESCUE OF SIVEL                        194


    PART III.--WORK

  1. THE STORY OF AUGUSTINE                     213

  2. HOME AGAIN                                 230

  3. DEATH OF ALCA                              248

  4. EDWIN                                      270

  5. BAPTISM                                    296

  6. THE GREAT BRETWALDA                        315

  7. THE END                                    331


  EPILOGUE                                      344




    ILLUSTRATIONS

    BY RALPH PEACOCK


  PORLOR AND HIS COMPANIONS KIDNAPPED
  BY SEA-THIEVES                                     _Frontispiece_

  DANCING ROUND THE SACRED ASH                   _To face page_  14

  PRINCESS ALCA TELLING STORIES TO THE
  BOYS                                             "  "          46

  MYSTACON ATTACKED BY HIS BOY CAPTIVES            "  "         104

  COELRED AND PORLOR IN EGYPT                      "  "         144

  COELRED AND PORLOR ON THEIR WAY TO
  THE WELLS                                        "  "         158

  DEATH OF MYSTACON                                "  "         206

  THE YOUNG WARRIORS PRESENTED TO
  ETHELFRITH                                       "  "         244

  LILLA SAVES THE KING'S LIFE                      "  "         304

  KING EDWIN, COELRED, AND PORLOR SLAIN            "  "         338




    PREFACE


Very little is known for certain of one of the most important events
in the history of the world, the coming of the Englishmen to England.
It took a long time, fully a century, from 450 A.D. to 550 A.D., and
they came constantly, in small detachments for the most part, landing
on the coast, in all directions, from the Forth to the Isle of Wight.
They came amidst the ruins of the mighty Roman Empire, a new race of
empire-founders, with all the germs of a still mightier future.

The new-comers from the older Angeln or England, now called Sleswig,
came in the greatest numbers. We know not why, but it certainly was a
wholesale movement. They kept launching their small fleets of dragon
ships, and crossing the North Sea with their gods, their door-posts,
and their beautiful golden-haired wives and children, until none were
left. They brought with them all the deep religious feeling, all the
imaginative mythology, all the heroic tales of the old land. They
first disembarked on the coast between the Forth and the Tees, driving
back the natives into Strathclyde, after a struggle which lasted for
many years. Among them came Ida the son of Eoppa, with twelve sons, in
forty dragon ships full of English warriors. He founded the castle of
Bambrough on the coast, which was at first surrounded with a hedge and
afterwards with a wall; and in 547 A.D. he became king of the country
of Bernicia, between the Forth and the Tees. Ida was surnamed the
"Flame-bearer." He reigned for twelve years in Bernicia, when Ethelric
his son succeeded him.

Many more warriors landed on the coast between the Tees and the Humber;
and in 559 A.D. their Eolderman, named Ella, the son of Iffi, the son
of Wuscfrea, and twelfth in descent from Woden, became king of the more
southern Northumbrian kingdom of Deira.

When they were settled in their kingdom of Deira, with Ella as their
king, and Elfric his brother as their leader in war, the sea-rovers
became farmers, ready to defend their possessions and to fight for
the acquisition of more territory for their countrymen. They were the
ceorls or freemen assembling in communities of families, within a
boundary or mark, and known by a common name with the addition of the
patronymic _ing_. The ceorl owned a hide of land, bore arms, had a
vote, and took part in the _thing_, or general assembly of his mark.
The union of marks formed a wapentake (Vopnatak), from the custom of
touching the chief's spear in token of fealty. The union of Wapentakes
formed the Scire or Shire with its Shire-mot. The Ceorl was the
freeman, while the Eorl was the nobleman or chief in peace and war, and
the Eolderman was a prince of the family of the Cyning (from _cyne_,
generous) or king, who wore the _cynehelm_ or circlet of gold.

The Englishmen came with their immemorial gods, and their grand old
traditions. Woden was their All-father and Creator, Thor the mighty
enemy of giants and trolls, Tyr the god of war. They invoked Balder the
bright and fair of aspect; Freyr, who presided over rain and sunshine;
Niord, who ruled the winds; AEgir, god of the ocean; and many more. "Our
forefathers derived comfort in affliction, support in difficulty, from
the belief that the gods watched over them. They bent in gratitude
for the blessings they conferred, and were guided and directed in the
daily business of life by the conviction of their responsibility to
higher powers than any which they recognised in the world around them."
A religious feeling was the basis of their respect for law--of their
loyalty, of their free institutions, and of those customs and habits
of thought which were the foundation-stones of the edifice of English
liberty. These old warriors brought with them to their new homes all
those germs which were fertilised by their virtues, and watered with
the life-blood of their valour, until, in the course of centuries,
they grew up to form the greatest nation this earth has ever seen, a
fruitful and beneficent tree, spreading its branches far and wide round
the world.

It was, in all probability, not Ella and Elfric, nor their
war-comrades Seomel and Brand, Vidfinn and Guthlaf, who first crossed
the sea from Angeln; for it must have taken two or three generations
to establish the English firmly in Northumbria, and their grandfathers
were the original invaders. They found the country desolate, and for
the most part waste. The Roman roads traversed the moors and forests,
and formed causeways over the swamps, but the stations were abandoned
and ruinous. There was scarcely any cultivation. Vast tracts were
covered with forests, the haunts of wild cattle and red-deer, of boars
and badgers, of wolves and wild-cats. It was in truth the "_Deira_" or
land of wild animals. The ponds and marshes were frequented by myriads
of wild-fowl, and few had ever penetrated into the hidden recesses of
the wildernesses. By very slow degrees, amidst wars and disturbance,
the English began to change the whole face of the country. The first
beginnings were in the days of Ella and Elfric, when defensible
homesteads were built, land was apportioned, and laws began to be
obeyed.

On the death of Ella in 588 his son Edwin fled before Ethelric King
of Bernicia, who conquered Deira, but, after the death of Ethelric,
Edwin took heart and not only reconquered his own kingdom of Deira but
Bernicia also, and united them both in one great kingdom of Northumbria.

The history of the early struggles into existence of any of the peoples
who, in later centuries, have formed the nations of modern Europe
is unfortunately so obscure that it can only furnish us with a mere
general outline of the course of events.

Occasionally, however, the record of a short period is found, like
an oasis in a desert, which is full of most interesting details. The
welcome narrative abruptly begins, and as suddenly ends, pleasing the
reader with anecdotes, speeches, estimates of character, and other
precious materials for history. There is a very remarkable example
of this in Bede's invaluable work. Nothing can be more tantalising
than the extremely meagre character of the accounts that have been
preserved of the leaders of the people, the makers of England, as Mr.
Green called them, during the Heptarchy, the all-important period
when England was made. But there is one striking exception. When the
venerable monk of Jarrow reaches the period of Edwin of Northumbria
his narrative somehow has fresh life and vigour breathed into it, and
the following half-century receives the same welcome treatment. We see
real progress being made in the civilisation of the country and the
condition of the people, which, though checked, was not put a stop to
even by the desolating invasions of Penda and Cadwalla.

One eagerly looks for the causes both of the increased life in Bede's
narrative and of this remarkable period of sudden progress. The full
details furnished for Edwin's history are so exceptional that the
circumstance was discussed by Dr. Giles, the editor of Bohn's edition
of Bede. He considers it to be clear that Bede must have had access to
highly valuable materials, for his details are too minute in themselves
and too accurately defined to have been derived by him from tradition
only.

The phenomena of the history of Edwin's reign are, however, far more
interesting than any question relating to Bede's materials. We find a
man who had passed his life in exile, and under every disadvantage,
suddenly developing into a most efficient ruler and giving vigour and
direction to every branch of his administration. But this is not all.
He is found assuming ensigns of sovereignty, adopting measures and
undertaking expeditions of a character not at all in accordance with
what could possibly be expected from a sovereign of any state in the
English Heptarchy of that period.

There is one natural way of accounting for the various problems
connected with Edwin's life-story, and especially with his reign. The
presence of a bigoted and very timid Roman monk, like Paulinus, in
attendance on his Queen, will in no way explain them. Edwin caused
a chronicle of his labours to be written; he assumed ensigns only
known at the court of the Emperor; he provided for the convenience of
travellers in a way only practised in the East; he equipped a fleet
for the subjugation of distant islands; he established order in a way
so effectual that no organisation known in the England of the seventh
century could have enforced it.

Edwin was a man of great ability, it must be conceded, but this will
not account for the introduction of measures so at variance with the
ideas and habits of the governments of the Heptarchy at that time. One
explanation covers all the ground. It is quite possible that, owing to
a very extraordinary combination of circumstances, certain countrymen
of Edwin may have had rare opportunities of visiting the distant
regions of the then known world, of studying many things in many
climes, and that, after years of absence, they may have returned home.
Surrounded by such men as his friends and ministers, the history of
his reign is made perfectly clear. A hint here and there even enables
us to guess who some of these great men were. History, in that age,
usually gives us a mere skeleton. Bede, fortunately, in the case of the
illustrious Northumbrian Bretwalda and his people, gives us much more,
but not nearly enough. Following the venerable historian closely and
exactly, it is not an unworthy aspiration to fill up the blanks, and
to present these workers in the making of England as living and moving
beings. Even we, at this distance of time, may owe them something. All
the seeds that they scattered so perseveringly and so earnestly, and
with such loving care for their country and its welfare, cannot have
fallen among thorns or on rocky ground. It is such considerations which
have given rise to this attempt to tell the strange and romantic story
of the Paladins of King Edwin the Great.

                                                  C. R. M.




    PART I

    HOME




    CHAPTER I

    STILLINGFLEET


The sacred ash tree spread its wide leafy branches over the court of
the Stillingas. On one side of this court was the long hall, built of
timber, with quaintly-carved joists and gables, on two others were the
barns and cattle-sheds, the whole being surrounded by a stiff quickset
hedge concealing the view of the open country. This ash was not only
sacred from its size and antiquity, and as an emblem of the ash tree of
_Yggdrasil_, but it also had an elf hole through which children could
be passed, a peculiarity possessed by no other ash for miles around.
Six children were dancing joyously round the tree one bright summer
afternoon 1300 years ago, and making the whole place resound with merry
laughter. The eldest was twelve years of age, a sturdy, straight-limbed
boy named Coelred, the eldest son of Seomel, the warrior chief of the
Stillingas. He had blue eyes and a sunburnt little face, with masses
of brown hair falling over his shoulders. His brother Porlor, two
years his junior, was a bright child with a dreamy, thoughtful look
in his eyes when at rest, and a strong little frame fit for sustained
work even at that early age. Their companion, Hereric, numbering the
same years as Porlor, was an inch taller, and his hair was golden and
glistened as the sun's rays rested on it. He was a young prince, son
of the warrior Elfric, the brother of Ella the king of Deira. His
little brother Osric was only three years of age. The four boys had
two girls for playfellows--Bergliot, the golden-haired princess, aged
six years, and Braga, or Bragaswith, the little sister of Coelred and
Porlor. Ella, the king, lived at Aldby with his queen and his daughter,
the princess Alca, aged sixteen, and the new-born prince Edwin, the
hope of Deira. Elfric was established at the Aldwark, the remains of
the imperial palace within the walls of Eburacum, or Eoforwic (York),
as the English then called it. But he was a widower, and his children
were generally at Stillingfleet, under the care of the gentle wife of
Seomel, the British lady Volisia. Elfric himself was also a frequent
visitor, to consult with Seomel, his friend and companion in arms, over
the affairs of the frontier.

[Illustration: Dancing Around the Sacred Ash]

On that bright summer afternoon the Lady Volisia sat on a bench by the
carved door-post of the hall, her baby-girl Nanna asleep by her side.
She was tall and slim, with a slightly aquiline nose and soft brown
eyes. She watched the happy group round the ash tree, a gentle smile
lighting up her face as she bent again over her work. It consisted of
a bright-coloured scarf to which she was attaching tassels. Presently
the children left off dancing and began passing each other through the
elf hole. It was said to bring luck, but it was too rough a game for
the little ones, so the lady called the children to come round her, and
told them that they should play the chance game for the scarf. This was
one of the most ancient of all Teutonic games. Every child held the
edge of the scarf with both hands. One was chosen to say a well-known
spell, touching a hand at each word, and the hand on which the last
word fell was dropped out. The spell was then repeated as often as
necessary, and the owner of the last hand left won the game. Twelve
small hands held the scarf, and the Princess Bergliot said the spell.

Thus it ran:

       _Hurli Burli_           _Scipa Hwede_
       _Blypan Trothorn_       _Gang Feran_
       _Eastor Gasta_          _Ut_.

The final "_ut_" came to Hereric the Atheling, but he presented the
scarf, with all the ardour of a lover of ten years old, to his little
playmate Braga. At the moment that the happy and smiling child received
it, a horn was heard in the distance, and all ran at full speed to the
gateway left in the line of the defensive hedge. Coelred, the eldest,
was allowed to rush on, but the rest were called back by Volisia to
await the arrivals within the courtyard.

The view outside the surrounding hedge showed that the home of Seomel,
the chief of the Stillingas, stood on the edge of a ridge running
east and west, with a stream flowing through the valley below. The
homesteads of the Stillingas, each with some tillage and pasturage
round it, were built at intervals on either side of the stream, just
clear of the highest flood. But beyond the narrow valley the whole
landscape consisted of one dense forest. The ridge was chiefly wooded
with ash trees, whence the name of Escrick (or Ashridge) for its more
eastern part, and a short steep hill led down from the gateway of the
Stillingfleet to the margin of the brook.

Coelred ran down the hill, and his bare legs and feet carried him
through the water and up the opposite side, just as the cavalcade
emerged from the forest. It consisted of Elfric the Atheling; Seomel,
the chief of the Stillingas; Guthlaf, the chief of the Hemingas; the
Princess Alca, a young girl numbering sixteen summers, with her women;
the gleeman Coifi; and a following of warriors returning from a short
campaign against their northern neighbours of Bernicia. It is not
certain whether the ladies rode as is now the fashion. Some people
maintain that the Lady Wake, grandmother of the Fair Maid of Kent, was
the first Englishwoman who used a side-saddle, 800 years afterwards.
Others consider that the question is unsettled. At all events, while
Guthlaf took his leave and rode on to his more distant home with his
followers, and the Stillinga folk made for their homesteads in the
valley, the rest cantered up the hill and dismounted in the courtyard,
where they were warmly greeted by Volisia and the children. Coelred ran
like a young deer by his father's horse, and it was his proud privilege
to assist the Lady Alca to dismount.

Elfric and Seomel were men of gigantic proportions, tall, sinewy,
and well knit, with blonde beards and fair hair flowing over their
shoulders, and of the same height. They wore over their linen tunics
leathern shirts with iron scales or rings sewn upon them in rows, over
which were metal collars. Their hose were blue, cross-gartered from
ankle to knee with strips of leather, and their shoes had an opening
down the instep tied close with thongs. On their left sides hung long
single-edged iron swords, with hilts wrought of silver and bronze and
scored with mystic runes, in wooden scabbards tipped and edged with
bronze. Short daggers, called _seax_, were suspended from their girdles
on the right side. The small round war-boards or shields, with an iron
boss, were slung over their backs, and in their hands were the long
ashen spears. Their helmets were of leather bound with iron and crested
with iron-wrought figures of wild boars with eyes of brass. Over their
armoured shirts they wore embroidered cloaks of blue cloth, fastened on
their shoulders with a golden and jewelled buckle. Coifi, the gleeman,
was in less warlike guise. He wore a garment with tight sleeves and
embroidered breast, not unlike a smock-frock, with a hood attached, his
feet and legs being cross-gartered, while a small harp was suspended
round his neck and hung at his left side.

The return from a warlike expedition was usually the occasion for a
feast in the hall of the chief. It was so in this instance. As the sun
went down Alca and the children retired to rest in the inner rooms,
while the servants prepared the meal. In the centre of the long hall
was the hearth-fire, with a hole in the roof for smoke; but now it was
covered with green boughs, and on either side of it the boards were
fixed on trestles. The freemen, or _ceorls_, of the Stillingas and
of the Atheling almost filled the great room, seated in rows on the
benches or settles, while the Prince and Seomel, with his wife, took
their places at the head of the upper board. Our English ancestors were
very clean, the use of baths was general, and before the Stillingas sat
down to meat water was brought them for hands and feet. The fare was
good and plentiful, meat being handed round on spits, while the horns
were filled with ale, and the warriors talked in groups over the events
of the campaign. But it was not until the Lady Volisia had herself
handed round the brimming mead-cups to her guests and had retired,
that the harp and song were called for. Then all eyes turned to the
famous gleeman who had arrived in the Atheling's train from York. No
man in the kingdom came near him for depth of knowledge of the ancient
religion or of the folk-lore of the English. He stood by the chiefs at
the upper end of the hall and tuned the harp as the mead-cup circulated.

Coifi sang that thrilling legend which never failed to arouse the
enthusiasm of his countrymen, and which was peculiarly appropriate
after an expedition which had for its object the rescue of a Deiran
town from a Bernician invasion. He told how the hero Beowulf came to
Heorot with a chosen band, to rescue the subjects of King Hrothgar
from the cruelties of their fiendish enemy Grendel; how Beowulf,
single-handed, tore the monster's arm from his shoulder; how he then
overcame Grendel's mother at the bottom of the sea with the aid of the
sword Hrunting; and how he returned home victorious after this dread
encounter. The touches of nature in the descriptions of scenery, the
exciting speeches and challenges, the warlike sentiments, went right
home to the hearts of his hearers, and loud and long was the applause
at the conclusion of each fytte or canto, when the mead-cup passed
round, and Coifi paused for breath.

      And here the singer for his art
        Not all in vain may plead:
      The song that nerves a nation's heart
        Is in itself a deed.

At length the long but inspiriting song was ended. Seomel and the
Atheling retired, the Stillingas went to their homes, while straw was
shaken down along the hall, behind the mead-benches, as beds for the
strangers. An eventful day thus ended, and all was silence in the
courts of Seomel.




    CHAPTER II

    ALCA


Alca was the most beautiful girl that her countrymen had ever beheld;
and even then, at the early age of sixteen years, as she tripped out
into the crowded court, she appeared to the beholders to be a perfect
dream of loveliness, lithe and active, yet with the graceful dignity
of a long-descended princess. Her hair was golden, her eyes a deep
sapphire blue, with that calm depth of meaning which was then believed
to be one attribute of an elf-maiden. Alca, from a young child, had
been remarkable for the universality of her love, which was extended
to all the gods had made. Her wisdom and knowledge were far beyond her
years, and seemed to those around her to be miraculous. She saw the
true meanings of beliefs and customs. She alone was able to extract the
hidden truth from the mysteries of nature, and could understand those
longings and aspirations which her companions could only dimly shadow
forth by their creeds and their superstitions. All loved the Princess,
but they looked upon her as one nearer to gods than to men; and only
children dared to love her without awe, and as a being higher and
wiser, but still one of themselves. For the rest of the world Alca was
an elf-maiden endowed with special gifts by the gods.

The Princess had accompanied her uncle to Stillingfleet to see her
cousins and other young friends, and to visit the Lady Volisia, to whom
she was warmly attached. On that summer morning she was to go with her
friend to the shrine of a goddess of her people on the other side of
the Ouse, attended by the children and by several servants. When they
reached the bank it was high tide. A large flat-bottomed boat was run
into the water, and the party was pulled across by the boys to an old
Roman fort on the opposite side, called Acaster. It consisted of two
towers, like those on the column of Trajan, surrounded by a ditch. It
was on the verge of a dense forest, in which some clearings had been
made. The whole tract forming the angle between the Ouse and Wharfe was
forest-clad, except where clearings had been made for planting apple
and other fruit trees, and where the _ings_ or swampy meadows formed a
fringe between the forest and the river banks. The pilgrims made their
way through the thickets by a very narrow path without stopping, for
the promised visit to the orchards was to be on their return, after
their devotions had been duly paid to the goddess.

Nehalennia, to whose worship the wife of Seomel had remained faithful,
was a Celtic goddess, who presided over fertility, and especially
over fruit trees, and who was also the goddess of chalk pits and the
patroness of chalk workers. The temple or _haruc_ (_Hoergr_), as the
English called it, was unbuilt by human hands. The deity dwelt in a
shady spot, embowered and shut in by self-grown trees, veiling her form
in the rustling foliage of the overhanging boughs. Here, just within
the forest, but bordering on the bright expanse of _ings_, stood a
large slab of limestone, on which was carved in relief an image of
Nehalennia, with long flowing hair, and baskets full of apples by her
side. Masses of elecampane (_Inula Helenium_) and of other medicinal
plants grew round the base of the carved stone, and a solemn silence
reigned around. A few rays of the mid-day sun found their way through
the overhanging branches, and lighted up the bas-relief, carved by some
well-trained Roman hand. The Lady Volisia, the Princess Alca, and the
children made their offerings to the shrine, and continued kneeling in
devotion for some time. It was the very spot on which the Cistercian
nunnery of Appleton was erected 600 years afterwards.

The party made their way through the dense forest from the shrine of
Nehalennia to the orchards of Appleton, which supplied Stillingfleet
and all the homesteads round York. Here they rested under the apple
trees, eating the rosy fruit, while Alca talked to the children. Porlor
had asked her why Nehalennia was not also a goddess of the English,
and she answered in the way which would make the essence of such
mysteries most clear to her companions. "The names only are different,"
she said, "the deity is the same. Your mother and her people pray for
fertility to Nehalennia, and you and Coelred and your sisters should
do likewise, because invocation of the same name is one more tie of
love between mother and children. Your father's people invoke Freyr to
send them rain and sunshine, and to give them the fruits of the earth
in due season. But it is the same thing. Both are names to denote the
beneficent goodness of the 'All-father,' he whom the English call
Woden. Remember that whatever god we invoke, we are always praying,
through one of his attributes, to the 'All-father.'

"Woden has many names," she exclaimed in a voice which awed her
companions, and with a rapt look, as if gazing through space and seeing
what was not visible to them. "He is the God and Father of victory, the
Giver of gifts, the Almighty and All-knowing, but always the Father
and Creator of gods and men. Sitting on his throne _hlidskialf_ he can
survey the whole world, and can hear all that goes on among men. His
spear _gunguir_ is in his hand; his ravens, _Huginn_ and _Muninn_, are
on his shoulders; his wolves, _Geri_ and _Freki_, are at his feet; his
horse _Sleipnir_ by his side. He too is the Father of the slain, and
the Rewarder of the brave and good when this life is ended." After a
pause her eyes lost that far-away look, and were full of love as she
turned to the children, and promised to tell them the meaning of all
these things as soon as they were old enough to understand. Coelred,
who had been eagerly listening to all the Princess had said, now
anxiously inquired about the slain, and about the fatherhood of Woden
in regard to them. "In three years," he said, "I shall be girded with
a sword, and shall take my place in battle by the side of my father
Seomel. How soon after that will Woden choose me to be one of the
slain: are the bravest taken first, or the youngest, or those who are
of least service? Can the Princess tell me?" Alca replied, as they
wended their way home--"Of that hour it is given to none to tell.
Woden sends his wish-maidens, called Valkyrie, who fly through the
air to choose the heroes that are to fall. Often the best and bravest
are taken, sometimes the very young, sometimes a warrior waits long
and fights in many battles before his turn comes. No good warrior
fears the Valkyrie. They are to be loved, not feared. They hover over
the conflicting armies, mingle in the ranks, take the slain in their
embraces, and ride with them on their heavenly horses to Valhalla,
where they attend at the feasts, and hand the drinking-horn to gods and
heroes. But touching the hour of death nothing can be known, because
the selection is made on the spot by the Valkyrie. The time we cannot
know." Then she turned with a sweet smile, and, looking from one to the
other, she said to the two boys, "Yet this I do know, for it is given
to me to know. When the fulness of time arrives, Coelred and Porlor
will fall in battle, fighting bravely in a righteous cause."

The boys were deeply impressed. Their hearts were too full for words,
and there was silence until they reached the old Roman tower at Acaster
and had crossed the river. It was broken by Porlor, who asked if the
Valkyrie could be seen. "No," replied Alca, "they are unseen in battle;
for, like Woden and the Valhalla, they are a mystery, which it is given
to few to understand." "But," persisted Porlor, "cannot they put on
the _alptahamir_ (swan shifts), and take the form of birds of augury?
Our friend Oswith, the son of Guthlaf, told us that he saw three swans
alight on Derwent bank, put their white swan shifts in the grass, and
turn into beautiful maidens. They bathed in the river, resumed their
shifts, and flew away again as swans; and Oswith never lies. Were they
Valkyrie?" Alca answered that "it was given to some to behold these
mysteries, and to understand the truth that lies concealed in them,
but to others it was not given." They were now approaching the gate
of Stillingfleet as the sun set, the faithful dog Shuprak bounded out
to meet them, and the conversation turned to trivial subjects as they
entered the court.

Some days afterwards the three boys, Hereric, Coelred, and Porlor,
with their dog Shuprak, set out for the burg of the Hemingas, to join
their friend Oswith, the son of Guthlaf, on a hunting expedition. They
wore cross-gartered hose, and belts with metal buckles, from which long
hunting-knives were suspended; bows and arrows were slung on their
backs, and the little fellows also carried short iron-headed spears.
For several miles they made their way through the dense forest, until
they emerged on Skipwith Common, where the ruins of an abandoned town
of the Parisi, consisting of circular huts, still showed many traces.
It was a weird and desolate place even in bright sunshine, and Porlor
whispered to his companions tales of grey old wood-folk clothed in
moss, of dwarfs and giants, and of the lubber fiend, as they hurried
across the moor, and again plunged into the forest. They went swiftly
over the ground, and soon reached the clearings and the fortified
burg of the Hemingas, at the junction of the rivers Ouse and Derwent.
Here there was a ruined fort built by the Romans, which had been
repaired with timber, and was the home of Guthlaf, the chief of the
Hemingas. His son Oswith was the same age as Coelred, straight as a
dart, broad-chested and lean-flanked--a splendid specimen of a young
Englishman. He was a fast friend of the sons of Seomel, and, after
warm words of welcome, their first act was to challenge each other to
fight. A wrestling-match at once commenced on the green, and the lithe
and sinewy figures of Coelred and Oswith were soon entwined, as they
strove, with every muscle at extreme tension, to throw each other to
the ground. Each boy won a bout, which made them quite happy, and the
four lads, after a merry meal, set out on their search for forest game,
working northwards again towards the home of Seomel.

"Nature was an open book to these lads of the far-distant past. They
lived in nearer communion than we can do with the world around them.
Their frames, not yet clogged and vitiated by the habits of an advanced
civilisation, were more alive than ours to the external effects of
natural causes. The birds spoke to them, the forest whispered to them,
the wind wantoned with their curly locks, they stood before the great
spirit of nature face to face, and knew him as he revealed himself in
every one of his divine forms." Loaded with as much game as they could
carry, after a very successful and very happy day, they were walking in
single file through the tangled underwood, when Oswith, their leader,
saw the eyes of a huge wild-cat glaring at him through the dense
foliage. It sprang up a tree, and in an instant he had thrown down his
burden and was after it, with his long knife in his mouth. When, at
a considerable height, he was swinging himself forward to attack his
antagonist, which was at bay, the bough broke and he fell heavily to
the ground. His comrades found him suffering intense pain, unable to
stand, and with a very badly sprained ankle. Abandoning the spoils of
the chase, Coelred and Porlor began to carry him, but they were still
several miles from Stillingfleet. Hereric ran forward for help, and
when it came the sturdy little fellows had already carried their friend
upwards of three miles. Oswith was soon lying on a heap of fresh straw
in Seomel's hall. His hose and shoes were removed, and it was found
that the ankle was much swollen, so that there was every prospect of
days and even weeks elapsing before he would be able to walk.

As soon as Coelred had seen that everything that was possible had
been done for his friend, he sought his mother's bower, and throwing
himself at the feet of Alca, he besought her to show favour to the son
of Guthlaf. "Indeed," replied the Princess, "I will do what I can for
my young friend Oswith." She went into the hall, patted the boy's head,
and spoke cheering words to him, with her eyes fixed on his until she
thought her spell would work. Then she removed the bandage, placed her
hand very gently on the swelling, and uttered it, as follows:--

             _Ben zi Bena,
              Bluot zi Bluode,
              Lid zi Geliden,
              Sose gelimida sin.
              Thu biguolen Wodin,
              So he wola coude,
              Sose ben-renki,
              Sose bluot-renki,
              Sose lidere-renki._

Volisia stood by her side, ready to administer a sleeping-draught,
and next morning Oswith was quite healed, and able to walk and run as
well as ever. As soon as she saw that the spell was working, Alca went
out to the ash tree in the courtyard and prayed to the AEsir on her
knees, several groups of people watching her with awe. When she rose
and looked round, Coifi came forward with a low obeisance. The gleeman
was an adept in the Teutonic religious beliefs, and was versed in all
the tales and traditions of the mythology of his people. But he looked
upon them solely from a practical point of view. He received every
supernatural story literally. To him Woden and Thor were the wooden
images preserved at Godmundham, and he sought for no further light.
Alca, even in extreme youth, was visionary in her religious views.
The All-father, as she understood him, was everywhere and pervaded
everything. The gods and goddesses were his attributes, or represented
his intentions and designs, as she had explained to the children on the
day of the pilgrimage to Nehalennia's shrine.

"The spell will not work, I fear, O daughter of the King," said Coifi,
who was then a man between thirty and forty, and known in every burg
and hall as the best gleeman in Deira. "The spell will work, Coifi,"
replied Alca in a gentle voice. After a pause the gleeman said almost
in a whisper, "I know the spell of Balder's horse that you used for
young Oswith. I think I know every spell, but they will not work for
me. I pray and sacrifice to the gods, but they help me not. Let them
give me power and I can believe them. I believe when I see." Alca
looked at him and said, "I am too young to teach so learned a man as
Coifi. But I can say why the spell will work. The boy loved me and
believed. I love the gods and have faith, so the spell will work."
Coifi replied, "But I cannot believe until I see the spell work. If
the spell works I believe." "That is the wrong way, Coifi," said the
Princess. "Believe and the spell works; for it works by faith. Wait
until the spell works before you can believe, and it will never work."
Puzzled and angry, Coifi declared that he would serve the gods and
pray to them for his lifetime, and they must answer him and give him
power; but that to believe before they showed him their mighty works
was impossible. Alca shook her head. She said no more, but she saw that
insight was not given to Coifi.

As she stood by the side of the gleeman, with Coelred and Porlor
watching her from the hall entrance, and with many people in the
courtyard, her aspect suddenly changed. She assumed a listening
attitude and then looked upwards. "The Valkyrie pass through the air,"
she cried. "I neither see nor hear," said Coifi; "it cannot be." All
gazed in amazement for several minutes. "A great battle is joined.
The heroes fall," was the next exclamation of the Princess. She stood
like one inspired. "Coelred! Coelred! run to my eame the Atheling and
to your father; tell them to arm and to assemble all their forces,
for the enemy approaches. Coifi, go thou to alarm the people. Bid
them to assemble armed and ready to march." Coelred was off like an
arrow from a bow. Coifi also obeyed. The alarm-horns were heard in
the valley. In half an hour the Stillingas were drawn up fully armed
outside the hedge. Elfric and Seomel, also fully armed, had entered the
enclosure and asked eagerly for the cause of the alarm. Alca was still
standing under the ash tree. All eyes were turned on her. The setting
sun threw a glow of light over her form. "I hear the rapid feet of
the messenger," she said, raising one arm. "You will hear him and act
quickly. He comes--make way for him." A lane was formed, and between
the two lines of warriors a little boy ran breathless into the court,
and sank exhausted on the ground. "It is Forthere, the son of Brand of
Ulfskelf," exclaimed Seomel. "Speak, boy! speak quickly--what are your
tidings."

The gallant little fellow had swum across the river. As soon as he
recovered breath he delivered his message. The settlement at Bilbrough
had been suddenly attacked and taken by an overwhelming force of
Britons from Elmet, led by their king Certicus. After a short fight the
slaughter began. Vidfinn, the chief of the Billingas, was slain, and
most of his people were massacred. Neither age nor sex was spared. A
young woman with little Sivel, the child of Vidfinn, brought the news
to Ulfskelf. But there was scarcely breathing-time before the enemy
appeared, their numbers vastly increased; Ulfskelf was surrounded, and
Brand resolved to defend it to the last gasp. A desperate fight took
place outside, but the overwhelming numbers of the enemy soon obliged
him to retreat behind his palisades. Forthere had escaped by creeping
along the margin of the Wharfe. He then swam across the Ouse, and so
brought the tidings to Stillingfleet.

Elfric and his leading men assembled under the ash tree and issued
orders. It was a bright moonlight night. A party had already been sent
off to prepare the boats for crossing the Ouse. Mounted messengers were
despatched to Cuthred, chief of the Poclingas beyond the Derwent, to
Sigfrid of the Elfingas, to Guthlaf of the Hemingas, to Ingeld of the
Heslingas, calling upon them to march with all despatch and meet Elfric
the Atheling at Acaster. The first object was to save Ulfskelf, if
Brand could hold out so long. Elfric was despatching another messenger
to the King, who was at Aldby, with a similar request. But Alca spoke
once more. She advised that King Ella should be asked to cross the
Ouse with his fighting men, above York, advance along the high land by
the hill of Severus and the ridge of Askham, and so take the enemy in
flank; while Elfric with his levies, raised between Ouse and Derwent,
opposed their further advance.

Stillingfleet was no longer safe. It was arranged that next morning
the Princess Alca and the Lady Volisia, escorted by Coifi and the boys,
with a few attendants, should take refuge at Aldby. Meanwhile Elfric
and Seomel, with the Stillingas and the Atheling's own followers,
crossed the Ouse and began to entrench themselves at Acaster in the
early hours of the night. When the reinforcements arrived next day,
they would boldly advance to the relief of Ulfskelf.




    CHAPTER III

    ALDBY


The escort of the Princess, of Volisia, and the children left
Stillingfleet next morning. In the van rode the older boys, Oswith,
Coelred, and Forthere, all three well armed, followed by the two
ladies, the children, and attendants, while Coifi, with the two younger
boys, Porlor and Hereric, brought up the rear. "The gleeman is to be
a priest of Woden," said Porlor to his friend, "to whom it is not
permitted to carry arms. The defence of the rear depends upon us, so we
must be on our guard." All the lads had arms suited to their size, but
none of them were yet old enough to wear swords.

After a mile's ride through the forest, they came to open moorland
where there was an outlying stockaded post of the Stillingas,
afterwards called Moreby; and here they met the Heslingas, led by the
veteran Ingeld, to whom the Princess gave fuller information than had
been brought by the messenger, and he pushed rapidly onwards with his
men, to join the Atheling. Riding on over moor and through forest,
the ladies and their escort, after some hours, reached the banks of
the bright river Derwent, where tall ash trees threw shadows over
its surface, which was skimmed by water-hens, while now and then the
brilliant plumage of the kingfisher glistened under the sun's rays
as it darted to its galleried nest in the bank. Soon the party came
in sight of Aldby, the royal seat of the kings of Deira, on a slight
eminence above the right bank of the river, the buildings appearing
amongst clumps of tall trees.

The Roman station of Derventio, on the Derwent, was twelve miles east
of York. When the English arrived, the buildings had been much injured
by invaders from the north, and by more than a century of neglect. They
were in a ruinous condition, but they were still standing; and they
received the name of Aldby, or the ancient town, from the new-comers.
The praetorium, repaired in many places with timber, still had a portico
composed of pillars with composite capitals, and formed the guest-hall
of the King of Deira. A villa, consisting of rooms built round three
sides of a square, with corridors, and a temple, were also included
in the Deiran palace. The walls of the guest-hall were adorned with
tapestry representing mythical beings from the Teutonic mythology, and
the floor retained its mosaic pavement. Although the boards or tables
were on movable trestles, there were fixed sideboards, with bowls of
bronze highly gilt and of very elegant forms, metal dishes, and horns,
while a raised dais with a throne at one end gave some appearance of
regal dignity to the spacious hall.

King Ella had marched away with a large force, but its place had been
taken by warriors from Driffield and from Godmundham, and Aldby still
had the busy appearance of a royal abode, with yards and halls crowded
with armed men, priests, and servants. The fugitives were cordially
received by Ella's queen, the stepmother of the Princess Alca, whose
name is not recorded in history. She had recently given birth to a son,
who had received the name of Edwin, a child of destiny, round whose
life-story the events of this narrative will eventually centre. The
children were all eager to pay their respects to the young Atheling,
the hope of the house of Deira, and Alca led them into the presence of
the infant prince.

There was much anxiety for several days, but at last the news came
that Elfric had relieved Ulfskelf and defeated the numerous but
ill-disciplined army of Britons. Their chief Certicus and his levies
commenced a retreat which the King converted into a rout when he
fell upon their right flank in the swampy ground between Askham and
Bilbrough. Ella and his brother then formed a junction round the hill,
now called Ingrish, and again fell furiously upon the disorganised
rabble. Certicus, with a small following, escaped into the forests of
Elmet, but there was tremendous slaughter, and the place is called
Helagh to this day. The English outposts were again extended to the
old Roman station of Calcaria, on the south side of the river Wharfe,
facing the ford of Nehalennia. The King also restored the burg of the
Billingas, and all due honours were paid to the remains of the chief
Vidfinn, who had been a daring Viking before he established himself at
Bilbrough with his children Hjuk and Bil. Nine votive boats of pure
gold were deposited in his grave, and a lofty tumulus was raised above
it, on the slope of the red sandstone hill which rises gradually from
the Roman road between York and Tadcaster. Little Sivel, the only
surviving child of Vidfinn, was adopted by Brand of Ulfskelf. A nephew
of Vidfinn, named Saebald, surnamed Fairfax from his silver-white
hair, was elected to command the Billingas and to defend the restored
settlement of Bilbrough.

These administrative arrangements occupied some time, during which the
lads at Aldby hunted in the forests between the Derwent and the foot
of the Wolds, sometimes pursuing their game far into the chalky hills,
and often ascending Garraby, which rises to a height of nearly 800 feet
above Aldby. Their evenings were passed in games with their sisters, or
in conversations with Alca, varied by listening to the wondrous tales
of Coifi or to the folk-lore of another race preserved in the memory of
their mother Volisia.

One day the five boys went with Coifi to Godmundham to visit the
temple which contains the sacred images brought from the old home
on the continent. A space was encircled by a quickset hedge, and
within there were three lofty elms, under which the idols were set
up. Hard by were the ruins of the Roman station of Delgovitia, some
of the buildings having been roughly repaired to serve as dwellings
for priests and servants. Coifi localised his beliefs. According to
his creed, Woden and Thor were within this enclosure at Godmundham,
or at all events he held that this was their favourite home, where
worshippers must seek their help, and where priests must observe all
the ceremonies connected with their cult. He told the boys the history
of the creation, and all the strange legends which had gathered round
it; and he narrated the myth of Balder's death and of Freyr's love for
Gerdr. He attended the sacrifices of bullocks, and remained long at
his devotions. But he never could derive either power or inspiration
from his prayers to the gods, and he rose from them with an expression
of discontent and impatience. The boys were glad to return to Aldby,
dissatisfied also, and eager for some more sympathetic teaching. This
they found in the Princess Alca, who to them was the type of perfect
beauty and goodness.

[Illustration: Princess Alca Telling Stories to the Boys]

They had attended her on an excursion to the foot of the Wolds, and
rested on a rising ground under the spreading branches of a tall ash
tree, with Aldby in sight beyond the river, and a mass of waving
foliage at their feet. The sun was still high, the stillness only
broken by the songs of birds. Alca sat on one of the projecting roots.
The boys were lying down at her feet, surrounded by leaves and flowers,
which they had been collecting to decorate her bower. Porlor broke the
silence by asking the Princess to teach them the story of Balder, and
its meaning. "Porlor," she said, "was right to be the spokesman, for
his name should make him a student of Balder's lore. But I see by your
eyes," she added, "that you all wish me to talk to you of the Son of
God. Listen, then, to one who seeks, though with little help and in
twilight, to learn and to show to others the true meaning of hidden
mysteries. Balder was the son of the All-father, of the Creator of
gods and men. He was the god of light, and grace, and manly beauty.
His brow was white as the chamomile flower. Through him deeds of true
bravery were done on the earth, the weak were protected, virtue was
practised, and justice was maintained. But a prophecy that Balder would
perish afflicted the gods. Then Frigga, the spouse of Woden, took an
oath from all created nature that no individual thing would harm the
pride of Asgard, the beloved of gods and men. But the goddess made a
fatal omission. She forgot a sprig of mistletoe. Being invulnerable,
Balder allowed the gods to use him as a target. Now Loki, as you know,
was born among the yotuns. He was false and full of wickedness, father
of the terrible wolf Fenris and of Hela, ruler of the dead. Loki put
mistletoe into the hands of the blind god Haudr, and with this he slew
the best and greatest of Woden's sons, who descended into hell. The
All-father himself went down into the dark abode of Hela, to persuade
her to relinquish her prey. She agreed, if all created nature would
weep for Balder. All nature did mourn for the loss of the god of
goodness and beauty, save one old crone. 'What have the gods done for
me,' she said, 'that I should weep for Balder? Let Hela keep her dead.'
Thus Balder's fate was sealed, and with it the fate of the world;
for justice, mercy, virtue, and true bravery ceased to prevail with
Balder's death, though they did not entirely cease to exist. I know
not why the All-father, in his wisdom, has submitted to this evil. But
it can only be for a time. The Son of God will rise again in triumph.
I sometimes think that he has risen, though as yet we know it not."
Then the far-off look came again into Alca's blue eyes, and during the
rest of her speech she gazed into the heavens. The boys listened almost
breathless.

"I think that God has risen to redeem the world," she resumed. "I am
impelled to this belief, though I know not why, or by what guiding
power. But misfortune and sorrow will not end--not yet. Coelred,
Hereric, Oswith, Forthere, Porlor, I love you as very dear brothers.
It is perhaps by reason of my love that insight is given to me. There
is borne into my mind a feeling that some great calamity is impending
over you all, and that it will fall upon you together. In this there
is a ray of comfort." She paused, and Coelred said, "If misfortune
overtakes us, O Princess, we will strive to meet it as Englishmen, as
sons of our brave fathers, ever victorious in battle!" "And," said
Oswith, "in all our troubles we will ever remember the goodness of our
beloved Princess." Forthere spoke words like those of Coelred, which
were echoed by the younger boys.

"Of that I am certain," continued Alca. "You will quit yourselves like
men--above all, like Englishmen. If you are together in your trials,
Coelred will be your leader. The fearless Oswith will be your support,
and will help to form your plans. Forthere, too, will be a trusty
friend. Porlor will be most shrewd as an adviser, and his rede should
be followed; and my sweet cousin Hereric will enlighten counsels by his
imagination. O my boys! remember that if sorrow comes, Alca is praying
for you and thinking of you. Always act as if the Son of God had risen.
Be brave. Love one another. Love truth. Be just and merciful. If you
hear that God has truly risen, then remember my words. Be true to
yourselves, and you will triumph in the end. May the gods watch over
you!"

There was a long silence. Alca rose and turned homewards, surrounded by
the boys with their sweet burdens. Anxious to turn their thoughts from
the solemn and depressing theme on which she had been led to dwell for
a time, by a force beyond her control, the Princess sang them a merry
song, and talked to them of the return of their victorious fathers,
which was expected on the following day. When the party reached Aldby
all were chatting and romping, and the boys turned into an inner court
to exercise themselves in feats of strength.

Next day the King arrived. Ella was a large man, like his brother,
but he looked much older, worn with illness, and his expression was
melancholy and somewhat stern. Elfric rode by his side, Seomel,
Guthlaf, Brand, and the other chiefs followed, and there was a goodly
array of English warriors. They dismounted at the Roman colonnade,
and were soon surrounded by wives and children. The great feast that
night in the old praetorium was ordered and arranged like that of
Seomel, but on a much larger and more regal scale. The Queen herself
took round the mead-cup to the guests, and when she retired there were
songs of victory, and the harp was passed from one to another. One
warrior had recited the events of the campaign, and received great
applause. Another told of the surprise of the Billingas by the cruel
and treacherous Certicus. Late in the evening Coifi took the harp, and
selected for his song the warning of Hrothgar to Beowulf on the frail
tenure of human life. This choice was resented by some of those present
as being intended to have reference to the King; but Ella himself
approved, and the gleeman continued as follows:--

          Soon will it be
          That sickness or the sword
          Shall part thee from power;
          Or clutch of fire,
          Or wave of flood,
          Or gripe of sword,
          Or javelin's flight,
          Or ugly age,
          Or glance of eye
          Shall oppress and darken thee.

This melancholy dirge concluded the feast, and before another year had
passed King Ella was in his grave.

The time of parting came only too soon. The Lady Volisia, with her
daughters and the children of Elfric, returned to Stillingfleet. The
Atheling himself, with Seomel, proceeded to York to make further
preparations for strengthening the frontier posts, and it was arranged
that Seomel should go thence, with supplies of weapons and stores, to
Bilbrough, Calcaria, and Ulfskelf, before returning home. He was to
take a large escort of Stillingas, and, to their great joy, the three
elder boys and Porlor were to accompany him.

The Atheling and those who were to go with him to York took leave
of the King and Queen. But when the boys came to say farewell to the
Princess Alca their hearts were too full for words, and tears were in
their eyes. They loved and worshipped her, they would all have died for
her, but not a word could they say. She spoke very gently and calmly,
repeating what she had said yesterday. "Remember my words. Be true to
yourselves, and may the gods watch over you."

After the cavalcade started, the boys looked back again and again,
waving their caps, until the graceful form under the colonnade was lost
to sight. When would they see her again? Ah, when!




    CHAPTER IV

    YORK AND THE DEIRAN FRONTIER


_Aberach_, the British mound by the confluence of Ouse and Foss, was
converted into the Roman camp of _Eburacum_ by Agricola in A.D. 79,
and from a camp became an imperial city, and the headquarters of the
6th Legion for nearly three centuries. The camp was surrounded by a
ditch 9 feet deep and 32 wide, with an _agger_ or rampart fortified by
_valli_. The sides were 692 yards long, with four gates, and there was
a space of about a hundred yards between the ditch and the river Ouse.
But in A.D. 120 the Emperor Hadrian caused the _valli_ to be replaced
by substantial walls of alternate layers of bricks and masonry, with
towers at the angles. The multangular tower at the north-west is still
standing. The praetorium was converted into an imperial palace, and
stood on the ground now occupied by gardens on the south-east side of
Goodramgate, and by Aldwark and Peterna. A temple of Bellona stood on
the site of part of St. Mary's Abbey and the manor. Hyeronimianus of
the 6th Legion had dedicated a temple to Serapis on the site of Fryar's
Garden, and there was an artificial cave for the worship of Mithras on
a site in Micklegate, opposite St. Martin's Church. The sites of other
temples and theatres, which must have existed, are now unknown. The
dense forest of Galtres came close up to the Praetorian gate, whence a
road led to Isurium, and the Decumanian gate was in the centre of the
opposite wall.

When the English arrived the 6th Legion had been gone for upwards of a
century and a half, the place had been frequently pillaged, the walls
were broken down in several places, and the beautiful Roman edifices
were in ruins. King Ella had repaired the breaches in the walls with
strong palisades, and his brother Elfric had made a portion of the
imperial palace habitable.

Seomel and the four boys were the guests of the Atheling for a few
days, while weapons were collected and got ready for the use of the
outposts beyond the Wharfe. The boys wandered about among the ruins,
and gazed upon the porticoes and colonnades with awe and admiration.
It was then that they first heard of the great emperors of Rome and of
the Legions, and they understood dimly that their own people were only
beginning to build up a new empire on the ruins of a glorious past. One
day they had crossed the river Ouse to see the tombs which lined both
sides of the Roman road leading to the south. Many were broken down,
but some were still standing, especially on the higher ground. There
was a beautiful monument on the Mount, where a youth and a maiden had
been buried, for their figures were carved in relief on the stone, but
of course the boys could not read the inscription. Here they rested,
gazing over the swampy expanse of Knavesmire, and Porlor fancied that
the two figures represented lovers who had been cut off in the flower
of their youth. They were worshippers of Nehalennia; for a deity, like
the one at Appleton, was carved in the semicircular space over their
heads.

In running down the slope towards the river, the boys stopped at the
entrance of the cave of Mithras, and entered with feelings of curiosity
mingled with awe. In the dim light they could see a bull on its knees,
and a young man plunging a knife into its neck. "What can it mean? Is
it a priest sacrificing a bullock to Woden?" said Oswith. "That cannot
be," objected Coelred, "for the images were not made by our people, nor
do we make images of the sacrificers but of the gods, and those only at
Godmundham." Porlor sat long gazing at the fine bas-relief, on which a
few rays from the sun cast a dim light. "The being with a high cap," he
said, "is a god, not a man. I see by his face that he is a good god."
His companions looked again more closely. "The god is plunging a knife
into the bull, but it is not to do harm but good, for he is a good
god." He again sat thinking. "It is a mystery," he said at last, "and
we are too ignorant to solve it." "Alca would understand," said the
other boys. They walked down to the river, and, crossing it, returned
to the "Aldwark," as the ruined palace was then called.

Next day Seomel left York with a number of laden horses, and a
strong force as an escort. The four boys were with him. Again they
passed the mysterious cave of Mithras, and the monument of the two
lovers on the Mount, as they wended their way southward along the
Roman road. These Roman roads in Britain were so admirably constructed
that, although they had been neglected for more than a century, they
were still serviceable. The mode of construction was as follows:--Two
parallel furrows were dug to mark the width, and all loose earth was
removed down to the rock. The first layer for the road was called the
_pavimentum_. On it was laid a bed of small squared stones called
_statumen_. The next layer consisted of a mass of small stones broken
to pieces and mixed with lime, called _rudus_ or _ruderatio_. The
third layer, called _nucleus_, was a mixture of lime, chalk, broken
tiles, all beaten together. On this was laid the _summum dorsum_ or
pavement of stones, sometimes like our paving-stones, but oftener of
square flagstones. At proper intervals there were stations for changing
horses, called _mutationes_, supplied with horses and _veredarii_ or
postilions, and in charge of stationmasters called _statores_. The
_miliaria_ or milestones were perfect stone cylinders about 3-1/2 feet
high, on bases.

The arrangements for travelling were out of gear, and most of the
_mutationes_ were in ruins or had been destroyed when King Ella
reigned. But the splendid road was so admirably constructed that it
was still efficient. Seomel had been delayed, and had not started
until nearly sunset, but he made the best of his way, and reached the
dwelling of Saebald the Fairfax, chief of the Billingas, long before
dark. Here the night was to be passed. It was here that Saebald's
predecessor had dwelt, and here the old warrior had been surprised by
the Britons and killed. The place is now called Street Houses. The
house was one of the _mutationes_ of the Roman road, to which some
wooden buildings had been added. But it was exposed, and it was the
intention of Saebald to remove his people to a stockaded burg on the
summit of what was afterwards called Ingrish Hill, about a mile to the
westward of the road. Saebald received his guests with much cordiality,
and after supper he was quite willing to satisfy the eager curiosity
of the boys about the life and death of the Viking chief Vidfinn, and
about the strange fate of his children, rumours of which had reached
them.

The hall of the Billingas was lighted with torches, and after some
conversation with Seomel touching the defences and the supply of
weapons, the good-natured Saebald turned to the boys and began his
tale. "Vidfinn," he said, "was a mighty sea-rover, and like Brand, his
brother, a stanch follower of the Eolderman Iffi, father of our king.
When the English first advanced beyond the Ouse they were led by Brand
and Vidfinn, and Vidfinn eventually formed this frontier station beyond
the road, where he and his followers settled. He brought two children,
a boy and a girl, with him, named Hjuk and Bil, to whom he was devoted.
He called his burg after the girl, Bilbrough, and his people hence were
called _Billingas_. It so happened that the spring beside his dwelling
on the road was fouled by cattle, and for a time they had to use the
water from a well called _Byrgir_, about half a mile up the hill. One
day Hjuk and Bil went up the hill to fetch a pail of water. They took
a pole named _Simul_, on which they slung the bucket _Saeg_, and away
they went, Bil in front and Hjuk behind, talking and laughing so that
the people heard them and thought no harm. But they never returned."
The boys had listened eagerly, and Oswith now asked if search was made
for the lost children. "Yes, indeed," answered Saebald. "The pole
_Simul_ and the bucket _Saeg_ were found lying near the well _Byrgir_
in such a position as to make people think that Hjuk must have fallen
down, and that Bil must have come tumbling after. But they were both
gone. Search was made in all directions and continued long, but with no
result. Vidfinn was wild with grief. At length, in gazing at Mani, who,
as you know, is seen on the face of the moon and directs its course,
Vidfinn thought he saw two children behind him, and he became convinced
that Mani had taken Hjuk and Bil up from the earth as they were coming
from the well. They help Mani by presiding over the tides of the ocean,
it is thought: Hjuk looks after the flow, while Bil directs the ebb,
and both together send the long high wave up the rivers, which you boys
must often have seen, and which is named after the god AEgir."

When Saebald paused, the boys ran out into the road and gazed at
the moon. They then saw, what they had never before observed, that
there really were two children behind Mani. Astonished and intensely
interested, they returned and entreated Saebald to tell them the rest
of the story of Vidfinn. The fair-haired chief of the Billingas said
that little remained to tell, and before beginning he showed the boys
the pole _Simul_ and the bucket _Saeg_, which hung on the carved
door-post of the hall, and had escaped attention from the Britons.
"When Vidfinn had satisfied himself that his beloved children were safe
in the hands of Mani," resumed Saebald, "he was consoled, and ten years
ago he took another wife, a daughter of one of the Billingas, and had a
son named Sivel, but the mother died. Peace had continued so long that
the old Viking was off his guard and completely taken by surprise when
his burg was attacked at the dead of night by the army of the Britons.
He sent little Sivel away with a girl, and they escaped to Ulfskelf.
Vidfinn then defended his home desperately, with his Billingas, and
at length he fell amidst a heap of slain. He was amply avenged by the
King and his brave warriors, and a worthy tumulus has been raised to
the memory of the founder of Bilbrough. My father was Beorn, another
of his brothers," concluded the Fairfax, "and as his successor, in the
minority of Sivel, I am proud to be the host of the valiant Seomel and
his knights" (_cnihts_ or boys). By this time the eyes of the four boys
were heavy, and they no sooner threw themselves on their heaps of fresh
straw in the hall than they were all fast asleep.

At dawn the two chiefs, Seomel and Saebald, went up to the Ingrish
Hill to inspect the progress of the stockade and to serve out weapons
to the Billingas, and on the way the boys were shown the tumulus of
Vidfinn, and, a little farther on, the deep well _Byrgir_. The tumulus
had been raised on the very spot where the bucket _Saeg_ and the pole
_Simul_ were found in the grass, so that it is a monument both to the
Viking father and to the children kidnapped by Mani.

Taking their leave of the hospitable lord of Bilbrough, Seomel and
the boys rode down the Roman road and came to the great battle-field
of Helagh. Seomel showed them the place where the enemy's slain were
buried, which is called "Hell Hole" to this day. They then went on
to the river Wharfe, and crossed by the ford of Nehalennia to the
old Roman station of Calcaria, where a strong English outpost was
established. Seomel went a mile or two down the river, and fixed upon
a hill called Kele-bor for another military station, to guard against
sudden incursions from Elmet; while the boys wandered up the stream
to a limestone crag. Here the water was deliciously cool and clear,
so different from the muddy floods of Wharfe and Ouse, lower down.
They stripped and plunged into it, and after their bath they went to
the famous shrine of their mother's goddess Nehalennia at Calcaria.
Here, in the midst of the white limestone country, the guardian deity
of chalk workers and of fruit trees received highest honour. Here
too, among her favourite white rocks, she lavished her favours most
abundantly among the fruit orchards, and even now the real wine-sour
plum will only grow on the Brotherton lime, and in the Sherburn
district. Crossing the ford once more, and riding along the banks of
the Wharfe, the little party was very hospitably welcomed at Ulfskelf
by the grand old warrior Brand and his wife Verbeia, a sister of the
Lady Volisia. Here Coelred and Porlor made the acquaintance of the
little Sivel, a bright intelligent child, in whom the strange story
told them by Saebald had made them feel a deep interest. Taking leave
of their cousin Forthere and of Sivel at Ulfskelf next morning, and of
Oswith, who rode on to Hemingborough, Seomel and his two sons arrived
at their home. Here they found the Lady Volisia with the children of
Elfric--Hereric, Bergliot, and Osric--her own daughters Braga and
Nanna, and the dog Shuprak. Thus once more was the happy and united
family assembled in the hall of Stillingfleet, with peace fully
restored, and all fear of danger vanished. How fortunate it is that it
is not given to any of us to know, and to few of us to foreshadow, what
a week or a month may bring forth.




    CHAPTER V

    KIDNAPPED


"I feel the Berserker rage flowing through me, and arousing the
desire to fight and to kill." It was Hereric who spoke, and he ended
his strange words with a wild shout. "You, Hereric!" exclaimed Porlor;
"why, you are the gentlest of us all, though no niddring. How strange
that you should be so taken! Yet I have heard Coifi say that the hour
when the sacred rage inflames us no man knows, but that it should never
be resisted. When it comes, he told me, we must kill and kill." He
raised another shout, which was echoed by Hereric and Coelred. "Lead
us to the attack of savage beasts ten times our size," said Porlor to
Coelred, whose eyes were also sparkling with excitement. "That will I,"
shouted the elder boy; "I will fight any one ten times my size," and he
threw his arms over his head. The three boys had just been having their
morning bath, and were sitting and lying on the grass, with their feet
in the water of the brook, which rippled over the stones.

It was early morning, and they were to take Bergliot with them into
the woods. When they ran home to get their arms, the young princess
was waiting at the gate. In a few minutes they joined her, with hosen
cross-girt, knives at their sides, and spears in their hands. "We are
full of Berserker rage," they told her. "You are full of naughtiness"
(the word she used was _hinderscype_), she answered, "and will be
whipped." Yet their excitement was contagious, for she ran back into
the hall and returned with a short spear and Shuprak at her heels.
All four then ran wildly down the hill and over the brook, shouting
and brandishing their spears, with the dog running and barking in
front. Startled by the noise, the Lady Volisia came to the gate, and
watched them, with anxious eyes, until they were hidden by the trees.
Then tears trickled down her cheeks. She never saw the boys again.
The wild young creatures made a great circuit in the forest, hurling
their spears at everything, and running at speed until they came to the
willow thicket where the Stillingfleet brook empties itself into the
river Ouse. Here they paused to regain their breath.

Presently Bergliot, in looking through the leafy branches of the
willows at the surface of the water, saw, sitting on a tree trunk on
the edge of the bank, what she thought was a nixy or water sprite. It
was singing, she fancied, but the sound was scarcely audible. "There
is a nixy," she said in a whisper to the rest, pointing to where it
sat. "Let us kill it," said Hereric. They all ran forward; the boys
pushed the little creature into the rushing stream with the butt ends
of their spears, while the girl threw a needle at it, which is supposed
to be fatal to such sprites. Then they all sang the cruel spell and ran
away:--

          Nix, Nix--needle in water,
          Virgin casteth steel in water
          Thou sink and we flee.

As they ran they could hear a long wailing cry, and when they stopped
out of breath it appeared to all of them to form itself into these
ominous words:--

          Dreadful your doom,
          Slaves shall ye be,
          Kindred and home
          Never to see.

They looked at each other half-frightened, and Bergliot began to
cry. She said she wanted to go home. The boys embraced her tenderly
and kissed her, and Coelred told Shuprak to see her safe back. As she
turned away she asked them to tell Oswith, if they saw him, that she
hoped he would come to visit her very soon. She waved a farewell to
them with her hand. Reluctantly, and after casting many longing glances
at his young masters, the dog went home with the little girl. "Let us
defy the omen," said Coelred: "let us go further afield to satiate our
Berserker rage," and all three again plunged into the forest. They
ran for hours, hurling their spears at every creature that came in
sight. At length, on emerging from the forest into the heathy expanse
of Skipwith Common, they paused for a moment to look round. Close by
there was a huge wild bull of a dun colour, with spreading horns, and
three cows. Coelred uttered a triumphant cry and hurled his spear at
the bull's shoulder. In a moment the ferocious creature was upon him,
threw him down amongst the heather, and would have gored and crushed
him, if Porlor had not diverted its attention by driving his spear into
its flank. It turned round foaming with rage just as Porlor sprang
behind a tree and Hereric faced it on one knee with his spear pointed.
Wild with rage, it dashed in his direction, then halted with its head
up, its eyes glaring, and foam dropping from its mouth. Coelred had
been stunned for a minute. He now ran up and attacked the bull in the
flank, prodding it with his spear. Daunted by the vigour of the attack,
the bull now galloped across the common, followed by the cows. The
boys gave chase, shouting and brandishing their weapons, coming up
with their antagonist amidst dense underwood, where they succeeded in
killing it with their spears. As the noble creature fell there was a
downpour of rain and a loud clap of thunder, and amidst the peals the
boys thought they again heard the ominous curse of the nixy:--

          Dreadful your doom,
          Slaves shall ye be,
          Kindred and home
          Never to see.

They dashed wildly on, they knew not whither. Porlor started a
wild-cat, which sprang up a tree. He followed with marvellous agility.
The chase turned fiercely at bay, and Coelred climbed up the tree to
help. There was a desperate fight among the branches, and the boys got
some nasty scratches, but at last one of them plunged a knife into
the cat, it lost its hold, and fell to the ground. Meanwhile Hereric
had roused a badger from its hole and kept it at bay with his spear.
Its mouth was open and its rows of sharp teeth glistened. It would
have gone hard with the Atheling if Coelred had not sprung upon it
from behind and plunged his knife into a vital part. Once more the
three boys resumed their wild career, with the ominous words of the
nixy ringing in their ears. The sun was low when they emerged from the
forest and came out on the banks of the muddy Ouse just at the point
where the Wharfe joins it. They were now exhausted and hungry, so tired
indeed that they could run no more without rest. They were unhappy too,
and frightened at the sounds which seemed to form themselves into such
dreadful words. The three boys threw themselves on the grass, and in a
minute they were fast asleep.

They had not seen a long black boat, like some foul snake, creeping
stealthily down the Wharfe to its confluence. It was flat-bottomed
and of unusual beam, but low in the water. The crew consisted of
half a dozen villainous-looking ruffians, sent by a vessel anchored
at the mouth of the Humber to Calcaria on pretence of selling some
cloths, and the return cargo was to be stolen. They were sea-thieves
and cut-throats. As they descended the Wharfe they saw Forthere and
Sivel fishing on the bank and suspecting no evil. Four of them sprang
on shore, and in a minute the lads were bound hand and foot, gagged,
and thrown into the bottom of the boat. A few minutes afterwards they
came in sight of the confluence, just in time to see Coelred, Porlor,
and Hereric throw themselves on the grass by the opposite shore. Very
stealthily the boat was brought under the bank. Coelred and Hereric
were overpowered and bound before they were half awake. Porlor,
however, was aroused by the footsteps. He had time to draw his knife
and make a desperate resistance, gashing the arm of one ruffian and
stabbing another in the hand. But he was quickly overpowered. His two
companions were thrown into the bottom of the boat, where, to their
horror and astonishment, they found Forthere and little Sivel in like
plight. Porlor was put across a thwart and given an unmerciful beating
with a thong of leather, which, in the dialect of the cut-throats,
was called a _lorum_. His young friends were nearly mad with impotent
rage as they heard the ferocious blows being showered on the child's
body. At last he was thrown, bruised and bleeding, among the rest; but,
bound as they were, they could do nothing to console or help him. It
all seemed like a horrible dream; they scarcely knew where they were,
and could do nothing but sob as they were roused at intervals from a
half-dozing state.

Meanwhile the boat went swiftly down the Ouse with an ebb-tide. The
villains kept a sharp look-out on either bank, and, when half a mile
above Hemingborough, they saw a boy bathing, and swimming out boldly
as the tide had slackened. Thinking no harm, he caught hold of one of
the boat's oars to rest. In an instant his wrists were seized, he was
bound hand and foot, and thrown into the bottom of the boat with the
others. It was Oswith. He was quite naked, and one of the crew threw a
coarse cloth over him. The grief of the rest of the kidnapped children
was redoubled at the sight of their beloved friend, the fearless son of
Guthlaf. He was as little able to understand what had really happened
as they were, yet he tried to console them. He whispered that he would
look out for chances of escape, and reminded them that at least they
had the consolation of being together.

All through the night the boat kept her course down the Humber, with
the tide against them during the first watch, but with a fair wind. Off
the mouth of the Trent the sea-thieves stopped and made fast, until
they were joined by another smaller boat coming down that river, which
went alongside and passed another boy on board. In spite of their
misery and discomfort, the kidnapped children were fast asleep while
the boat was waiting in the mud, and they were aroused by another
little boy being thrown amongst them. He said that he was Godric the
son of Ulchel, a thegn of the Gainas. He seemed to be as small as
Sivel. After a time the seven forlorn children went fast asleep as the
boat was rowed down the Humber, and finally came alongside the vessel
whose leader had sent the thieves on their kidnapping errand.

This vessel was small, but suited for sea-voyages, and with much
more beam than was allowed for an ordinary fighting ship. Her lines
were indeed very unlike those of a dragon ship of the Vikings. For she
was built primarily for trading, and in the second place for piracy,
whenever the opportunity offered, and she had a capacious hold, now
half full of merchandise. She was lying off Ravenspur, the site of the
Roman station of Praetorium, under the shelter of Y-kill, the Ocellum
Promontorium, now Spurn Head. The seven boys were bundled out of the
boat and into the ship's hold like so many bales of goods, and the
boats were turned adrift. They had been stolen. The vessel then got
under weigh and hoisted her single sail, shaping a southerly course,
with a strong breeze which soon freshened into a gale. The stolen
children nestled together and slept long, for they were quite worn
out with anxiety and grief, to which three of them had added a day of
intense excitement and fatigue. They awoke quite famished and were
given some food, but throughout the voyage the poor children were
treated with vile inhumanity, half-starved, and exposed to the seas
which washed into the vessel during the gale. They could not have
survived many more days of such treatment. Fortunately the wind was
fair, and the voyage had been a short though a stormy one, when the
piratical thieves anchored in the port of Amfleet. It is not known
whence they came nor what land was disgraced by having bred them, nor
does it matter. They were paid and employed by a trader with more
humanity but as little conscience as themselves.




    CHAPTER VI

    MYSTACON


Mystacon was the principal trader between Gaul and the northern
countries on the one hand, and Italy and the East on the other, during
the latter part of the sixth century. He was a Greek, a native of
Crete, brought up by a merchant at Massilia, and his life had been
devoted to mercantile pursuits, in which his cunning, ability, and
absence of all scruples had enabled him to amass wealth, which he
sought by every means to increase. In those days Brunehaud, a Gothic
princess from Spain, was Regent of the eastern part of France, called
Austrasia, her husband, King Sigebert, having been assassinated in 575.
Neustria, which included northern and central France, was governed by
Queen Fredegonda as Regent to her little son Clotaire II. A handsome
woman of low extraction, she had waded through murders and other evil
deeds to her lofty position, in which she maintained herself by her
strong will. Capable of any crime to gain her objects, courageous and
unscrupulous, she must have possessed great ability and astuteness to
have been successful in maintaining her power so long in that turbulent
age. Her husband, Chilperic I., died by poison administered by his wife
in 584, and Fredegonda was Regent from that year until 596. Gontran,
the brother of Sigebert and Chilperic, was King of Burgundy. A fourth
brother, Charibert, King of Paris, who was father of Bertha, the wife
of Ethelbert, King of Kent, died without male issue in 570. These four
brothers were the grandsons of Clovis.

The Greek trader, when he found that the fierce nation of the Franks
was ruled over by the Queen-Regents, Brunehaud and Fredegonda, hastened
to propitiate them by presents, and to secure their patronage. As
regards Fredegonda he had been successful. He consulted her wishes, and
brought her the luxuries she required both from the north and south,
always as free offerings. In return he was under her protection, his
goods were to pass unmolested through her dominions, and he was to be
assisted by her officers. He had been granted similar privileges by
King Gontran of Burgundy, whose country included the shores of the
Rhone from Lyons to the sea.

In his northern trade Mystacon employed agents to bring him valuable
furs and amber, and even unicorns' horns, from the countries bordering
on the Baltic, tin from Cornwall, and occasionally he paid sea-thieves
to kidnap young children from the north, who fetched high prices in the
markets of Rome and Constantinople. He had a shed at Ambleteuse where
he received his northern merchandise, preferring that little port to
the neighbouring harbour of Gessoriacum (Boulogne), because a Frankish
officer, from whom his gifts had secured him favour and protection, was
stationed there with a strong body of disciplined followers.

Mystacon had been several days at Ambleteuse, his merchandise was
stored in the shed, and his servants had pack-horses ready to convey
it southward along the old Roman road, when the vessel from the Humber
anchored off the port and landed its cargo. The crew was composed of
such dangerous villains that the merchant induced the Queen-Regent's
officer to post armed men behind his shed, before he ventured to confer
with them. Besides a pile of beaver skins and other commodities,
seven boys were put on shore. They stood on the sandy beach close
together, the little ones clinging to the three bigger lads. All were
wet through, and looked half-starved and miserable. Porlor and little
Godric were clinging to Coelred. Sivel had his arms round Forthere, and
Hereric nestled under the sheltering arm of the son of Guthlaf. Oswith
the fearless, who was nearly naked, with only a bit of sackcloth round
his loins, alone maintained a defiant look. There was no longer any
sign or token of Berserker rage among the rest.

The wily Greek came forward to look at them. He saw their great
beauty and their value, but he also saw from their appearance that they
had been cruelly treated. The sea-thieves demanded the payment he had
promised, so much for each. "But they are not in good condition," he
remonstrated; "the price must be reduced." A livid mark on Porlor's
neck caught his quick, searching eye. He pulled down the boy's shirt,
and saw that his back was covered with weals, the effect of the cruel
flogging he had received. "Damaged goods," he said. Then, turning to
his servants, he told them to take the boys into the shed, and to
clothe and feed them. "I will only pay half-price for damaged goods,"
he repeated, turning to the spokesman of the sea-thieves. "That little
wild-cat used his knife on one of us," the man answered, "and the
flogging served him right." "What is that to me, my friend?" rejoined
Mystacon, in a low but irritating voice. "You can please yourselves
about damaging your goods, that is your business, but you cannot expect
to get the same price as if they were not damaged. If a heavy bale was
to fall and hurt one of you, of course it is open to you to cut and
slash it if you please, and it may serve the bale right. That I do not
dispute. But you must not expect the same price in the market as if the
bale had not been cut and slashed. I can only pay you half-price for
the boys." The kidnappers could not follow the subtle argument of the
Greek, but they began to look dangerous. The merchant retreated back
a few paces. "Pay us what you promised, thou cursed cheat, or we will
kill thee and the boys too." He retreated rapidly back and cried out
for help, as the villains drew their long knives and rushed towards
him. In another minute they were all overpowered and thrown on the
ground by the Frankish guard. The officer came forward and suggested
capital punishment, offering to hang them in a row. "It is the just
and proper treatment," said Mystacon, "of those who try to extort
full price for damaged goods from unwary traders. As soon as your
laudable proposal has been carried into effect, I shall have pleasure
in requesting your lordship to accept the large sum which the criminals
refused." Another hour had not passed before twenty bodies were hanging
from the branches of the stunted pines round Ambleteuse, and before the
Frankish officer had an additional reason for extending his protection
to the wily merchant.

Mystacon set out with his train of laden horses and attendants early
next morning, following the old Roman road by Amiens, Soissons, and
Autun to Lyons. The boys had been warmly clothed and fed, and had
slept well, nor were they prevented from having a morning bath in the
sea. Two pack-horses were allowed them, so that they could ride by
turns, while the rest trotted along on the road-side. They found that
they could understand much that was said to them by the servants, and
when Mystacon spoke the Frank dialect slowly and clearly, they could
comprehend the meaning of nearly every word. For in those days there
was little difference between the Frankish and other Teutonic dialects.

The journey across Picardy restored the health and strength, and
revived the spirits, of the English lads. This limestone tract, with
its keen fresh air, arable surface, and well-watered meadows, reminded
them of the country round Calcaria. At Samarobriva, or Amiens, they
rested, and Mystacon was allowed to store his goods against the wall
of the town, and to encamp there by the Roman gate of the Twins,
whereon was carved Romulus and Remus suckled by the wolf. This was the
first opportunity the boys had found of collecting their thoughts,
and holding a serious consultation. Even now they scarcely understood
what had happened or where they were. Their first words, as they sat
among the bales, were words of grief at the sorrow and anxiety of their
relations, who would search high and low through the woods, until at
last they gave them up as dead. "Alca will give them hope and courage,"
said Coelred. "She will know that we are together, and she knows that
we shall return. For we are to die in battle fighting for a righteous
cause, and that cannot be anywhere but in England. She is praying now
that the gods will watch over us, and her prayers are ever answered."
These words, spoken with an air of conviction, comforted the rest. "We
must suffer," said Oswith, "but that does not signify when we have such
good reason for hope. Porlor has already suffered more than the rest
of us." "At that I rejoice," said Porlor, whose little head had been
teeming with ideas suggested by Mithras and the bull, ever since he had
gazed on the sculpture at York. "Through suffering we shall all win the
rewards prepared for the true and brave; and the thong those niddring
thieves called _lorum_ is no word of bane to me, but of good luck."
"Nay, then," said Hereric, smiling, "we must fasten it to thy name and
call thee Porlorlorum." "Let it be so," answered the imaginative child;
"it will remind me, and all of us, in the happy years that will surely
come when this darkness has been turned to light, that we had to pass
through suffering to happiness and home."

They then began to wonder what their position really was, and whither
Mystacon was taking them. They had already discovered that he was a
cunning liar, and they believed nothing he told them, although he had
uniformly treated them with kindness. Forthere proposed to run away,
and both Coelred and Oswith were inclined to some plan of making their
way across country to the coast, and seizing a boat. But they would not
attempt it unarmed. Alca had told them that little Porlor should give
them counsel, and they all turned to him. "My rede is that we wait to
learn more, and to see what will happen," he said. "I do not fear the
distance this man is taking us from home, if we have knowledge. A short
distance with ignorance means disaster, perhaps death. A very great
distance is easy to go over with knowledge of all the obstacles, and of
the way to overcome or avoid them. The wisdom of Alca and her insight
will bring comfort to our parents. It is for us to remember her words,
to follow them, to wait and watch until the time comes for us to go
home. I know the time will come, and the gods will watch over us." "We
will wait and watch," they all said. It was now dark. They laid their
weary heads down side by side, and passed into a happy sleep. Their
dreams were of home and kindred.

The boys had their morning bath in one of the numerous bright little
trout streams, bordered by aspen and willow, which flow down to the
sands of St. Valery. Later in the morning, as they sat talking near the
Gate of the Twins, a monk came out in a long dark-coloured cassock,
with a rope round his waist. He was a young man, with a patient look
in his grey eyes, and a circlet of thick fair hair round his tonsure.
When he saw the lads, he stopped to improve the occasion. He asked them
if they knew what had happened at that Gate of the Twins, and he told
them the story of St. Martin. "Out of this gate," he said, "long, long
ago, a brave and virtuous Roman soldier named Martin rode, on a very
frosty winter's day. He had a cloak wrapped closely round him, and as
he passed along the causeway he saw a poor man shivering with cold.
Martin drew his sword and, cutting his cloak in two, he gave half to
the beggar. This was charity, the greatest of all virtues, which covers
a multitude of sins. Martin was afterwards baptized in the half cloak,
and became a Christian and a Saint." After a pause he asked, "Are you
Christians?" Coelred answered that they did not so much as know that
there were such people as Christians. "But," he added, "we know very
well that it is good to give to those who are in need; for the Princess
Alca has taught us." "We know it," said Hereric, "and we try to
remember to act as she has taught us, but we are not always able to do
right." The hearts of all the boys were warming towards the young monk.

There was a longer pause, and then the monk told them that they must
be baptized into the fold of Christ. He raised his voice. "The Son of
God went down into hell, but now He has risen from the dead." The boys
started to their feet with looks of astonishment and deep interest.
These were almost the very words spoken by the Princess Alca, under
the ash tree at the foot of Garraby Hill. "Then Alca is right!" they
exclaimed. "She is always right. The Son of God has risen." Porlor
went on to ask about baptism, when Mystacon came forward. He had been
listening to the latter part of the conversation, and did not like it.
Concealing his displeasure by a forced smile, he invented a lie on
the spur of the moment. "By the order of the Bishop of Noviodunum,"
he said, addressing the monk, "these Pagan youths are being conducted
to his city to be duly instructed and baptized. I thank you for the
interest you have taken in them, but your help is not needed." There
was nothing more to be said. The good monk gave his blessing to the
boys, and went on his way, while Mystacon issued hurried orders for the
pack-horses to be loaded, and in another hour he and his merchandise
were again journeying southward; but he kept well clear of the city of
Noviodunum (Soissons).

The most anxious part of the journey for the merchant was
approaching. He was bound to visit the Queen, wherever she might be,
both on the way north and south, and she took whatever she fancied
without paying. Even this heavy and uncertain tax generally left a
wide margin of profit, but it was a source of anxiety, and he now
feared that she might take a fancy to the beautiful English boys.
Fortune, however, favoured him. Fredegonda was, he had ascertained, at
the manor of Braine-sur-la-Vesle, between Soissons and Rheims, but he
had also learned that she was on the point of departure. He cunningly
timed his arrival on the day that she was to begin her journey, in the
hope that she would accept a present, and, in the hurry of starting,
forgo her usual practice of rummaging through the whole contents of
his caravan. Late on the third evening after leaving Amiens, Mystacon
encamped outside the gates of Braine-sur-la-Vesle. This Merovingian
palace was an immense farm, with large unfortified wooden houses,
stables, barns, and cow-sheds. In the morning the Franks in attendance
on the royal family began to march out of the great enclosure. They
had a fierce air, with large and vigorous bodies, inured to cold and
hunger. Their favourite weapon, the battle-axe with a short handle,
rested on their shoulders, and they wore their long hair tied up over
their foreheads, forming a kind of aigrette, then falling behind like
a horse's tail. The long line of the escort of warriors was followed
by several waggons drawn by oxen. In the first sat Fredegonda, with
the little King Clotaire, then only four years of age. She was a most
formidable-looking woman, with a fierce, cruel glance in her large
black eyes, and a haughty bearing. Mystacon advanced in a cringing
attitude, offering a valuable present, which she accepted, as he had
hoped, without stopping, ordering it to be put into one of the waggons.
As the royal train passed out of sight, the merchant gave orders to
continue the journey to Lyons, by way of Bibracte or Augustodunum
(Autun). The boys had seen the warriors, and the great lady in her
waggon. But they had been told nothing. If Porlor had known that it
was the Queen of the Franks, his rede would probably have been to rush
forward, tell her that Hereric was an Atheling of Deira, and claim her
protection. But they knew nothing, were kept behind, and were only
allowed to peep between the bales.

At Lyons the merchant embarked his goods in a large boat, went down
the Rhone to its mouth, and then sailed in a vessel from Massilia to
the mouth of the Tiber. Before embarking, the boys again had a long and
anxious talk over their position. Mystacon had told them lie after lie
about their destination, and they were in great perplexity. He said
that he had saved them from death at the hands of the sea-thieves, that
he was their saviour and benefactor, and that the journey was for their
good. They had thought of telling their captor that Hereric was an
Atheling, but on the whole it seemed to them that the knowledge might
increase the danger, if it existed, and that their wisest course was
to keep silence about themselves. They had enjoyed the journey through
France. The sight of a strange country and of many things that were new
to them had amused and interested them, and they now looked as bright
and fresh as on the morning when the Berserker rage so unfortunately
seized upon gentle Hereric, and led to such an unlooked-for
catastrophe. Their fate was now sealed. After their embarkation in the
boat on the river Rhone, it would not be many days before they would
enter the imperial city and become the victims of Mystacon's greed.




    PART II

    EXILE


  Go forth, bright youths, nor any danger shun,
    Go forth to brave whatever may betide;
  Your country needs your knowledge hardly won,
    Your heads to counsel and your hearts to guide.

  But let fond memory turn again to home,
    Come back enriched with stores of foreign lore,
  Return to gladden hearts that long bemoan
    Loved kinsmen's absence from their native shore.




    CHAPTER I

    FALLEN ROME


In the end of the sixth century the old Rome, the lingering remnant of
the imperial city, had nearly disappeared. Language, literature, art,
science were being crushed out, not so much by inroads of barbarians
as by the bigotry of bishops and monks. When the Goths, under Alaric,
entered Rome by the Salarian gate in 410 and revelled in pillage
for six days, they did little or no damage to buildings or works of
art. Half a century afterwards, when Genseric sacked the city for
fourteen days, he only carried off the gilt-bronze tiles on the roof
of the Capitoline temple of Jupiter and the spoils from the temple of
Jerusalem; and during the sack of Ricimer little injury was done to
buildings. Rome suffered more from Totila in 546 than from any former
sack, half the walls being destroyed and many houses being burnt.

Theodoric the Goth established his capital at Ravenna. He took steps
to protect the monuments of Rome, and his reign from 493 to 526 may
be considered to have been the period which saw the last of the true
Romans. Cassiodorus strove to preserve the rapidly failing taste for
the models of classical antiquity. Boethius, the last of the Romans
whom Cato or Cicero would have acknowledged as their countryman,
threw a flickering ray over the fallen empire. But both Boethius and
his learned friend Symmachus were murdered by Theodoric in 526. Long
before this the last joyous festivals of old Rome, the Lupercalia, had
been abolished through the bigotry of Pope Gelasius, and with them
disappeared all living vestiges of the old life. The buildings were
imperishable. The shell was there amidst dirt and desolation; the life
was gone. Monks pulled down or defaced the edifices and statues raised
by genius, and the beautiful temple of Apollo gave place to the cells
of Benedict on the summit of Monte Cassino.

Belisarius and Narses recovered Italy for the emperors of the East
in 536, and Justinian fixed the capital of his _exarch_ or governor
at Ravenna, not at Rome. But the walls of Rome were repaired, and
partially rebuilt. Only thirty years afterwards Alboin, with an
army of Lombards, conquered Northern Italy without encountering any
opposition, established an oppressive aristocracy in the subjugated
provinces, and extended his inroads to the gates of Rome. This was
the condition of affairs when Mystacon arrived at the mouth of the
Tiber with his merchandise. Maurice Tiberius, the best of the Eastern
emperors, had ascended the throne at Constantinople in 582. His exarch
Romanus ruled at Ravenna. Young Autharis had succeeded Alboin as king
of the Lombards in 586, and his armies kept Rome in perpetual fear. The
suburbs were constantly devastated. The city was vacant and solitary:
the depopulation had been rapid. Famine was frequent, the edifices were
exposed to ruin, and the chief person in the city was the Bishop, who
exulted over the desolation of idolatry. His name was Pelagius II.,
but the ecclesiastic who possessed the greatest influence over the
miserable remnant of the inhabitants was the Deacon Gregory. He was a
native of the city, born in 544, and his parents, Gordian and Sylvia,
were of senatorial rank. He was also wealthy, and he had founded a
monastery on the Caelian Hill, dedicated to St. Andrew. He was learned
in the Scriptures and in the works of the early fathers of the Church,
and was a voluminous writer both of letters and of commentaries. While
acting as the Pope's nuncio at Constantinople, he had occupied himself
in a violent controversy with the Eutychians on the question whether,
after the resurrection, the bodies of the faithful would be impalpable
like air, or palpable though subtle and sublimed. The former view
was the heresy which Gregory, with the important aid of the Emperor,
effectually suppressed. He then returned to Rome, and maintained his
influence by relieving distress through his great wealth and his
organising ability, and also by the power of his pathetic but rude
eloquence. But he was a narrow-minded bigot. He hated the monuments of
classic genius, destroyed the magnificent baths and theatres, and did
more harm to the buildings of Rome than all the barbarians, from Alaric
to Totila, put together. The decided progress made by the ancients
in astronomy and geography was declared to be contrary to scriptural
truth, sculpture was condemned as an ally of paganism, and both science
and art disappeared. The belief of Gregory that the end of the world
was close at hand also had a mischievous tendency. As a young man he
was often tormented with pains in the bowels, and was continually
suffering from low fever, and these ailments probably had their effect
on his temperament. His zeal for the spread of Christianity perhaps
atones for his shortcomings in other respects, and at all events
Gregory was the leading figure in the Rome of the end of the sixth
century.

The son of the Senator Gordian was not the only wealthy man in Rome,
or it would have been no place for Mystacon and his wares. Patricians,
with incomes from estates in Campania and Sicily, still lived in some
of the ruins of departed greatness on the Caelian Hill. We meet with
the names of Decius, Basilius, Olybrius, Orestes, Maximus, Symmachus,
and Pamphronius. But the sons and daughters of others were reduced to
penury, and many descendants of consuls and senators were begging their
bread in the streets.

Pamphronius was one of those who, by flight on some occasions and
prompt submission on others, had succeeded in preserving sufficient of
this world's goods to enable him to live in a partially-rebuilt villa,
and to show signs of comparative wealth. He had a few clients round
him, and was a customer of Mystacon.

Symmachus Boethius was another survivor of an ancient and renowned
family. His maternal ancestor had been a bright model of learning
and virtue in the days of Constantine and his immediate successors.
Scholar, statesman, and orator, he gave new life and vigour to the
literature of Rome, and he was zealous for the ancient faith. He
remonstrated with the Emperor Gratian on the removal of the altar of
victory from the Senate in 384. His letters are extant, and that in
favour of the altar of victory is, we are told, infinitely superior to
the verbose, abusive, and dishonest reply of St. Ambrose. Proconsul in
Achaia and Africa, he had great wealth, estates in Campania, Sicily,
and Mauritania, and a mansion on the Caelian Hill. His descendants for
four generations were all distinguished. The fifth in descent, named
Quintus Aurelius Memmius Symmachus, had an only daughter Rusticiana.
She was happily married to Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius, whose
father was consul in 487. Boethius was famous for his learning and for
his charities. He was accused of a wish to free Rome from the Goths,
was condemned unheard, and put to death, with his son, by order of
Theodoric. His _Consolatio Philosophiae_, written in prison, shows that
he was not a Christian. Rusticiana was reduced to poverty until her
property was restored by Theodoric's daughter Amalasontha. At the sack
of Rome in 541 she was again reduced to beggary, and was only saved
from death by the intervention of Totila.

Anicius Severinus Boethius, the son of the great Boethius and of
Rusticiana, was consul in 522, and died, soon after his mother, in
570. He had succeeded in recovering his Sicilian estates, and in
raising the fortunes of his family sufficiently to be able to reside
in the fine old mansion of the Symmachus family on the Caelian. His
son Symmachus Boethius continued to prosper, and, at the time of which
we speak, he was one of the few wealthy patricians of Rome. His wife
was a virtuous lady named Otacilia. His villa made some pretensions
to its ancient splendour, and its owner, now a man between fifty and
sixty, outwardly conformed to the Christian religion, as all who valued
their peace and safety were bound to do in those days. The religion of
Ambrose and of Gregory became a persecuting religion as soon as its
hierarchy had the power to persecute. In this and in other essentials
it differed widely from the religion of Christ. By ready conformity
the patricians Pamphronius and Symmachus Boethius maintained friendly
relations with the Deacon Gregory and his monks of St. Andrew, who
were their neighbours on the Caelian Hill. They were consulted on the
affairs of the city, especially on the absorbing questions relating
to food-supply, but all real power was in the hands of the Bishop
and clergy, whose preaching swayed the mob. Gregory was, indeed, a
remarkable personality. His character presented a singular mixture of
sense and superstition, pride and humility, simplicity and cunning; and
through all there was that touch of sympathy which secured the support
of the multitude, and that burning and impulsive zeal which seemed to
carry all before it, and which was mainly directed to the propagation
of his faith. His worst trait was his unprincipled time-serving. When
the good Emperor Maurice was murdered, whom he knew well, and from whom
he had received much kindness, he wrote a flattering letter to his
murderer Phocas, one of the most infamous wretches that ever disgraced
the purple, which is worded in a way that is simply revolting. It needs
much zeal to atone for such baseness.

These were the leaders of Rome, but not of living Rome. They were
like small crabs in a great dead shell. It is difficult to realise the
effect on the mind of any one then coming to Rome for the first time,
and gazing upon the superb baths and theatres, the splendid temples and
halls in long vistas, all desolate and abandoned, with here and there
a priceless work of art thrown down and broken. Everywhere silence and
desolation, except where some monk might be seen preaching to a squalid
group, or where half-starved crowds assembled at church doors for doles
of food. The population had dwindled from millions to thousands, and
clergy had taken the place of soldiery and well-to-do citizens of the
empire, but in much smaller numbers. Still there were a few wealthy
people, sufficient to induce traders to expose valuable goods for sale.

[Illustration: Mystacon Attacked by his Boy Captives]

Mystacon, when he arrived in his vessel, found the port of Ostia
quite empty, and there was ample space at his disposal in the long
row of dilapidated emporia facing the Tiber, at the foot of Mount
Aventine. Here his goods were warehoused until the day of the market,
which was then held in the beautiful Forum of Trajan. He now had to
disclose his real intention to the English boys. He had safely housed
them in a large room, with plenty of his own hirelings always more or
less on guard outside. He opened his communication by dwelling upon
his kindness and liberality, on having saved their lives when the
sea-thieves would have killed them, and on the gratitude they owed
him. At last the truth came out. He would be obliged to sell them in
the market, owing to the great expense they had been to him, and if a
sufficient sum could not be obtained, he would have to take them to
Ravenna or to Constantinople. He was unprepared for the outburst of
rage and fury with which his base scheme was received by the little
boys. They told him that Hereric was an atheling, and that all were the
sons of thegns, better born than any one in Rome. Their eyes flamed
with Berserker madness as they cried out that they would kill him as
they would kill a wild-cat or a badger, and Forthere actually flew at
his throat. The coward was taken by surprise. He cried out for help,
and could not collect his ideas and decide upon the course to take
until the lads were all tied hand and foot. He was in great perplexity.
A violent scene at the market was out of the question. His wish was
to flog them within an inch of their lives; but, as he had told his
deceased accomplices, damaged goods only fetch half-price. He must
display them with whole skins. At last he determined to starve them
into submission. He told them that they would have no food until they
consented to go quietly to the Forum, and left them with the door well
barred. For more than thirty-six hours they resolutely held out, but
the bigger boys could not bear to hear little Godric and Sivel crying
for food. They turned to Porlor for his counsel. None of them had been
more furious, none of them now felt a stronger desire to kill the
treacherous villain who had employed the kidnappers, as they now fully
believed. He said that the shame was almost more than they could bear,
but that it would at least be a great gain to be free from Mystacon. No
master could be worse, and when they were older and stronger they could
defy any master to detain them. "But the shame! the shame!" moaned
Coelred and Oswith, as they lay with their heads in their hands prone
to the ground. It had to be done. The next time Mystacon came, Porlor
told him to bring food, and that they would go without resistance. The
boys had few words and could not scold. But the villain was told that
they knew him as he was, far viler and baser than the sea-thieves, a
niddring and a liar, and that some day they would kill him. He sent
them plenty of food, and his sickly smile betokened malice not unmixed
with fear. His mind was, however, relieved: he would get his price.

"To be sold as slaves!" In all their thoughts of possible danger and
suffering, they had never anticipated anything so bad as this. They
called to mind the words that the sounds in the forest seemed to form
themselves into, and shuddered. But after hours of despondency the
brave little fellows took heart. Coelred was the leader who now urged
his companions to remember the words of the Princess. They talked long
and anxiously, but before they laid down their heads to sleep, they
had, with one accord, all raised their right hands and cried--"Come
what may, we will quit ourselves like men--above all, like Englishmen!"




    CHAPTER II

    IN BONDAGE AT ROME


The Forum of Trajan was as yet uninjured. The noble rows of
buildings with colonnades, including the once well-stored library,
still surrounded the large paved court, and in the centre stood the
beautiful column with its elaborate representation in bronze of the
events of the Dacian war. Here important markets were held, and on
one autumn morning of the year 588 several merchants, who had lately
arrived, exposed many things for sale. Abundance of people resorted
thither to buy. Mystacon had his wares arranged under a colonnade. He
invited attention in a cringing attitude, seeking for purchasers. The
English boys stood in a group quite naked, their eyes full of tears of
shame and rage. Among the first people who stopped in front of them
was a thin and emaciated ecclesiastic, accompanied by another, who
was younger and of stouter build. The older man had an aquiline nose
and hollow cheeks, bright piercing eyes, which had assumed a gentle
expression, and a somewhat commanding air. It was Gregory himself,
then aged forty-four, and his secretary Peter. Mystacon bowed low
before them. Gregory looked at the boys with admiration, and turning
to the merchant, he remarked that their bodies were white, their
countenances beautiful, and their hair very fine. Mystacon bowed still
lower. "From what country or nation were they brought?" he asked. The
reply was that they came from the island of Britain, whose inhabitants
are of that personal appearance. "Are these islanders Christians,
or are they still involved in the errors of Paganism?" was the next
inquiry. He was told that they were Pagans. Fetching a deep sigh, he
exclaimed--"Alas! what pity that the author of darkness is possessed
of men of such fair countenances, and that, being remarkable for such
graceful aspects, their minds should be void of inward grace. What,"
he demanded, "is the name of that nation?" The kidnapper replied that
they were called Angles. "Right," said Gregory, "for they have angelic
faces, and it becomes such to be co-heirs with the angels in heaven.
What is the name," he proceeded, "of the province from which they
are brought?" The reply was that the name of the province was Deira.
"Truly are they _De ira_," said he, "withdrawn from wrath and called
to the mercy of Christ. How is the king of that province called?"
Mystacon said that his name was Ella; and Gregory, alluding to it as
he walked on, observed to Peter that Hallelujah, the praise of God the
Creator, must be sung in those parts. Gregory was on his way to have an
interview with the Pope, and on coming into his presence, he proposed
that ministers should be sent to the English, by whom they might be
converted to Christ; and, in his impulsive way, he declared that he
was ready to undertake that work himself, by the assistance of God.
Pelagius replied that he was willing to grant his request, but that the
people would never consent to his departure. Gregory then entrusted to
Peter the business of purchasing some of these "Angles," and sent him
back to the market.

The boys did not understand a word of the remarks made by Gregory and
by other passers-by who stopped to question Mystacon. Presently two
patricians, advanced in years, followed by clients and attendants,
walked into the Forum and stopped at the colonnade where the lads were
still exposed. After gazing upon them, Symmachus Boethius observed to
his companion Pamphronius that he had never seen such perfect symmetry
and beauty except in ancient sculpture. "The works of Praxiteles are
looked upon with disapproval by our good friends the priests, so I
would fain ornament my villa with living forms that would be worthy
of the chisel of the most gifted sculptor of antiquity." Pamphronius
expressed his concurrence, and his desire to possess at least two of
the young slaves. Calling Mystacon aside, they made various inquiries,
and concluded bargains by which Symmachus Boethius became the owner
of Coelred and Porlor, while Oswith and Sivel fell to Pamphronius.
Their clients were instructed to complete the arrangement and pay the
purchase-money, and the great men passed on. No sooner were they out
of sight, than Peter arrived breathless to carry out the instructions
of his master. Mystacon was delighted, for his troubles and anxieties
were fully repaid. Peter agreed to his terms, and the Atheling Hereric,
Forthere, and Godric became the property of the Deacon Gregory.

The boys were thus relieved from their shameful and degrading position,
which they had looked forward to with such horror and dismay. Their
clothes were restored to them, and they were told by signs to accompany
the servants of the patricians and Peter, the road of all being the
same, namely, that leading to the Caelian Hill. Casting looks of
vindictive hatred at Mystacon, they gladly accompanied their new
acquaintances.

Of all the seven hills of Rome, the Caelian was the most favoured by
the wealthier classes during the latter days of the empire, and their
villas were scattered over it, half-hidden by groves of cypress trees.
But the troublous times had wrought destruction, and most of them were
now in ruins. Facing the Palatine, where the imperial palace stood
desolate and abandoned, was the monastery of St. Andrew, the villas of
Symmachus and Pamphronius, and the deserted temple of Divus Claudius,
while just below ran the Appian Way. In rear stood the Sacellum Dianae,
the arch of Dolabella, and the chapel containing little votive ships
of marble, reminding the boys of the votive boats in the tumulus of
Vidfinn at Bilbrough. The aqueduct of Nero entered Rome at the back
of the Caelian Hill, and was one of the few which still brought water
to the city; and to the south were the Lateran Palace and the famous
Asinarian Gate, by which Totila and his army entered in 546, through
the treachery of some Isaurian sentries.

The villa of Symmachus was the best and most perfect that remained
in the Rome of Gregory. The atrium and adjacent halls were of noble
proportions; there was a large garden in the rear, full of myrtles
and other shrubs; and beyond were the stables, near which Coelred and
Porlor were provided with a _cubiculum_ to themselves. Symmachus only
required the lads to attend him on certain occasions, and to perform
outdoor work, to which they felt no objection. He was a man of a kindly
and somewhat timid disposition, fond of a certain amount of display,
and with cultivated tastes. His amiable wife Otacilia was very kind to
the lads. They had liberty to wander over the city, and Porlor was full
of eager curiosity.

Pamphronius was less wealthy; his villa was of smaller proportions
and in a more ruinous condition, and he himself was a man of a more
exacting disposition, and with less natural kindliness than his
neighbour. Yet Oswith and little Sivel were well treated, and they were
very fortunate in the companionship of a son of one of the freedmen
of Pamphronius named Bassus, who was some years older than Oswith.
This youth was of mixed Roman and Gothic descent, tall for his age and
handsome, and well educated, being able to speak the Greek language,
as well as the debased Latin then talked at Rome, and having picked
up much of the ancient lore, in addition to what he had been taught
of Christianity. Bassus from the first conceived an ardent boyish
attachment for Oswith and a warm friendship for all the English lads,
and he continued to be a valued and faithful companion to the end of
their lives. He was destined to survive them all but one.

With their life in the monastery of St. Andrew the three others,
or at least two of them, were not so well pleased. The prior, named
Augustine, was a disciplinarian, inclined to be harsh and imperious
to those under him, and his humility was of that kind which is nearly
related to pride. Times had to be observed, rules must be respected;
yet the lads enjoyed a certain share of liberty. The gentle and
self-respecting Hereric fell more easily into the regular ways of
the monks. He considered it to be more dignified to obey, and he was
deeply interested in the new ideas and conceptions conveyed in the
little he could understand of the teaching of Peter, who was appointed
to instruct them before baptism. But Forthere hated the confinement
and the whole life, longing for the sports and adventures of the
forests to which he had been accustomed. Little Godric followed the
lead of Forthere, who was rebellious from the first. The monks found
it necessary to correct him before he had been an inmate more than a
few days, and they would have proceeded to more severe measures if he
had persisted in his disobedience. The loyal devotion of Forthere to
his companion as an atheling, and his sincere affection for Hereric
himself, were the motives which probably saved him. For Hereric's sake
he would submit when he would have been cut to pieces before he would
have obeyed a monk; and, in fact, the authorities ruled him through
the influence of the Atheling. The fierce young Englishman was a true
son of Brand of Ulfskelf, the mighty warrior and most loyal of all the
followers of King Ella. Like his father, young Forthere could brook no
tyranny, but, like his father, he would die for any atheling of the
house of Deira.

A monk named Laurentius was appointed to instruct the four boys
outside the monastery. They understood very little that he told them,
and that through the help of Bassus, for as yet they could only
exchange thoughts by means of a few signs and words established between
themselves and their new friend. Nevertheless, Gregory caused all the
seven English lads to be baptized without further delay, deciding that
the instruction of Peter and Laurentius had been sufficient. In a
very few months Bassus taught them the language then in use at Rome,
a dialect of Latin in process of conversion into Italian, and they
were able to understand all that was said to them, as well as to hold
conversations. He then began to teach them Greek, the language of the
imperial court and of commerce, and the boys in the villas of the two
patricians worked hard to acquire it, Bassus having impressed upon them
that it alone would enable them to comprehend fully the many strange
things they would see and hear, and would give them the knowledge which
was power.

Coelred, Oswith, and Porlor, with Bassus as their guide, had
wandered through the almost deserted streets of Rome, and gazed
with wonder and admiration on the magnificent edifices, which were
then neglected and dilapidated, but not actually in ruins. They had
especially examined the fine temple to the Sun erected by the Emperor
Aurelian on the Quirinal, and while they rested under its ornate
portico, Bassus had explained the true import of Mithras stabbing
the bull. This opened a whole world of imaginative speculation in
the mind of Porlor, who had never forgotten his wonder at the sight
of the bas-relief in the cave at York. On another day they crossed
the Tiber and visited Constantine's basilica dedicated to St. Peter,
which presented a sorry appearance when compared with the monuments
of antiquity. The sides were of plain unplastered brick, with arched
openings for windows, and in front there were figures and emblems
painted in fresco, in a very debased style of art. Even a child must
have been impressed with the superiority of the ancient edifices. The
English boys called to mind the impression they had received from
beholding the ruins of Roman temples at York; and how it had been borne
in upon their minds that a mighty empire had passed away, and that it
was for their countrymen to build something greater on its ruins. These
ideas now recurred to them with immeasurably greater force as they sat
together under the portico of the desecrated temple of Jupiter on the
Capitol, and commanded a view of the graceful temples round the Forum,
of the palace rising above them on the Palatine, and of the long vista
of edifices terminating with the Colosseum. The warm sun and deep blue
sky gave a brilliance to the scene, which contrasted with the signs of
decay that could be detected by the eye, in places where broken statues
and pavements and heaps of fallen tiles denoted the desolation of the
present time. Bassus told them how the Forum used to be crowded with
citizens, he showed them the place whence great senators and orators
used to make speeches to the people, and he described the processions
of the lupercalia and of the milites. All had passed away. Their young
thoughts were not depressed. They reflected on what was to follow, on
another great people arising to replace the dead Roman Empire. But
they did not think that it was to be found here among the monks and
the debased rabble of Gregory's Rome. Their aspirations turned to the
North, to the homes of Deira, and to the stalwart English, irresistible
in war and open to new ideas and fresh knowledge. It was becoming
something more than a dream amongst them, that it was ordained that
they should bring back to their kindred these new ideas and this fresh
knowledge. They would diligently learn all that could be useful to
their people in the lands of the ancient civilisation, until they were
old enough to wear swords and take their places as men in the battle
array; and then they would return, if need be fighting their way home.
This was the result of many discussions and conversations, held among
the cypress groves of the Caelian Hill, after exploring excursions
through the desolate city.

The boys from the two villas usually took their morning bath in a
tank near the _navicula_, which was shaded by trees and supplied with
water from Nero's aqueduct. Here, too, the Atheling, with their cousin
Forthere and little Godric, often joined them, and they talked over
their prospects, and discussed all the wondrous things they had seen
and heard. The Christian religion had been more clearly explained to
them when they acquired the use of the language then talked at Rome.
They understood that the Son of God had died for all mankind, and
that He had risen from the dead. They knew that they must pray to Him
for guidance and to keep them from sin, and they all did so. But they
thought that the teaching of Laurentius and Peter was the same as the
far more impressive and beautiful teaching of the Princess Alca. In
their conception Christ was another name for Balder. But they kept
these opinions to themselves, and gave the name of Christ to the Son of
God they worshipped.

Often taking counsel together, they formed a small _Gemot_, as they
called it, of seven little boys, with the world of Rome against them,
all except Bassus, whom they had made one of themselves. Hereric
invented a watchword to warn them of the approach of strangers who
might disturb their meetings in the cool cypress groves. It consisted
of the two words _Bylr_, a tempest, and _Grima_, a thing helmeted or
veiled. The meaning was that the unknown or veiled one might betoken a
storm for them. For they conversed respecting all the affairs of Rome,
speculated on the hidden meanings of all they heard, and talked over
the time for rising against their oppressors and fighting their way
home. There were two or three people whom Forthere intended to kill
first, including Mystacon.

So time passed on, and after two years Gregory succeeded to the
Pontificate. He had not forgotten his project of sending a mission
to the Angles, and was mindful of the advantage of having youthful
interpreters ready on the Caelian. But for a long time the miserable
condition of Rome absorbed his attention. The state of affairs had
become perilous. The corn ships failed to arrive time after time,
and these failures caused misery among the people. It was a common
occurrence to see crowds clamouring for food at the doors of St.
Peter's and at the Lateran. A total cessation of the Egyptian corn
trade was threatened, while the supply from Sicily was becoming more
and more precarious. Even greater danger threatened Rome from the
north. The Lombards made constant incursions, riding over the Campagna,
devastating the suburbs, and insulting the sentries guarding the gates
of the city.

Pope Gregory appealed to the exarch at Ravenna for help, but that
official was unable to do more than maintain his own position, which
was also threatened. There were frequent consultations between the Pope
and his clerical advisers and the leading patricians. The outlook was
most serious. At last it was determined that an embassy should be sent
to Constantinople to represent to the Emperor Maurice the absolute
necessity for making efficient arrangements to supply Rome with
corn, and to entreat him to send an army to drive back the Lombards
and put a stop to their incessant inroads, which were desolating
Southern Italy. Symmachus Boethius and Pamphronius were requested to
be the ambassadors, and after some pressure from the Pope they rather
unwillingly consented, for it would be an expensive and probably a
thankless service. They resolved to take several attendants, including
the four English boys and young Bassus.

This startling and important news came as a great surprise to the
little society. As yet they had never been separated. Oswith consulted
Bassus, and told him that they must bind each other always to be
steadfast friends, in the most solemn manner possible. Their compact
must include a firm resolution that when they returned home none should
be left behind. He asked Bassus how this could be done with the most
binding solemnity. "It must be an oath to God," advised his friend,
"which in the Hebrew tongue is Lilla. The most solemn thing that you
can do," added Bassus, "is to change your name from Oswith to Lilla, as
a memorial and a testimony. This will make the deepest impression on
the rest."

For the last time before the separation all the boys assembled
under the shady trees by the tank of the _navicula_. Much sorrow
was expressed at parting, but all anticipated wonderful things, and
probably much good, from the visit to Constantinople. They all took
the oath of constant friendship, and that no one should be left behind
when they fought their way home. "It is the oath of God," said Oswith,
"and to impress it on our hearts, from henceforth my name shall be
Lilla." "We declare," they all answered, "that we will call you Lilla
for evermore as a testimony of our compact." They embraced each other.
Little Sivel parted from his adopted brother Forthere with bitter
tears. All took tender farewells of Hereric the Atheling, whom they
fondly loved, of Forthere, and of Godric. It was a sad parting, but
they looked forward to meeting again at the same place.

A few days afterwards the two patricians embarked at Brundusium for
Constantinople, accompanied by Lilla, Coelred, Porlor, Sivel, Bassus,
and other attendants.




    CHAPTER III

    THE GLORIES OF THE EAST


At Rome everything reminded a visitor of past greatness.
Constantinople, on the other hand, was the new Rome, the grandest
and most magnificent city in the world. For nearly three centuries
the revenues of the empire had been lavished upon her edifices, all
the treasures of art had been brought from far and near to adorn her
palaces and theatres, and her churches were decorated with marble and
gold and every precious material the earth could yield. Her unrivalled
position on the shores of the Propontis, her harbour of Chrysoceras (or
the "Golden Horn"), and the beautiful wooded shores of the Bosphorus
surrounded her with every charm and every luxury, and combined to make
the city of Constantinople the most splendid capital ever raised by
genius commanding unlimited resources.

After their arrival the Roman patricians had to wait some days for
an audience with the Emperor. They had visited the capital before,
but no one could ever tire of gazing on that unequalled architectural
display. Boethius and Pamphronius walked through the city followed by
their attendants; and the English boys, confused at the magnificence
around them, were half dazed with wonder and admiration. They stood in
the elliptically-shaped forum of Constantine, with triumphal arches at
the two opposite entrances, and colonnades all round, filled with the
statues of the gods, with shrines dedicated to Cybele and to Fortune,
and a lofty pillar in the centre. This specially attracted their
attention. It was 120 feet high, of marble and porphyry, surmounted by
a statue of the Emperor Theodosius. Next they were taken to another
forum, which was square and also surrounded by porticoes, with an
elevated arcade adorned with statues, and the golden miliarium in
the centre. The Hippodrome also filled them with astonishment, 300
paces long, and the space between the two goals filled with statues
and obelisks. They saw the wreathed column of bronze which bore the
golden tripod of Delphi, and the Emperor's throne, with the winding
staircase called _Cochlea_ descending to the palace. They encountered
palaces, churches, and baths at every turn; and were taken to see the
underground cistern, or rather lake, with an arched roof supported on
336 marble pillars. Even more surprising to them were the baths of
Zeuxippus, the most beautiful in the world, adorned with the greatest
triumphs of Grecian art, the Muses of Helicon, the Athene of Lyndus,
and the Amphitrite of Rhodes. It all seemed like a gorgeous dream which
might suddenly melt away. When their eyes met, their looks told each
other of their amazement, but they were too much astonished to express
themselves in words. It was, however, the life and movement which
made these scenes so striking and so vivid. Horsemen, foot passengers
hurrying to and fro, troops marching, bright colours everywhere in
motion, gave animation and interest to the marvellous buildings, so
different from poor deserted Rome. They strolled on to the Golden
Gate, and back to the Augusteum, where a colossal equestrian statue of
Justinian in an attitude of defiance absorbed their attention for a few
moments, and then their eyes glanced beyond it to the crowning glory of
his architectural work.

They had scarcely room for more wonder when they came before the
great church dedicated to Divine Wisdom. Yet the interior, as they
entered, almost took their breath away. St. Sophia had been restored
and rededicated by Justinian about a quarter of a century before, in
563. The beautiful columns of green marble from Ephesus, of porphyry
from Aurelian's Sun Temple at Rome, the ornaments and figures in
carved stone, the decorations in gold and marbles of the most precious
kinds, the walls encrusted with mosaics, the richly-carved capitals,
and the exquisite proportions of the aerial dome, all combined to form
the most perfect and beautiful church that had ever been erected. The
gorgeous services, with long processions of richly-dressed priests and
their attendants, solemn music and singing, and the delicious scent of
incense, completed their wonder and awe. The boys remained in a sort of
dream of astonishment for several days, until the time arrived for the
audience. The patricians were richly dressed, and their attendants, in
suitably handsome attire, were to accompany them to the palace.

The Emperor Maurice Tiberius had ascended the throne in the year
582. Descended from an ancient Roman family settled in Asia Minor,
he was born at Arabissus in Cappadocia, spent his youth at the court
of Justin II., and afterwards served with distinction in the Persian
war. His accession was due to the best of all reasons, his loyalty to
his predecessor Tiberius Augustus, whose daughter he married. Maurice
was forty-three years of age when he became emperor, and he was an
excellent ruler, promoting the happiness of his people with sense and
courage. He was a rigid economist, and his demeanour was cold and
reserved. Soon after his accession another war with Persia broke out,
and when the embassy came from Rome, the general Heraclius had just
returned from Mesopotamia after gaining a great victory.

Rigid etiquette and a display of pomp and magnificence at court
ceremonials had been introduced by Diocletian and had been increased
by successive emperors. The palace was a vast building on the shores
of the Propontis between the Hippodrome and the church of St. Sophia.
When the embassy from Rome arrived at the appointed time it was met
by the Master of the Offices and his attendants, and the patricians,
being of consular rank, were accosted with the title of "illustrious."
After an interval they were ushered into the presence. The Emperor was
in the great audience-hall called _Chalce_ (from its brazen doors),
which consisted of a dome supported by massy pillars, walls encrusted
with mosaics representing African and Italian triumphs, and a pavement
of many-coloured marbles. The imperial throne was surrounded by the
great officers of state, and by favoured courtiers, all gorgeously
dressed. There stood the Praepositus or Prefect of the Bedchamber with
attendant Counts, the Quaestor or Chancellor, the Count of the Sacred
Largesses, the Count of the Privy Purse, the Commanders of the Guards,
the victorious generals Heraclius, Comentiolus, Narses, and Priscus,
and several bishops. There also were Athanagild, a tall and handsome
young Gothic Prince, the philosopher Metrodorus, the famous physician
Alexander, the lawyer-poet Agathias, and many others.

There were numerous presentations, and when the turn of Boethius and
Pamphronius came, those illustrious patricians made low obeisance, and
stated the case set forth in their instructions from the Holy Father
Gregory, touching the sore need of prompt assistance in which the city
of the seven hills then stood. They were told that they would receive
their answer on a future day. Many eyes were turned on the handsome
youths, whose good looks were enhanced by their rich and well-fitting
clothes, and the patricians soon had reason to regret that they had
taken those means of increasing their own importance by the brilliance
of their suite. In leaving the palace the boys made way for Priscus
the general, and they were struck by the revolting appearance of the
soldier who held his horse. He was a short man with red hair and shaggy
eyebrows, and his face was disfigured by a great scar. He looked a
savage and malicious barbarian; yet this man was Phocas, the successor
of Maurice as Emperor of the East! whose monument, a tall column with
an inscription, is still standing in the Forum at Rome.

During the following days the patricians received many visits. Narses,
then one of the most trusted of the Emperor's generals, paid his
respects, and took special notice of Lilla and Bassus. Stephanos, the
Count of the Sacred Largesses, also came, and was very much attracted
by the intelligent appearance of little Sivel. The Gothic Prince
Athanagild was another visitor. He was a young scion of the royal
house of Spain, who had taken refuge at the court of Maurice from the
persecution of King Recared. Athanagild was also a grandson, through
his mother, of Queen Brunehaud of Austrasia. During his exile he had
formed a friendship with the physician Alexander, through whom he had
heard of the Indian voyages of Cosmas. Fond of adventure, he was now
keen to follow in the course of the old navigator, and was looking out
for trusty followers. His eyes fell upon Coelred and Porlor, and he at
once conceived a strong desire to secure their services.

It was too late for the patricians to regret their imprudence in
displaying their precious human property so openly; and just at this
time Symmachus Boethius fell dangerously ill. The physician Alexander
attended him, but his charms and amulets were of no avail. A few days
after the death of his colleague, Pamphronius was summoned to receive
his answer, and he was served with an order, through the Count of the
Domestics, to bring the five youths with him who had been in the suite
of the embassy at the former reception. The Emperor gave him audience
at the lovely summer residence of Heroeum, a villa with gardens
extending down to the sea, on the Asiatic side of the Propontis, near
Chalcedon. Maurice was not encouraging. He said that he had ordered
some ships laden with grain to be sent to the Tiber; but that he could
give no military aid, owing to the disturbed state of affairs in
Persia. The Emperor, indeed, told Pamphronius that he was himself on
his way to Antioch with all the forces he could collect. His advice was
that King Childebert of Austrasia should be bribed to invade Northern
Italy and give employment to the Lombards. He also promised to instruct
the Exarch of Ravenna to co-operate with Childebert.

Pamphronius then had to take his leave; but before he embarked to
return to the city he was informed by the Praepositus that the five
youths were required for the public service, and would be detained at
Heroeum. He protested strongly, but was merely told that he could, if
he chose, recover them by process of law when their services were no
longer under requisition by the State. Pamphronius returned to Rome
with little but good advice as the result of his embassy, having lost
his colleague by death, and his two slaves, for whom he had paid high
prices to Mystacon, by an arbitrary act which, from his point of view,
amounted to plunder. He felt very indignant.

Great preparations were, in fact, being made for a Mesopotamian
campaign, rendered probable by the disturbances in Persia. The army was
already on the march to Antioch by way of the Cilician Gates. Ships
were assembled at Chalcedon and other ports, and the Emperor Maurice
himself, with some of his principal officers and generals, was about to
embark for the coast of Syria.

The boys had been lodged, with the attendants of the Emperor's
household, in buildings near the gardens of Heroeum. They were able,
thanks to their friend Bassus, to converse in Greek, and to understand
what had taken place. They welcomed the chances that were now opening
to them of taking part in some warlike adventure, and of emulating the
deeds of their Viking ancestors, before again returning to Rome. Next
day Lilla and Bassus were appointed to posts in the army, as pages
in attendance on Narses. Little Sivel was taken into the household
of the Treasurer Stephanos, who intended to employ the quick-witted
and intelligent boy in one of the State departments under his charge,
probably in the mint at Antioch.

Athanagild was of an enterprising and roving disposition, and on the
death of his father Hermenegild at Toledo in 586, his uncle Recared
succeeded, and he fled to the court of his grandmother at Metz. But a
violent quarrel with his uncle Childebert led to his banishment, and
he found safety with the Emperor Maurice. Having been nursed through
an illness by the physician Alexander, a close friendship was formed
between them, and he thus heard of the voyages to India by the aged
monk Cosmas, who was intimate with the physician. He had also been
told of the great military exploits of Gollas, King of the White Huns,
in those parts, and he resolved to find his way to that distant and
unknown land, and to offer his sword to the conqueror. He had vague
dreams of sovereignty and dominion for himself. His great object now
was to find a pilot and a trusty crew to take him to India by the route
of Cosmas. Alexander gave him friendly help and advice, and obtained
for him a pilot in the shape of Monas, an old companion of Cosmas, who
would find a vessel if supplied with funds. The Gothic Prince was now
looking for two or three followers who would work under Monas, and whom
he could thoroughly trust. He had taken a fancy for Coelred and Porlor
at first sight. He admired their stalwart young limbs, and their faces
with an expression open as the day, where no lie could find a place. He
felt sure that, if once gained over, they would be loyal and true.

Athanagild was a tall, handsome young man, with a winning manner, and
when he told the boys that he was a Geata, whose deeds they had heard
of in the song of Beowulf, he won their hearts. They remembered how
often Coifi had sung of the Geatas and their exploits; and as they
thought of the old hall at home, where the gleeman was wont to recite
his tales, their eyes filled with tears. They were walking with the
Prince in the beautiful gardens of Heroeum near the sea-shore, as he
explained his plans to them. There was much that was wonderful, much
that they could not understand. But they saw that it was an exploit
worthy of the Vikings, and they joyfully consented to take part in it,
on the understanding that they were to return with Monas. The two boys
were handed over to the Gothic Prince with the sanction of the Prefect
of the Imperial Bedchamber.

In less than a month the Emperor and his court were at Antioch, with
a powerful and efficient army encamped outside the town. Coelred and
Lilla agreed together that, if they returned from their expeditions,
they would wait for each other at Antioch before starting for Rome.
Sivel was already employed in the mint, receiving practical instruction
in the art of coining the debased money which bore the name and effigy
of Maurice, and they thought that they could safely calculate on his
being still there when they returned.

One evening the boys were sitting together under the shade of some
date-palms outside the city gate, discussing all the wondrous sights
they had beheld, and their new experiences, when a great cloud of
dust was seen on the road. Soon afterwards a brilliant cavalcade
came in sight. It literally glittered under the rays of the setting
sun, seeming to be one sparkling mass of bright weapons and gorgeous
dresses. At its head rode a man in a long robe of cloth-of-gold, with
flowing locks, and a huge globe of some light wicker-work gilded,
surmounting his silver-gilt helmet. After a short parley he was
admitted with his followers, and conducted to quarters near the palace.
It was Khosro Parviz, the King of Persia, who had been driven from his
dominions, and came to seek aid from the Emperor.

The reception of this King of Kings by Maurice was magnificent; and he
consented to employ his army for the restoration of Khosro. For several
days active preparations were being made, and then there was a second
separation of the English boys. As the army began its march under the
command of Narses, Coelred, Porlor, and Sivel bade an affectionate
farewell to Lilla and Bassus, who were well mounted and followed in the
general's train.

Next day Athanagild took leave of the Emperor Maurice, and made sail
for Alexandria with his young English followers, and half a dozen
Gothic soldiers who had been the loyal and attached followers of his
father. They were to travel from Alexandria to Myos Hormos on the Red
Sea, where Monas had promised to meet them with a vessel prepared for
the long voyage. When the Prince fled from Toledo, he had taken with
him a large amount of gold and jewels sewn up in belts, which he had
carefully kept by causing his servants to wear them, and which would
now enable him to equip his expedition. He and his young friends were
in high spirits when the long line of white buildings, the tall Pharos
rising above them, and the rows of palm trees announced that Alexandria
was in sight.




    CHAPTER IV

    A SON OF ALARIC


The sun was pouring down its dazzling rays on rocks and sand, and on
the expanse of intensely blue sea. There was nothing to relieve the eye
except a line of white huts, and at some distance a grove of date-palms
surrounding a well. One small vessel was at anchor. This was Myos
Hormos on the Red Sea. Coelred and Porlor reclined in a shed roofed
with palm leaves, near the well, while Athanagild and the Goths, drowsy
with the heat, were lying about under the trees. Mounted on camels, and
guided by a servant of Monas, they had crossed the desert during the
nights, and had arrived on the seventh day at dawn. They now waited
for the coming of Monas from the town. The boys were much changed in
appearance. Their faces were bronzed by the sun, their hair close cut,
and large white turbans were wound round their heads. They were dressed
in white, and were armed with swords, daggers, and spears. A chatty of
fresh water and a little heap of parched corn on a cloth were between
them.

Coelred's eyes were closed. He opened them drowsily and said, "With
my eyes shut, and the sun making the darkness almost light, I fancy
that I am lying on the grass, by the brook at Stillingfleet, and
almost hear the voices of Bergliot and Braga, and the barking of dear
old Shuprak at the top of the hill." Porlor looked at his brother,
whose eyes were filling with tears, and lovingly stroked his cheek.
"My thoughts and dreams are ever with our loved ones, like yours,
dear Coelred. But we must keep wide awake for the next few days," and
he shook his brother by the shoulder. "We have seen enough of our
companions to make that quite clear." In a very low voice Coelred said,
"What think you of Athanagild?" "The Gothic Prince," replied Porlor, in
a whisper, "is a brave and true warrior, and will keep his word with
us, I am sure. But he is not gifted with patience or judgment, and he
has embarked on an enterprise which requires both. He acts on sudden
impulses, strikes before hearing a word, and his Goths follow and obey
blindly. There is much to arrange now that needs forethought and care,
and I feel that, although we are so many years younger, the success of
this voyage will depend upon our conduct, and upon the character of
the captain and pilot of whom we know nothing. In truth we have had
several affrays since we landed in Egypt, and have escaped death or
imprisonment mainly by good fortune, and all have been due to the quick
temper of our chief." "We cannot always guide our own thoughts and
actions," mused Coelred, "how much less those of our companions. So we
must often leave all to chance; yet there are those who take all these
things into account, weigh them, and give each its just value, and who
can then offer sage counsel; and you are one, my Porlor." "I do try
hard to think out the points on which our lives and fortunes depend,"
said the younger boy; "and truly I do so because one who is dearer to
me than my own life shares my fate." They both sat up and wound their
arms round each other in a brotherly embrace. As they did so they
became aware of people approaching the palm grove, whose figures stood
out clear against the sky. The party consisted of an erect old man with
a white beard, and some black servants. "If I mistake not, this is the
pilot and guide of whom we know nothing, and concerning whom it imports
us much to know a great deal," said Porlor. At the same moment Coelred
cried out--"Prince Athanagild, a visitor approaches."

[Illustration: Coelred and Porlor in Egypt]

The Prince and his Goths sprang to their feet as the old man came
under the shade of the trees and made a low obeisance. He introduced
himself as the pilot and master who had undertaken to supply the
vessel, load her with a suitable cargo, and convey the Prince to India.
Funds had been duly received through the Imperial physician Alexander,
and such merchandise had been purchased as there would be a demand for
at the Indian port, and had been conveyed across the desert. The vessel
was built at Adulis, and was owned by Monas. "Good," said the Prince;
"we will sail to-day." "That cannot be," objected the old man, "for the
ship is not ready and the cargo is not on board." "How long will be the
delay?" "A week at least," was the answer, "and I have a long report to
make." "I cannot rest here, and I cannot listen, old man. I must be at
work. Action, not words, for me. I and my followers will hunt out these
Arabs of the desert of whom I hear, and try their mettle while you make
the ship ready." Monas protested, and explained the extreme danger of
such a proceeding. "In ordinary times," he said, "there is nothing to
plunder at Myos Hormos. But if the news gets abroad that a ship is
loading or unloading, then indeed are the vultures gathered together.
Clouds of Arabs cover the sands, and pounce down if the merchants have
not sufficient force to resist them. I believe that our secret is well
kept, yet the sight of you and your followers careering over the desert
will at once bring the marauders about our ears." But the Prince would
not listen to reason. He caused his led horses to be saddled, and his
camels to be loaded with food and water, and set out with his Goths
in the afternoon in search of adventures. His last words to Monas
were--"These Counts" (_Comites_), pointing to Coelred and Porlor, "are
my lieutenants, and will act for me. Their wishes are my wishes, their
orders my orders." So saying, this knight-errant rode away.

Monas held up his hands with astonishment at such madness. He turned
round to look at the lieutenants, and saw a boy of fifteen and another
of thirteen; well grown and intelligent, no doubt, and one struck him
as possessing sagacity above his years, but both very young. "Counts!"
he said aloud; but to himself, "Lieutenants! The Holy Saints protect
us!" and he again held up his hands, with a half-despairing gesture.

This conversation had been carried on in Greek. The boys came forward,
and Porlor requested the old man to make his report, and enable them to
enter upon the duties with which their friend Athanagild had entrusted
them. They did this with such a quiet assumption of command, and with
such combined dignity and courtesy, that Monas almost ceased to feel
the incongruity of such very juvenile Counts taking the command of the
enterprise, and at once entered upon his explanations and reports, with
which he had come for submission to Athanagild.

Monas, in early life, had been a companion of the better-known
merchant and monk Cosmas in his daring voyages. A native of Egypt, of
Greek descent, his quick wit and readiness of resource had enabled him
to establish commercial intercourse between ports of the Red Sea and
of the west coast of India, after his master Cosmas had retired into
monkish seclusion. He had acted as interpreter, when quite a young
man, to the Indian embassy which brought a present of an elephant to
the Emperor Justinian in 552, and he had since made several voyages
to India. When the imperial physician applied to his ancient friend
Cosmas, on the subject of the wish of the Gothic Prince to make a
voyage to India, and forwarded a supply of money, the matter was placed
in the hands of Monas. For Cosmas had quite retired from worldly
concerns, though the famous geographer still survived, in a cell
situated in a secluded oasis near Myos Hormos. Although the disciple
was also contemplating a retirement to a monastic cell in imitation of
his master, he consented to undertake one more voyage. He owned more
than one vessel at Adulis, and the most seaworthy was brought up to
Myos Hormos, while the articles well known to Monas as finding a ready
sale in the Indian ports were purchased in the markets of Alexandria,
sent up the Nile to Thebes, and conveyed across the desert with as
little delay as possible, in the hope that the Arab marauders would not
hear that a ship was being loaded at the deserted port of Myos Hormos.

When Coelred and Porlor walked down to the beach, they found the ruins
of a considerable town, and three or four sheds consisting of stone
walls with roofs of palm leaves. The small cargo was stored in them,
and the crew of tall blacks was loading a boat with bales. The boys,
accompanied by Monas, went on board the vessel with the first load, and
found her to be a craft the like of which they had never before seen.
She had a half-deck and a small cabin. Her build was like that of the
_pathamars_ on the Malabar coast, the planks being neatly secured to
each other with knotted ropes, and she had two masts with lateen sails.
Water was stored in large chatties carefully lashed to the ship's side,
and the food, all bread and vegetables, was in sacks. The boys inquired
whether there was any danger of an attack from Arabs, and Monas said
that he hoped the wild young Prince would return the next evening at
latest, in which case he was not likely to have encountered Arabs, and
the risk would be averted.

Monas further said that it was necessary that the young Counts, as he
called the boys, should visit the great navigator and geographer in
his seclusion; and it was agreed that they should travel during the
night. A short refreshing sleep was followed by a bathe in the sea
when the sun set. Coelred, Porlor, and Monas then mounted their camels
and proceeded over the desert in a south-westerly direction. After
travelling for several hours, at dawn they came to a small grove of
date-palms, where a stone cell of some size had been built, with a few
sheds round it. This was the place to which Cosmas had retired to end
his days.

On entering the grove, the visitors found a man in extreme old age,
seated outside his cell almost in a state of coma. He had a long white
beard, and must have been upwards of ninety years old. When Monas told
him that his visitors were the adventurers who wished to undertake a
voyage to India, he aroused himself. "They must consult me first," he
said in a feeble but clear voice. "They must rest here and listen to
what I can tell them. I am Cosmas," he continued, addressing the boys,
"and my title is _Indicopleustes_, for I sailed to India. Give them
food, and let them sit and listen to my words." Dates were set before
them by a servant, and the garrulous old man continued to relate the
story of his life. "I have been, in the years long gone by, a merchant
who navigated the Erythraean Sea, and reached the distant ports of
India. I knew the seasons, and taught Monas when the winds blew which
would take us to India, and when he must spread his sails to return.
It is said that Hippalus, in the days of Claudius the Emperor, first
discovered the constancy of the winds in their seasons. It is true. But
the credit is mine of making this knowledge useful to the world. Now
the rich products of India are sold in markets within the dominions of
our Emperor. This is due to me. I know all the emporia and how to reach
them. I was impelled by the desire of knowledge more than by gain,
though there was gain. I discovered the royal seat of white marble
at Adulis. It is consecrated to Ares. There are images of Heracles
and Hermes sculptured on it, and Greek letters are written on every
side. Monas helped me to copy the inscription, which was caused to be
put there by the great King Ptolemy Euergetes. It is all in my second
book. You have read my great work?" he asked. The boys answered that
they could not read. "You must learn," he went on. "It is necessary
that you should read my great work. It is in twelve books, and is
entitled _Christian Topography_. When my career was finished as a
merchant going to and fro, I devoted myself to God and became a monk.
Then I wrote my great book. In it I have confuted Ptolemy and all the
Pagans. I have proved that the earth is a flat surface. It is an oblong
plain twice as long from east to west as from north to south, and the
holy city of Jerusalem is in the centre. The whole is enclosed by an
ocean. I have proved it by arguments from Scripture, from the Fathers,
from testimony, and from reason. There are many copies of my great
work in the monasteries, in libraries, and in palaces. The Pagans are
confuted." Porlor said that he would be glad if the holy monk would
tell them about the voyage to India. "I am waiting for God to call me
to begin a longer voyage," was the answer. "Monas knows all. I taught
him." Cosmas had tired himself, and began to doze. The old man was not
long for this world. He had done his work, which was to throw back
science for centuries. The interview with old Cosmas Indicopleustes
then came to an end, and the boys took their leave. They reached Myos
Hormos a little after sunset, and were disappointed to hear that there
was no news of Athanagild.

During the next few days the loading continued, but there was no sign
of the Prince. At last he appeared alone, and wounded. He had had
his wish. He had come upon a large party of Arabs near a well in the
desert, and at once attacked them. All his Goths were killed, and he
received a spear-thrust, but the Arabs had not known the extent of the
losses they had inflicted, and retreated under cover of the night. He
thought, however, that he had been followed by one or two horsemen,
perhaps more, and he knew not whither he was going, but his horse had
brought him back to the port. He was faint from loss of blood. Monas
declared that they would be attacked before morning, and he took the
Prince on board the vessel to examine his wound.

Coelred and Porlor, after a consultation, made the black sailors
build a sort of sconce or small fort with some of the remaining bales
and other materials, with an angle pointing landwards, and the two
ends resting on the sea when it was high tide. They also dug a trench
outside in the sand, into which the water flowed. The remaining
merchandise was brought inside this extemporary intrenchment, and the
loading proceeded through the night. It was calm and the moon was up.
A little before dawn Coelred, who was on the watch, thought he saw
dark figures cautiously creeping round the huts. The boat happened to
be alongside the vessel, and there were only a few men and Porlor on
shore. Coelred aroused them, and they all stood to their arms, when a
sudden rush was made by a number of Arabs. The two boys stood side by
side at the angle, with the sailors supporting them. Luckily it was
high tide. There was a desperate struggle for the fort. The foremost
assailants were hurled back by the young Englishmen with their spears.
The brothers then drew their swords and began an unequal fight,
supported by their men, who behaved well. More of the enemy came to
the attack from behind the huts, and began to scale the enclosure. All
would have been lost if, at that moment, the boat had not touched the
sand. The boys retreated fighting, and were seized by their own people
as the boat was shoved off. The marauders secured a small portion of
the cargo, with the loss of several of their number. Two of the crew
were also killed. As soon as Coelred and Porlor were on board, Monas
weighed and made sail before a light northerly breeze.

The Prince's wound proved to be mortal. The loss of blood had been
great, there was much exhaustion, and inflammation set in. The boys
nursed him tenderly. On the third day he felt that his end was near.
Porlor was supporting him, while Coelred held a cool bandage on his
forehead. Monas had some skill, but the case was beyond human aid. He
stood looking down on the little scene, amazed at the madness which
had led to such consequences. "Farewell, my friends," said the Prince;
"my folly nearly ended your lives as well as my own. You have become
dear to me. I hoped that you would have been my companions in arms, and
that we might have carved out an empire together. I saw that you were
true and brave, worthy to be the comrades of one who is of the blood
of Alaric." He paused, and his voice became weaker. He finished what
he wished to say with difficulty. "I was driven from my country. Like
you, I desired to return. One pleasure is left me. I can give you the
means of going home." He looked at Coelred, whose cool hand, damped
with water from a chatty, was on his forehead. "Take off my belt," he
said. The boy hesitated. "Take it. I would see it round your waist."
Coelred gently unfastened the embroidered leathern belt, which was
heavy, and did with it as the dying man had told him. Athanagild smiled
as if contented. "Old man," he said, with difficulty turning to Monas,
"thou art my witness that I leave all I possess to my young Counts. I
charge thee to safeguard them." He closed his eyes as Monas bowed low
before him in token of assent. After a long pause the Prince touched
the belt and said, in his corrupt Greek, "I there place the treasure
close packed in secrecy. Farewell." (_Ufaireo dia malki tote._) These
were his last words. The boys never forgot them, and ever afterwards
used the first word, which they pronounced "_uvaru_" for a secret
hiding-place. Athanagild did not speak again, and passed away during
the night.

The moon was shining brightly, and bathing the calm expanse of water
with a silvery light, when the old man and the two young boys, with
tears in their eyes, committed the remains of this impulsive and
generous son of Alaric to the deep.




    CHAPTER V

    UJJAYANI


The sea was like molten silver. The burning sun blazed pitilessly
down on the little vessel, which was motionless. The northerly breeze
reckoned upon by Monas had failed him. They had been becalmed for days,
and the water was running short. All day the boys were stretched out
under a rough awning of palm leaves, panting for breath. The sky was
like a dome of burnished steel. One night Porlor watched the northern
horizon, and saw a bank of clouds rising, which he pointed out to the
old pilot and to his brother. Soon cat's-paws were seen along the
surface of the sea. Monas said there would be a breeze in the morning.
But their water would not last them, unless they replenished at some
well on the Arabian coast; yet this was a very perilous proceeding,
for the eastern side of the Red Sea was infested by savage robbers.
There was, however, no alternative, and as soon as the breeze filled
his sails, Monas steered for a port called Jidda, 320 miles south of
Myos Hormos. They came to off a grove of palm trees, which denoted the
presence of wells, on a bright moonlight night. A short distance to
the south there were a few scattered huts. When dawn broke they could
see that the wells were in possession of armed men. Monas feared to
land, but the boys declared they would die fighting rather than die
of thirst. Well armed, and accompanied by half a dozen of the crew,
Coelred and Porlor took the boat, landed, and boldly advanced towards
the wells. They were met half-way by a solitary Arab, who stood in
the path uttering the word "Bismillah." He was a powerful young man,
about five years older than Coelred, in a long camel's-hair cloth,
with the hood secured round his head by a green band. His complexion
was bronzed, nose aquiline, lips rather thick, and he had piercing
black eyes. He held a long spear in his right hand. Coelred said in
Greek that they must have water. The young Arab replied in the same
language that the wells were in his possession. He said that he was
Muhammad, the son of Abdallah, servant of Abu Taleb, one of the chiefs
of the Koraish of Mekka. He was commanding an expedition against the
robbers who attacked the caravans of Mekka, and had defeated them and
driven them from the wells of Jidda. They should have water if they
paid for it--let the master of the ship come to him. Coelred sent the
boat back for old Monas, and the English lads stood facing the Arab
youth, all leaning on their spears. Few more words passed between them.
The Arab gazed at the young Englishmen with unconcealed admiration,
and the lads scanned the features of the strange being before them
with feelings of curiosity and interest which they could not have
explained. Monas was very agreeably surprised to find a law-maintaining
force at the wells, instead of the cut-throats he expected. It was
soon arranged that the vessel should be watered and replenished with
some provisions, in exchange for six bales of cloth. This occupied
the rest of the day. Young Muhammad and the English lads rested under
the shade. The Arab's knowledge of Greek merely enabled him to strike
bargains, and he could not converse, so that the time was passed, for
the most part, in friendly silence. The undefinable feeling of interest
which took possession of the boys when they first encountered this
extraordinary man was increased as they sat near him. The expression
of his countenance changed frequently, but was always remarkable. His
eyes were bright and eager while he bargained with Monas; they had a
soft and gentle look when they rested on the truthful faces of his
companions; then again they once or twice flashed a look of fierce
anger, apparently without cause. But what the boys noticed with most
interest was that far-away, abstracted look which came into the Arab's
eyes as he rested under the trees, as if he saw things invisible to
all besides himself; and when this strange look came it lasted long.
They had seen something like it in the Princess Alca, and once or
twice in old Monas. But there was something in the Arab's look which
was peculiar to himself: it was as if madness mingled in his strange
abstraction; and when he shook it off, it was with a glance of fury.
The boys were quite absorbed by their companion, and when Monas called
them away the sun was already on the horizon. They took leave of each
other with solemn courtesy, and an hour afterwards the vessel was under
weigh and sailing down the Red Sea with a fresh northerly breeze. The
boys talked long over their encounter with this strange being, and
never forgot it. The makers of England and the false prophet had this
wonderful meeting before the serious work of their lives was begun.
It taught the English boys to recognise a man with deep convictions,
and to distinguish between real fanaticism and fraud. It elevated the
fanciful conceptions of the Arab, and when he dreamt of angels he saw
the faces of Coelred and of Porlor.

[Illustration: Coelred and Porlor on their Way to the Wells]

The breeze continued, the air was cooler, and Monas said that they
would soon reach their next stopping-place, the emporium of Ocelis.
By this time he knew the whole history of his young companions. They
had never thought for a moment of turning back after the death of the
Gothic Prince, but were quite resolved to complete their adventure
before returning to Antioch; and the old man, without any tie of his
own, had become warmly attached to them. He would give them the use of
his knowledge and experience, see them safe again on their way home,
and then follow his master Cosmas into monastic seclusion.

Many a long conversation was held between the boys and their aged
friend during the long starlight nights, when the little vessel made
her way over the smooth sea to Ocelis. One night they talked of the
young Arab and his look of abstraction. "It is the look," said Monas,
"which betokens fitness for a life of seclusion, of devotion to prayer,
and thoughts of eternity. The monks often have it, and the generation
in which I live is one much given to a monkish life. It is only in such
a life that we can find rest, safety from hell fire, and that religious
truth without which there is no safety. In Egypt alone there are now
six hundred monasteries, all maintaining the truth against the errors
of Rome." "And what is the truth?" asked Porlor. "The truth is," said
Monas, "that Christ existed _of_ two natures, and whosoever denies
it shall for ever be accursed. The Synod of Chalcedon, when Marcian
was emperor, declared that Christ existed _in_ two natures, and this
wicked heresy is still held by the priests of Rome, and sends many
souls to hell. Dangers and pitfalls of false doctrine surround us,
and the only safety from them is in monastic seclusion. Young and old
should fly to the desert." "That will I never do," cried Coelred. "My
life shall be active and earnest. I devote it to brave deeds and to
the service of my countrymen." Old Monas shook his head, but he could
not help admiring, and even approving, the very different direction
to which the hopes and aspirations of his young friends were turned.
They understood his words, but their minds were not trained to receive
such subtleties. "Does Muhammad hold the truth," asked Porlor, "or is
he, like us, ignorant of the true nature of the Son of God? We are
ignorant because what you say is beyond our comprehension. How is it
with that Arab warrior with the changing eyes?" "The Arab," said Monas,
"is a very young man, and he is a heathen. But he has been in Christian
cities with merchants of his tribe, and knows something of the truth.
I talked with him in the shade while you slept." "We were not asleep,"
protested the boys. "Fast asleep," repeated Monas, "while I sounded the
depths of the young Arab's mind. He is no ordinary man. He will either
receive the truth and convert Arabia into a land of saints, or he will
be the mightiest heresiarch with which the world has ever been cursed,
spreading desolation and moral death over what once was Christendom.
But not in my time," drowsily continued the old man. Coelred rose to
take the helm, and Porlor followed Monas to the land of dreams.

It was not often that Monas kept the boys awake with such serious
discourse. He generally related the stirring events in his voyages
with Cosmas, taught them the rules of steering by the stars, and told
of the famous book written in the time of the Emperor Nero, and called
the _Periplus of the Erythraean Sea_, from which Cosmas gleaned much
of the information which enabled him to make his voyages successfully.
The northerly wind soon brought them to the emporium of Ocelis, near
the strait of Dere, which opens upon the Erythraean Sea. Here they
again took in water and provisions, proceeding along the Arabian coast
to Kane, a port of considerable trade, where some of the merchandise
was exchanged for frankincense and aloes. Sailing onwards to the east,
they reached Syagros, whence, in accordance with the directions laid
down by his master, Monas proceeded to make his bold voyage across the
trackless ocean to distant India. The south-west wind, called Hippalus
from the pilot who first attempted the passage by it, carried the
little vessel across the sea until, in a few days, the coast of Guzerat
was sighted, the mouth of the great river Narbada was entered, and
Monas piloted her past islands and shoals, and anchored her off the
_ghat_ of the busy port of Barugaza.

Founded by the sage Bhriga, the town of Barugaza was one of the oldest
seaports of Western India, and was then one of the chief seats of
trade. Its exports were cotton, a kind of fine calico called _baftas_,
bdellium, and flowers of the mahina tree. Barugaza is on an artificial
hill 60 feet high overlooking the river, the only rising ground for
many miles around; for a flat alluvial plain of fertile black soil
stretches away for fifty miles to the foot of the mountains, covered
with crops of cotton and rice. Here and there a clump of mango and
other fruit trees denoted the position of a village, and on an island
in the Narbada there was a banyan-tree with 350 large and 3000 small
stems, enclosing a space 700 yards in circumference.

There was much to astonish, much to interest, the English lads on
first landing at the _ghat_ of Barugaza. They had seen an elephant
at Alexandria, but everything else was strange to them; especially
the dresses of the people, the merchants in their snow-white robes
and red turbans, and the crowds of coolies with nothing but a _dhuti_
round their waists, carrying heavy loads, and taking cargoes on board
the boats. Kesava was the name of the merchant who always acted as
agent for Monas when he brought a cargo to Barugaza; and this was the
fifth time he had made the voyage, without counting those in which he
accompanied Cosmas. Before they were contaminated by intercourse with
Europeans, the merchants of India were celebrated for their probity and
fair dealing; and Kesava was a good specimen of his class. Property
could be entrusted to his care with perfect confidence, and he took
charge of the vessel and the crew, while Monas and the boys were to
convey their merchandise up country to Ujjayani, one of the seven
sacred cities of the Hindus, the famous capital of Malwa.

Monas set out on his journey a few days after his arrival at Barugaza.
He and the boys travelled in open palkis, their bales of goods were
slung on bamboos which were borne on the shoulders of coolies, and they
were guarded by a well-equipped body of fighting men. They travelled up
stream, along the right bank of the Narbada, for 180 miles, to a small
town called Mandlesar, where the river is still 500 yards in width.
Thence the route turned northwards across the Vindhya Hills for a
distance of seventy miles to Ujjayani. Coelred and Porlor walked across
the hills, travelling from midnight until sunrise, and on the third day
from leaving Mandlesar they entered the far-famed capital of Malwa.
Along this road the English lads observed that long lines of trees were
planted to afford shade to travellers from the scorching rays of the
sun, while at intervals there were fountains by the road-side to enable
them to quench their thirst. Porlor, especially, was deeply impressed
with the excellence of a government which took such thought for the
comfort of its people.

The city of Ujjayani was built on the right bank of the river Sipra,
with _ghats_ leading down to the water. It was very extensive, and
contained many grand edifices, besides the famous temple of Siva and
the palace of the Raja. There were, however, more trees than houses.
Every dwelling had its shady garden stocked with flowering shrubs, and
round the city there was a broad belt of fruit trees, and avenues of
the sacred _vata_ or peepul trees, frequented by the Hanuman monkeys.
Within this belt of foliage were the great tanks with bathing _ghats_
shaded by clumps of tall trees, above which rose the spreading fans of
the palmyra palm and the graceful areca; while _palasa_ and _tulasi_
shrubs, with their gorgeous flowers, concealed the bathers.

The golden age of Hindu literature was the period when Vikramaditya
ruled at Ujjayani about B.C. 57, and when the "Nava-ratna" or nine gems
of literature flourished there. His dynasty still ruled over Malwa,
and in 592 Jayachandra was the Raja. The place was full of traditions
of the hero king, and of his divine poet Kalidasa, whose immortal
works had the freshness and reality at Ujjayani which such poems can
only really possess at the place where they were composed. The bright
river Sipra, the flowering groves, the pretty girls descending the
_ghats_ with lotas on their heads, the cranes in the paddy swamps--all
nature reminded the votaries of Kalidasa that he dwelt at the court
of Ujjayani when he wrote _Sakuntala_, the _Seasons_, and the _Cloud
Messenger_. Peace reigned in Malwa, but there were threatening clouds
on the northern horizon. Gollas, King of the White Huns, had overrun
Northern India, and terror repeated marvellous stories of the prowess
of his army, which included 2000 elephants. It was said that, when he
besieged a town, his soldiers drank all the water in the ditch, and
then marched dry-shod to beat down the walls. It was to this conqueror
that Athanagild had contemplated the offer of his sword; but Coelred
and Porlor had no such intention. Ujjayani was to be the remotest point
of their wanderings, whence they were to return homewards.

Monas was busily engaged in exchanging the merchandise for bales of
small bulk, containing fine calico and muslin, valuable gums, spices,
precious stones, and specie. Among his acquaintance there was an old
Guru named Govinda, who had travelled far and spoke Greek. He was a man
of profound learning though of Sudra caste, and was passing the evening
of his days at Ujjayani, occupied in speculative studies. Govinda had
taken a great fancy for the English lads, whose bright intelligence and
simple truthfulness first attracted his regard. After their bath in one
of the great tanks, they often passed hours conversing with the Guru,
asking him questions, and listening to his wonderful discourse. He was
generally in the verandah of a small garden-house near a large tank,
which was surrounded by flowering shrubs, and shaded by a large _vata_
tree. Here the Guru sat, an old man with a very benevolent expression
and high intellectual forehead, clothed in snow-white robes, often with
a bundle of reeds forming a book, and a _kalam_ in his hand. Coelred
and Porlor reclined on a step at his side, listening eagerly to what
he told them. The boys were in perfect health, being well cared for by
Monas as regards clothing and protection from the sun and from chills,
and living on a diet of rice and pulses duly seasoned, on fruits, and
milk. They were thus able to enjoy to the full all the wonders of their
sojourn at Ujjayani.

The Guru had told them many tales of Hindu gods and heroes. One
morning the boys came from their bath with a quantity of crimson
water-lilies, and a handful of the golden-coloured champaka flower,
sacred to Krishna. This led Govinda to tell them the story of the
_avatur_, calling Krishna the Son of God. They, in their turn, related
the legend of Balder, and, after reflecting a while, the Guru said that
Balder and Krishna were one, and that both were Christ. Remembering
the conversation with Monas, Porlor asked whether this Son of God with
several names, whom they all worshipped, existed _of_ two natures or
_in_ two natures. "Both," replied the Guru, and this bold solution
appeared at once to sweep away the motives for religious disputes which
sounded so incomprehensible to the boys. "Both, for whether of or in
two natures, the incarnation of a deity embraces and contains, and in
fact is, all that can be expressed by prepositions, and much more."

Then, descending from such sublime speculations, he said that he
would relate to his young friends the sequel of the story of the
Pandavas, those princes favoured by Krishna, including their search for
heaven after a long life of adventures and vicissitudes. The Pandavas
found that all the rewards of this life were vanity, and that they must
seek for higher and better things. "We must all do likewise sooner or
later, and meanwhile we may reflect on the story of the Pandavas,"
he went on. "There were five princes--Yudisthira, Arjuna, Bhima, and
the two sons of Madri. They set out with their wife Draupadi and
their dog Suparaka." "That is the name of our dear old dog at home!"
exclaimed Coelred. "True," said the Guru, "for Suparaka is Yama." He
continued--"The princes, with their beautiful wife and faithful dog,
set out for the mighty Himalaya Mountains, to find the heaven of the
gods on Mount Meru." "Is not Asgard the abode of the gods?" interrupted
Coelred. "Asgard is Meru," explained the long-suffering Guru; "but few
can reach it, trusting in their own strength. Sins and moral defects
prove fatal to the pilgrims. They toiled on over scorching plains and
snowy mountains, tired and foot-sore. Draupadi was the first to fall."
Porlor asked why she should be the first. "Her love for Arjuna was too
great," explained the Guru. "Next fell one of the sons of Madri, for
he thought that none was equal to himself; and the other son of Madri
followed, for he had the same fault. Then Arjuna fell, because he could
not fulfil his boast that he would destroy all his enemies in one day.
Bhima fell, because he cursed his opponents before he encountered them
in fight. Yudisthira and the dog Suparaka alone reached the gate of
heaven. The Prince was invited by the gods to enter, but he refused
unless Draupadi and his brothers were also received. He was assured
that they were already there. But he still refused, unless the faithful
dog Suparaka could bear him company. The gods remonstrated, but
Yudisthira was firm. 'Never, come weal or come woe, will I abandon that
faithful dog.' He prevailed, but when he entered he found that Draupadi
and his brothers were not in heaven. They cried to him for help from
hell. Yudisthira triumphed in the crowning trial. He resolved to share
the fate of his dear ones in hell, rather than enjoy heaven without
them. This was the supreme test applied by the gods. They then showed
him that it was all _maya_ or illusion, and the brothers, Draupadi, and
the dog dwell in heaven with the gods, in full content of heart for
ever."

Coelred and Porlor talked much over this story of Yudisthira when they
returned that evening to their home with Monas. They loved the Pandu
prince for standing by the good dog Suparaka, and they swore that they
would imitate the steadfast loyalty of Yudisthira.

Thus the days passed on, while Monas completed his business, and the
Guru related many strange tales to the English lads. One day, as they
sat with him, a dark mass of cloud rose from the southern horizon, and
moved rapidly northwards across the sky towards the Himalayan snows.
Old Govinda pointed to it, and said that it reminded him of Kalidasa's
poem of the _Cloud Messenger_. "Tell us about it," said both the boys;
and he related how Yaksha was banished for some fault by the god
Kuvera, and was sent to pass the years of his exile at Ramagiri, near
Nagpore, and to the south of Ujjayani, and of the Vindhyan Hills. One
day he saw a cloud, the herald of the rainy season, passing to the
north, just as the cloud we now see floats in the same direction. He
prayed to the cloud to take a message for him, after discharging some
of its moisture.

    With pinions swifter by the 'minisht store,
    Soon over Vindhyan mountains thou wilt soar,
    And Reva's rippling stream, whose waters glide
    Beneath their feet, without their rush and roar,
    In many a rock-bound channel, summer dried,
  Like lines of paint that deck an elephant's huge side.

The cloud passed on to this bright imperial city of Ujjayani, the
pride of all the earth. It rested on flower-sweet terraces where women
sit at open casements, while the air of the morning

    Plays wooingly around the loosened hair
    And fevered cheek--
    Then, as it blows o'er Sipra fresh and strong,
    Bids all her swans upon the banks prepare
    To hail the sunrise.

"The cloud hurries onward on its journey," said Porlor, "but whither
was Yaksha's message sent?" "It was sent," said the Guru, "to Alaka."
"To Alca!" exclaimed both the boys, as they sprang to their feet
in astonishment. Then, seeing the question in Govinda's eyes, they
explained that Alca was the beautiful Princess of Deira. "We love her
more than anything in the world. She knows everything. She loves all
living things. She can disclose all the hidden mysteries of nature. She
is our joy, our hope. Oh that the cloud would take a message to her
from us! Shall we pray to it? Answer us, good Govinda."

The Guru looked at the eager faces of the boys. He then pondered for
a long time. At last he said--"The Alaka of our religion is believed
to be the abode or the heaven of the Gandharva on Mount Meru. The
Gandharva is the being who knows and reveals the secrets of nature and
divine truth, and prepares the holy soma juice for the gods." He again
paused to think. "Your northern Princess Alca is the same as our Alaka,
the abode of the Gandharva of wisdom and truth, the depository of the
secrets of nature. You do well to love her. Pray then to the cloud
and it will take your message." The boys knelt down, praying long and
fervently to the cloud to take their message. It was that they were
well, that they had never forgotten her words, that they would return
to her. The Guru assured them that they had not prayed in vain. They
had never felt so happy since they parted from the Princess at Aldby.

Not many days afterwards they bade farewell to the Guru, who
had become warmly attached to them; for Monas had completed his
arrangements, the bales were ready, and they started on their return
journey to Barugaza. The boys had offered their old friend a gold ring
as a keepsake, which he declined. But when he saw them for the last
time he gave them a small parcel as an offering for their Princess. "It
contains," he said, "a very precious gum called bdellium, translucent
and fragrant. It is a trifle by which to remember me." "We shall never
forget you, dear Guru," exclaimed Coelred; and Porlor declared that
"Bdellium" should be their watchword and the watchword of their friends
for evermore. Soon Ujjayani and the Guru, Barugaza and its busy _ghat_,
were but memories. The north-east wind was taking their little vessel
homewards again across the Erythraean Sea.

One night, as old Monas sat aft by the steering oar, with Coelred and
Porlor near him, he asked the boys what they had been told by the Guru.
Porlor was full of his praises, and repeated the stories of Krishna and
of the Pandus; but something held the brothers back from mentioning the
Cloud Messenger to the aged pilot. They declared that the Guru was the
wisest, the most learned, and the most religious man in the world, and
that he was beloved by God. "The strange and incomprehensible questions
over which others quarrel for days and years, the Guru sees through and
settles with a word. He is generous, and says that all men, more or
less, are in the right way." Monas shook his head. "My friend Govinda,"
he said, "is learned and good. It grieves me to the heart that he will
assuredly be burnt in hell fire for ever and ever. Yet that must be
his fate, for he is unsound on all points of doctrine." It was on the
tip of Coelred's tongue to say he would go where the Guru went; but he
checked himself, for the boys loved old Monas, and made it a point not
to anger or annoy him. "Beware," he continued, "how you allow plausible
falsehoods to sink into your hearts. You are very young and will be
surrounded by dangers. May the Lord watch over you!"

On another night Monas explained their position to his young friends.
"Thanks to Prince Athanagild," he said, "you are very rich. Your
property consists of small bales easily carried but of great value, and
of gold coins and gems. The crew will be amply recompensed by a present
of the vessel and a generous distribution of money. We will land at
Berenike, to which port the voyage is much shorter than to Myos Hormos.
There camels can be procured, and the journey to the Nile will occupy
three days. I will accompany you to Alexandria and see you embarked for
Antioch. For myself I need nothing. I go to the cell of my old master,
who must now be dead, where I shall end my days happily, in prayer and
in the contemplation of the true nature of the incarnate Word. Your
destiny is very different. I am on the verge of the grave. You are
entering upon life. You are brave and true. May the blessing of God be
with you!"

It was very grateful to the old pilot to receive the warm thanks of
his young friends, knowing how true and genuine they were; and the
voyage passed pleasantly. The plans of Monas were admirably arranged.
The crew was satisfied, the journey across the desert and the voyage
down the Nile were performed without accident, and when Coelred and
Porlor left Alexandria in the vessel that was to convey them to the
port of Antioch, the last thing they saw was the white cloth with which
old Monas waved his farewell from the Pharos.




    CHAPTER VI

    IRAN


Sivel was a very intelligent and quick-witted boy, and he rapidly
learnt all his companions could teach him in the treasury office at
Antioch and in the mint. He was able to read and write, and had even
tried his hand on the dies for stamping coins. The decadence of art
had been very rapid since the days of Gallienus. All attempts at
portraiture on the coins had disappeared, though there was still a
head, and an angel with orb and cross on the reverse. It was not beyond
the powers of a clever boy like Sivel to tool the inscriptions, and
even to copy the rough effigy of the good Emperor. Not a few of the
rude letters traced on Byzantine money of this period are the work of
our English boy:

          TI MAVRICIVS IMP AN IX COS
          DN MAVRICIVS PP AVG,

or

          DN MAVRIC TIBER PF AVG;

and he was thus busily employed when the news spread that troops from
the Persian war were returning. Sivel lived, with several Greek clerks
in the employment of the Count of the Sacred Largesses, in a large room
opening on a court which formed part of the palace. As he worked one
day, two tall forms stood in the doorway, and in another moment the
delighted boy was wrapped in the tight embraces of Lilla and Bassus,
who had returned unhurt from the war, and with license to proceed on
their own affairs to Rome. Many days had not elapsed before Coelred and
Porlor, with their small but precious bales, also reached the Syrian
capital and found a safe place--an "_uvaru_" they called it--in which
to bestow their goods for the time. The lads were beside themselves
with joy at meeting once more, and they agreed that all, including
Sivel, should embark in the first vessel bound for Brundusium.

They longed to hear each other's stories, and when Porlor had related
the particulars of the wonderful voyage to India and back, Lilla
promised, with the help of his friend Bassus, to describe what they
had seen during the Persian war. On the next evening they assembled
under the shade of the grove of palm trees, outside the city gate,
whence they had beheld the arrival of Khosro Parviz before their
adventures began. Bassus first explained the cause of the war. "On the
dethronement and death of Hormazd IV., King of Persia," he said, "there
was great confusion. Bahram, the ablest of the Persian generals, gained
over the army and seized the government, while the King's son, Khosro
Parviz, took refuge in Roman territory. We all witnessed his arrival at
Antioch from this very spot, and we know that the Emperor graciously
resolved to restore the fugitive prince to the throne of his ancestors.
He was influenced in making this decision partly by policy, but mainly,
it is believed, by the generous dictates of his imperial nature. Our
master in the art of war, the great General Narses, received the
commands of the Emperor Maurice to execute his orders, and he planned
the campaign with consummate skill. It was known that Bahram, with
the Persian army, was posted in the Mesopotamian plain beyond the
river Tigris, and not far from the foot of the mountains. Narses
resolved that the Roman forces should enter Persia in two divisions.
The General himself, accompanied by the King of Persia, led the main
body from Antioch to the Tigris, while a Roman contingent, under the
command of John, the Prefect of Armenia, was to create a diversion by
breaking into the northern Persian province of Azerbijan. For Narses
had carefully studied the science of tactics and evolutions under the
eye of the Emperor, who was himself the author of twelve books on the
military art. You saw the army commence its march, and we parted in the
earnest hope that this happy day of meeting again would not be long
deferred. Lilla must now tell you of our march."

The thread of the story was then taken up by the fearless son of
Guthlaf. "As pages of the General," said Lilla, "we rode behind him,
and encamped near his tent. For several days we had to traverse a
vast desert, and we were often parched with thirst; but at length we
reached the river Tigris, passing over it near a great mound which,
we were told, covers the ruins of the most ancient city in the world,
called Nineveh. Crossing the river, our General made three rapid
marches to overtake the Persians, who were encamped at the foot of the
mountains. Then the wisdom of the strategy of Narses was made clear.
Hearing of the march of the Armenian contingent, the Persian General
feared lest it should fall on his rear, and he began a rapid march to
the northward to attack it. But the Prefect John had strict orders to
avoid an encounter; and eventually Bahram made a countermarch to cover
the city of Canzaca, towards which Narses was steadily advancing.
Leaving the plain, our way led us through the mountains of Media, to
Sirgan, on the plain of Ushnei, where a junction was formed with John's
contingent. Three days afterwards a great battle was fought in a hilly
country. For a time the Roman infantry fell back before the vigorous
charges of Persian horse, and Narses himself dashed into the thick of
the battle. We fought by his side, and when the victory was won the
General was so pleased with us that he gave us separate commands of
infantry companies. Next morning Bahram continued his retreat over
the mountains, closely pursued by us, and at night we pitched our
camp close to the Persian position. Still retreating, the Persians
descended into the plain in which their great city of Canzaca is built
on a high rock. Here the final and decisive battle was fought. Bassus
and I led on our men, and were long engaged in desperate encounters
side by side. At last we saw the enemy flying in all directions. But
we were too exhausted to follow them, and rested for three days on the
battle-field. Our General then occupied the Persian city of Canzaca.

"Khosro Parviz was overjoyed. Our army had made him once more King of
Kings, or _Malkan Malka_. He declared that the Emperor Maurice was his
father, requested a contingent of the Romans to remain in his service,
and promised great rewards to the rest. For a short time we were posted
in the wonderful city where the people worship fire which has been kept
burning for 700 years." Porlor and Coelred had both been too absorbed
in the story of the campaign to interrupt with questions, but now
Porlor asked whether fire was really the god of those people. "Yes,"
said Bassus, "we saw them worshipping before it. Canzaca is on a hill
which rises high above the plain, with a steep acclivity to the north
and west, and a sloping approach from the east. The brow of this hill
is crowned by a circlet of strong stone walls 12 feet wide, extending
for a great distance, with an arched gateway also of massive hewn
stone, leading into the town. In the highest part of the town there is
a lake, 300 paces round, with exquisitely clear water of a deep blue
colour, which has no bottom. And now I come to your question about the
fire. Near the lake there stands a fire-temple--_pyraeum_ the Greeks
call it. Built of bricks and cement, its walls are of great thickness,
and a narrow vaulted passage surrounds the central chamber. This
chamber has a great arch on each of its sides, and is surmounted by a
circular dome on which the stars of heaven are painted. A silver moon
is on the highest point. In the centre of this chamber is the altar
with the sacred fire. We have seen the King, Khosro Parviz, enthroned
there, surrounded by emblems of the sun and moon, with the golden globe
on his head, while all his people prayed to the flame on the altar."

"We used to sit on the walls," said Lilla, "and look over a vast
extent of country bounded by distant mountains. At our feet there was
a winding rocky ridge, the height of two men and 80 paces long, called
'the Dragon.' We were told that the monster was coming open-mouthed
to devour the city when it was suddenly transformed into stone by the
potent spell of the signet ring of an ancient king they call Solomon.
Certainly it was lying on the plain before us, like a winding serpent
of stone. We were offered commands by the King of Persia, which we
declined, and the General then said that we deserved some reward and
might name it. So we asked for license to go to Rome, where friends
urgently needed our presence, which was granted. Narses said that he
was sorry to part with us when we took leave, and we set out with
a small escort. We had to cross the Median mountains to reach the
plains of Mesopotamia, and in the pass my Bassus was so badly hurt by
a fall with his horse that we had to remain at a place called Sideh
for several days." "Did they also worship fire in that place?" asked
Porlor. "No," said Lilla, "they had a stranger worship. They believe in
an ancient bird called the Simurg, which has been alive since the world
began. Passing to and fro over the earth from the beginning, the Simurg
has seen everything. It therefore knows everything, and is a bird of
great wisdom. Its counsel is sought for, but it is seldom seen, and its
abode is believed to be on the mountain peak of Demavend. They worship
a figure of the Simurg made of silver, which we saw. It was on a raised
platform, and has a swelling breast, small head, and wide-spreading
tail. Two lamps are always burning before it, and close by there is a
jug filled with water, to be used as a spell for the sick and afflicted
when the Simurg cannot be consulted in person. As soon as Bassus was
well enough we left Sideh, descended into the plain, and, after a long
and tedious journey, arrived at Antioch without further accident."

"How wonderful are the numbers of gods!" observed Porlor. "We have
found people not only worshipping the Son of God under many names, but
also bowing down to snakes, cows, and monkeys. Now you tell us that
there are people who worship a flame of fire, and others whose belief
is in an ancient bird. Many of their creeds are incomprehensible, but
the Princess Alca will explain it all to us when we go home." Coelred
warmly thanked Lilla and Bassus for the story of their campaign, which
had been of absorbing interest to him, and for telling him and Porlor
of all the wonders they had seen. A very happy evening had been passed
under the palm trees.

The subsequent days were occupied in preparations for the voyage to
Brundusium. A vessel had been hired at Seleucia and was ready to sail,
when a great calamity overtook the friends. Little Sivel was missing.
He had not been seen since the evening when Lilla and Bassus related
their adventures. The other lads had taken leave of him in the street,
but his companions in the treasury said that he never came home.
Several days were wasted in a vain search. At last Lilla remembered
that, while passing through a crowd in the _agora_ the day after his
arrival, he for a moment caught sight of a face which reminded him of
Mystacon. The incident had passed from his memory, being full of other
exciting thoughts at the time. "I see it all!" exclaimed Porlor. The
rest turned to him for an explanation, but he declared there was no
time to explain, and that they must hurry down to the port of Seleucia.
Porlor instituted inquiries at once, through the agent for their
vessel, and sure enough Mystacon the merchant had been there. He had
sailed, on his way to Rome, three days before. Further inquiry elicited
the fact that some one, muffled up in cloths and gagged, had been
carried on board.

"We are too late!" exclaimed Porlor. "We must follow quickly to Rome
and effect the rescue there. For the villainy is unmasked. Mystacon
has seen Pamphronius, who has offered large sums for the recovery of
his slaves. He has found out that our Sivel was at Antioch, with his
value greatly increased owing to his acquired knowledge and well-known
ability, of which every one talks. He has kidnapped our boy and taken
him to Rome, with the object of extorting a heavy sum from Pamphronius,
and he will probably keep Sivel concealed until it is paid." They were
all wild with rage. "To the rescue! to the rescue!" they shouted.
"Death to Mystacon and Pamphronius!" Their preparations were soon made.
Next day the captain and crew were on board, the anchor was up, and the
vessel was bowling along before a fresh easterly breeze. But it was a
long stern chase.

The lads held many consultations during the voyage. Great caution
would be necessary, for they were resolved not only to rescue Sivel,
but also to kill Mystacon, and perhaps Pamphronius. Otacilia, the widow
of Symmachus Boethius, who had always been very kind to Coelred and
Porlor, and disliked Pamphronius, had manumitted all her husband's
slaves. This news had reached Antioch. Coelred and Porlor, in order to
be close to the scene of action, would therefore seek, and felt sure
of obtaining, hospitality in the great rambling villa of the departed
Symmachus. Lilla and Bassus would take up their quarters, as imperial
officers, in lodgings within the old Praetorian camp. Their friends
at the monastery would be eager to help as soon as the news was told
them. Then a watch must be kept on the Pamphronian villa, while Lilla
was to visit his old master, and ascertain whether Sivel was already
there. All the haunts of Mystacon were also to be searched, and further
details were to be settled hereafter, as they must depend on the course
of events.

Thus did these lads rack their brains to devise the surest way of
rescuing their beloved companion. Coelred and Porlor were rich, and
easily defrayed the expenses of the vessel, and of posting rapidly
from Brundusium to Rome. It was early in the year 595 that the four
lads returned. Six years had passed since the mortifying scene in the
slave-market. Lilla and Coelred had now reached the age of eighteen,
Porlor was sixteen years old. Both Coelred and Porlor were hospitably
received by Otacilia, as they anticipated, and the heroes from Persia
were lodged in the old camp. Next day they all hurried to greet and to
consult with their comrades in the monastery of St. Andrew.




    CHAPTER VII

    THE RESCUE OF SIVEL


Once more the little society of English boys was assembled at its
old trysting-place under the cypress trees, near the _navicula_, on
the Caelian Hill--all but Sivel. When the first transports of joy at
meeting again were over, they gazed on each other and rejoiced at the
changes they saw, from weak boys to be sold and beaten, to powerful
young warriors who were able to defend themselves. Forthere was nearly
mad with rage and anxiety when he heard of the abduction of his young
cousin. He had become a strong and muscular youth, a most formidable
antagonist, as impulsive as ever, and otherwise unchanged--a vigorous
foe, but a true and faithful friend. Little Godric was still a boy.
Hereric had grown into a youth of singular grace and beauty. He was now
sixteen, and he had an air of cultivation and breeding, due partly to
his high rank, but also to the knowledge he had acquired. He could read
and write, and had become a sincere Christian. If he had a fault, it
was that he relied too much on the probity of others, and was easily
deceived by designing men. Forthere and Godric were devoted to the
Atheling, as indeed were all his companions. No one could know the
Deiran Prince without loving him. To the sons of Seomel and to Lilla he
was almost a brother.

Hereric had startling news to tell. He had passed most of his time
studying under Laurentius in the monastery of St. Andrew. But Forthere
and Godric, refusing to work at books, were sent to Monte Cassiano,
where they were employed in the fields or at the works connected with
the extension of the monastery. They were often in trouble, owing to
their decided aversion for the _Regula Monachorum_ of St. Benedict; and
they had recently been brought back to the Caelian Hill.

Gregory had not forgotten his intention to introduce Christianity
into England, the land of the beautiful children in the market-place.
Three had been brought up in the monastery on the Caelian, and one
at least would now make an excellent interpreter. He resolved to
entrust the mission to his prior of St. Andrew, whose reward was to
be the bishopric of the new diocese. Augustine was to be accompanied
by Laurentius and Peter, Hereric and his two companions, and several
monks and attendants. Letters were written to the Queens Fredegonda and
Brunehaud for protection while passing through their dominions; and
to Vergilius, the Bishop of Arles, to bespeak hospitality. Brunehaud
promised also to provide an interpreter. Hereric had been told of the
mission, and was, of course, delighted at so good an opportunity of
returning home, provided that all his companions were equally favoured.
But as the day for starting approached, the monks showed great
repugnance to being employed on such a service. They were terrified,
and although Augustine was not so faint-hearted, he looked upon the
undertaking as being full of danger. The truth was that Forthere had
been telling the monks such stories about England as made their hair
stand on end. The time was very near; for the departure of the mission
was to take place on the very next day, the 21st of July 596.

When all the news had been exchanged, the boys were long in
consultation. The plans for the discovery and rescue of Sivel were laid
with care and circumspection. But Forthere was torn different ways. He
could not endure leaving Rome with his adopted brother still in the
hands of the villain Mystacon; yet his devotion for the Atheling made
it equally hard to quit the mission and remain. Hereric settled the
question. "Forthere, my more than brother, your duty is clear. Sivel is
the adopted son of your valorous father, Brand of Ulfskelf. You must
follow the quest for him until his rescue is achieved. The loss to me
is greater than I can tell you. But our Godric is growing to be a man,
and a brave one. He will be my faithful companion and true soldier in
your absence." Young Godric's face flushed with pleasure, while Hereric
and Forthere clasped each other in a long, silent embrace. "But," added
the Atheling, as he gazed into Forthere's eyes, "you must follow the
rede of Porlor, and the guidance of Coelred and Lilla. Strike when they
give the signal, but not before. Your blow is strong and sure. Let it
fall at the appointed time, and not too suddenly, my Forthere. God
bless you all, and may our next meeting be in our own land, with Sivel
in our midst!"

It was clear that, if the boys accomplished all they intended, Rome
would be too hot to hold them. Their course of action must be guided
by events, but their general plan was to have horses always ready at
the Symmachan villa, to overpower the guard at one of the gates when
their work was done, and to join the army of the Lombard King. Thence
they would make their way, by fair means or foul, to their native land.
Coelred prevailed upon Hereric to take a good supply of money, and the
Atheling also undertook to convey the small but precious bales from
India, as part of his own baggage. It was the only chance of their
reaching England.

Next day the mission left Rome. Pope Gregory offered up prayers, said
mass at St. Peter's, and gave the monks his blessing. No attempt was
made to oblige Forthere to go when he refused. A more woebegone set of
wretches than the monks of this mission could not be conceived. They
looked miserable and terror-stricken. Augustine was supported by the
importance and responsibility of his position, Laurentius and Peter
were good men and true, but the rest were very poor creatures. Hereric
and Godric, alert and armed, brought up the rear, and long did they
wave their caps to their beloved comrades, who stood on Aurelian's Wall
to see the last of them. Two days afterwards Augustine came back alone.
The cowardly terror of his monks had so increased that they sent their
prior to entreat the holy Gregory that they should not be compelled to
undertake so dangerous, toilsome, and uncertain a journey. But the holy
Gregory was inexorable. He sent back Augustine, telling them that "it
was better not to begin a good work than to think of desisting from
that which had been begun. It behoves you, my beloved sons," he went
on, "to fulfil the good work which, by the help of our Lord, you have
undertaken, being assured that much labour is followed by an eternal
reward. When Augustine returns, humbly obey him in all things." So the
cowardly missionaries had to go on; but very few intended to trust
their precious skins beyond Arles, or some other safe place for monks
in the south of France. Forthere was much amused at the return of
Augustine, believing that his stories had played a part in frightening
the monks, whom he thoroughly despised.

Meanwhile the plans for the rescue were put in train without delay.
On the first day Bassus and Porlor watched the approaches to the
Pamphronian villa. Coelred searched the warehouses under the Aventine
Hill, where they had all been confined when they first came to Rome.
But the place was deserted. Lilla and Forthere went through every
street and lane in the Suburra, scanning each face that passed them,
but without result. Next day the rescuers were more fortunate. Forthere
was again prowling in the vilest purlieus of the Suburra, when he
caught sight of a face he recognised. Its owner was muffled in a
cloak, which he drew quickly over his head, and ran at speed down a
narrow lane. In another moment the hand of Forthere was upon him. His
struggles were unavailing, and he was dragged out into the open space
at the foot of the Palatine, gagged, and bound. Forthere was almost
certain that the face was that of one of the servants of Mystacon. The
sun had set, and as soon as it was dusk the vigorous young Englishman
half carried and half dragged his captive across the Forum, and down
the Appian Way to the garden of the villa of Symmachus. Forthere shared
a _cubiculum_ in the villa with his cousins. In this little room he
deposited the living bundle, and left him still more securely bound and
gagged. He required the rede of Porlor and his other comrades before
proceeding further. He found Coelred and Bassus watching the villa of
Pamphronius, while Porlor and Lilla returned from fruitless searches
soon afterwards. They all began to examine their prisoner.

The man swore that he had never seen his captors before, and had
never heard of Mystacon; but they all recognised him, so he was turned
on his back, a sword was put on his throat, and he was told that it
would be drawn across it if he told a single lie. They then found
that Sivel had been several days at Rome, confined in a house in the
Suburra; not ill treated, the man declared, but only kept secure. All
this time Mystacon had been bargaining for the full price of Sivel to
be paid again to him if he was restored, pretending that he was not
actually in Rome. Pamphronius offered half the price. He was furious
at the way his slaves had been taken from him, and would pay high for
the mere spiteful pleasure of getting them into his power. A bargain
had at length been struck, and Sivel was to be delivered over to his
master the next day, after noon. The man was tied up again, gagged, and
secured in the stable.

After a consultation, it was decided that the intended preliminary
interview between Lilla and Pamphronius would be unnecessary. They
now knew all they wanted to know. They would watch for the arrival of
Mystacon and his victim, and effect the rescue by force. All the old
fury that they had felt when they first heard that they were to be
sold as slaves came back to them--the mortification and the burning
shame. Forthere was beside himself with rage at the thoughts of the
old insults and of the danger to which his beloved little brother was
still exposed. It would be a bad time for Mystacon when he next met the
outraged lads. In the morning they looked carefully to their arms; and
saw that the horses were ready for a start at any moment, with a small
supply of food for each rider.

In the afternoon all five comrades concealed themselves behind a
ruined wall, and kept careful watch over the villa of Pamphronius. It
was thought better to allow the slave-dealer with his party to enter
than to attack him in the road, where they might be interrupted.
Forthere had a heavy club, the rest were armed with swords. All
had long knives. After an anxious interval, they at length heard
many footsteps. First came Mystacon himself, looking proud and
self-satisfied, and it was with the greatest difficulty that Forthere
could restrain himself from flying at the villain's throat. Then
followed a closed litter, carried by slaves, and half a dozen armed
men. The doors of the villa were closed, but when Mystacon knocked and
uttered the words "Servus Captus" in a loud voice, they were thrown
open. The little procession passed in, and they were quickly closed and
barred again. The boys rushed towards the doors, furious and baffled;
but Porlor made a sign for silence. He then knocked in his turn and
said "Servus Captus" in a loud voice. Again the doors were thrown
open, and a tall slave appeared. Porlor flew at his throat, and the
unexpected assault threw him off his balance. He fell without uttering
a sound, and in another instant Forthere had cut his throat. They were
now in the large deserted _atrium_. At the other end there were heavy
curtains concealing the great hall, and behind them they heard voices.

The five lads pulled themselves together. They were well armed, but
they were about to face heavy odds if the attendants showed fight.
They drew their swords. "Ready?" cried Coelred, and the curtains were
torn aside. Coelred and Forthere occupied the entrance, while Lilla
and Bassus rushed across the hall to the opposite door, to prevent all
escape. Porlor then advanced a little and looked round. On the right,
at a table, were Pamphronius and Mystacon. On the left was Sivel tied
hands and feet, and held by two slaves, with half a dozen armed men
behind them. To send the slaves flying and cut the bonds was the work
of an instant. Porlor put his arm round Sivel, who flew to his side.
The other four lads made a furious onslaught on the armed men. Lilla
ran the foremost through the body, Bassus cut down another, and the
rest threw down their swords and surrendered. "The first that moves
is a dead man," cried Coelred, and Forthere proceeded to secure and
gag them. Pamphronius and Mystacon remained to be dealt with. The
slave-dealer's face was blanched with fear. Too well he recognised his
assailants. But the patrician tried to put a bold face on the matter.
"The Holy Father will make you all answer for this outrage," he cried.
"Osvitus and Sivellus are my property. I have a right to recover them.
They belong to me." This was more than Forthere could stand. To his
astonishment Pamphronius found himself seized by the throat and dragged
into the middle of the room. "Miserable wretch!" shouted the enraged
Englishman. "Lilla is the descendant of God, Sivel is the brother of
a goddess. Their fathers were brave warriors who could make a hundred
such creatures as you run before them. You are not good enough to be
their slave. Kneel down and ask their pardon, or I will smash your
skull," and he raised the heavy club he had brought with him. The
patrician had never been spoken to in this way in all his life. But
he was in mortal terror, and did what he was told. "Shall I kill the
niddring?" asked Forthere. "It is not necessary," said Porlor. So he
was well tied up, gagged, and rolled into a corner. Then Mystacon
was brought forward howling for mercy, and reminding the boys of all
his kindness. "For you, vile wretch," said Coelred, "there can be no
forgiveness. You had fair warning. We prayed to you to spare us from
shame and humiliation, and you had no mercy. We told you then that we
would kill you, and Englishmen always keep faith. You must die, and at
our hands." He made a sign to Forthere, who ran Mystacon through and
through, and he fell dead. "We could not have left Rome with honour,"
said Coelred, "until this was done."

[Illustration: Death of Mystacon]

They all went quickly to the villa of Symmachus, and prepared to mount
their horses. Coelred and Porlor had already explained what was about
to happen to their kind old friend Otacilia, and taken their leave.
"Will you be able to ride, my Sivel?" asked Forthere, as he tenderly
embraced his recovered brother. "Anywhere with you," replied the
boy. He looked very pale and ill. But there was no time to be lost.
They hastily mounted, and, led by Coelred, they galloped down to the
Asinarian Gate. The guard turned out, and was attacked furiously by
the Englishmen. Two men were cut down, and the rest ran away for help.
Bassus and Lilla dismounted to unbar and throw open the gates, and they
all galloped out into the starry night. For several hours they rode on
at a steady pace, but they did not appear to have been followed. So
they stopped for a few hours of rest before sunrise, tethered their
horses, and were soon fast asleep. Next day they continued to ride
northwards, stopping at noon for a short siesta. All this time they had
been too eager while riding, and too tired when resting, to consult
much with each other; and they were awakened from their noonday sleep
by a great band of armed and mounted warriors who surrounded them.
Roughly seized, they were almost in despair when they were dragged
before the commander of this force.

But all turned out well. In the handsome warrior with huge drooping
moustache Coelred was reminded of the Gothic Prince Athanagild. "He
must be of our kindred," he thought, and spoke to him in English,
saying that he and his companions were Englishmen, escaping from
bondage at Rome, who threw themselves on his protection. The commander
was well pleased, received the lads as his countrymen, and enlisted
them in his force. It was quite providential that they should have
fallen in with these Saxons, for they would be taken by them in safety
within easy reach of England. A large Saxon army of nearly 20,000 men
had entered the service of Agilulphus, who ascended the throne of the
Lombards in 590. But they were not satisfied, and were about to return
in a body to their own country on the lower Rhine. There was nothing
to stop them, and a few months after our English lads entered their
ranks they commenced their march over the Alps, and down the course of
the Rhine, a journey presenting physical difficulties, and of great
interest, but involving no danger when in such powerful company. This
protection continued until our young heroes found themselves on the
shores of the German Ocean, facing their own native land. They had
resolved to return from the first. They were always confident that the
happy day would come. Alca had told them that they were not to die in a
distant land. Now they were full of joyful anticipations. Her words, as
they always knew, were true. The years of banishment were past and gone
for ever.




    PART III

    WORK


          So much to do that is not e'en begun.
          So much to hope for that we cannot see,
          So much to win, so many things to be.

                                         L. MORRIS.




    CHAPTER I

    THE STORY OF AUGUSTINE


Six tall young warriors landed one summer morning on the British shore,
at Ebbs-fleet, in the Isle of Thanet. They were healthy, and strong,
and goodly to look upon. The eldest was a dark Italian, the others
with the fair hair and florid complexions of Englishmen. Young Sivel
had quite recovered his health and good looks, and all were alert and
ready for anything that might betide. It was the last year of the sixth
century. Their eager inquiries were answered by the news that some
Italian monks and two English lads had landed two years before, and had
been allowed to establish themselves at Canterbury, the capital of the
kingdom of Kent.

The Jutes who formed the Kentish settlement had been near neighbours
of the English on the Continent, and like the royal houses of
Bernicia and Deira, the AEskingas of Kent were descended from Woden.
King Ethelbert had succeeded his father Imeric in 561, and was now
an old man, having reigned for thirty-eight years. He had married a
Frankish princess, Bertha, the daughter of Charibert, King of Paris.
They were an aged couple, and their son Eadbald had arrived at man's
estate. Ethelbert, in spite of one crushing defeat which he received
at Wimbledon from Ceaulin and Cutha of Wessex in 568, had been a
successful ruler. Northwards his influence extended to the Humber.
Sledda, the King of Essex, who married his sister Ricula, acknowledged
his sovereignty, and he was received by all the English people south
of the Humber as Bretwalda, or overlord. As the Queen Bertha was a
Christian, she had always had a priest in attendance upon her, and
Luidhard, the Bishop of Senlis, was now her chaplain.

The young warriors became acquainted with these particulars on their
arrival, and, as horses could not be procured at once, they set out on
foot for Canterbury. The first person they met, superintending some
buildings outside the town, was their old friend Peter. He told them
that Hereric and Godric were safe and well, and conducted them to the
temporary monastery, where the Atheling and his young companion were
soon embracing their friends. At length all the boys were again united.
Soon they sat down round Hereric, to hear the story of his adventures.

"I and Godric," he said, "saw you all waving to us from the wall of
Aurelian as we rode out of Rome, looking so tall and strong, and we
were happy in the certainty that, if it was God's will, you would
rescue our Sivel. It was a mournful journey, for the unwilling monks
did nothing but sigh and groan with coward fear, for which our Forthere
was partly answerable. The stories they told, on his authority, were
enough to appal even brave men, which they certainly were not. At
last they sent back the Prior to entreat the Holy Father to allow
them to return to Rome. But Gregory's reply urged them to proceed,
and the threats of Augustine obliged them to continue the journey.
When we arrived at Arles, the good bishop Vergilius received us most
hospitably, and supplied us with the means of carrying ourselves and
our goods across France. Here many of the monks feigned sickness, and
declared that they could not travel. They were left behind, and others
fell away when we passed through towns where there were convents with
the Benedictine rule. Queen Brunehaud of Austrasia sent us a Frankish
interpreter, but although I could understand him, he had no knowledge
of English, and was useless in the interpretation of Augustine's Latin.
We went over much of the road we all know so well, and at Amfleet our
pitiful condition, when we stood shivering on the sand, came back to
our minds.

"Forty very cowardly monks and servants left Rome. Only a fourth
part embarked at Amfleet. The party consisted of the Prior Augustine,
Laurentius and Peter, Godric and I, and five convent servants. We
landed in the island of Thanet, which, as you saw, is separated from
Kent by the river Wantsum, nearly a mile in width. All now depended
upon us, for the monks could not speak a word to the people, and the
Frank sent by Queen Brunehaud was of little or no use. I proposed to
Augustine that I should go to the King of the country, announce his
arrival, and ask for license to land. The Prior consented, but enjoined
me to conceal my rank and name. I rode to Canterbury, and was allowed
to have an interview with King Ethelbert and his son Eadbald. The Queen
was also present, and the Bishop of Senlis. They received me very
kindly, and allowed me to keep my name and rank from them until a time
when I could more fitly divulge it. Eadbald did not wish that the monks
should be allowed to remain. But the Queen and her bishop strongly
urged their cause, and I was sent back with a message that they might
remain until Ethelbert had seen them, when they would hear further.

"I returned to Thanet, and, by order of the King, we were supplied
with provisions and a house. Here were stored the precious Eastern
bales of Coelred and Porlor, five books sent by Gregory, a cross and
a picture, and some vestments. A few days afterwards the King came to
Thanet, and, sitting in the open air, he ordered our company to be
brought before him. He would not let us come into his presence under
a roof, lest we should practise any magical arts so as to impose upon
him, and get the better of him. The Prior formed the most imposing
procession possible under the circumstances. First he came himself
bearing a silver cross in his hand, with Laurentius and Peter close
behind him, carrying a board with the Son of God painted upon it. Next
came Godric and I, while the five convent servants brought up the rear,
singing a litany. The King ordered Augustine to deliver his message,
and when I explained the royal words, the Prior began to preach in
Latin until they all seemed weary, for not a word did they understand.
He then told me to repeat what he had said in English more briefly,
which I did, giving only the substance of his discourse. The King and
those with him seemed very favourably impressed; and not only was
permission granted for the monks to live in Canterbury, but a promise
was given to supply them with all necessaries, and they had license to
preach the new religion."

"All this was due to Hereric alone," interrupted Godric. "The Prior
was so long and unintelligible that they were all weary of him, and I
am sure that he and his monks would have been sent straight back to
France. But when the Atheling stood up, not stooping with a cowl over
his head, but erect and graceful, with his golden hair waving in the
breeze, the scene changed as if by magic. All eyes were turned to him,
and every man present listened eagerly. His voice, as we all know,
is sweet and pleasant to hear. He described the wonderful birth and
the good works of Jesus. He related the events of His death with such
feeling that the Kentish warriors swore great oaths, while Ethelbert
sprang to his feet, drew his sword, and waved it over his head with
excitement. The monks were terrified. The servants ran away, Augustine
and Laurentius cowered down, old Peter alone stood his ground. They
understood nothing, but heard the oaths and saw the old King with his
drawn sword, vowing vengeance on the Jews. There was a long pause.
Then, in a gentler voice, Hereric declared to them that the Son of God
had risen from the dead to save all, of every nation under heaven,
who turned to Him for comfort and help in the hour of death. When he
stopped there was not one present, from the King downwards, who was not
willing to grant anything the Atheling might ask."

"Nay," said Hereric, "our Godric goes too far. I was but the
instrument to convey Augustine's meaning in English words." "It was
not the words," persisted Godric; "it was the gracious person that
delivered the discourse, and the way he spoke the words, that won
all hearts. Say, my brothers, who was it that deserves the praise?"
"Hereric! Hereric!" they all shouted, Forthere more vociferously than
the rest. "It is the partial voice of love," resumed Hereric, "which
methinks is a little beyond reason. Say no more of me, I pray." "We
must speak out," said Forthere, "for the jealous monks will not put
thy name into their chronicle, it will be Augustine who did it all."
Hereric looked distressed, and the subject was dropped. "We all marched
to Canterbury," he continued, "and as we drew near the city, with the
cross raised on high, Augustine caused another litany to be sung. We
were temporarily lodged in a house, where the Prior at once established
and put in force the _Regula Monachorum_ of St. Benedict, in use at
St. Andrew's on the Caelian Hill. As the monks were unable to preach
intelligibly, they had to be contented with good works for a time."
"Yes," said the incorrigible Godric, "they have resorted to signs and
wonders and miraculous cures. Augustine performed more miracles in the
short time he was at Canterbury than he ever dared to attempt during
his former life, under the eye of Gregory at Rome. I can work some of
them myself." "So can I," added Forthere, "and I know very well how
others are done." The Atheling took no notice of this interruption.
"There is," he went on, "on the east side of this city a church built
by the Romans, and dedicated to St. Martin, of whom we all heard at
the Gate of the Twins outside Amiens, when we were in the power of
Mystacon. Here the Frankish Bishop performs Christian services for the
Queen. Here the monks say masses and baptize, and Ethelbert himself has
submitted to the rite of baptism. But the people hold back, encouraged
by Eadbald. Augustine himself is not here. He has hurried back to
France to be consecrated by the Bishop of Arles; but before he went
he had obtained from the King the grant of another old Roman church,
which he has dedicated to St. Peter and St. Paul, and where he has
begun to build a monastery. It was there that you met old Peter, who is
to be the first Abbot. I have promised to remain here until Augustine
returns as Bishop, and until I have taught Laurentius and Peter enough
English to enable them to preach to the people. Godric has promised
to stay with me, and I know Forthere will also. You all need rest.
Besides, our absence has been long, and we have heard no news. I have
indeed received a rumour that Ella, our King, is dead, and that our
country has been seized by the Bernicians. I fear that it will be a
sad home-coming for most of us. Let us give ourselves a little time
for preparation to bear our sorrows manfully. I would fain desire that
we should all come home together." They unanimously agreed to wait
for Hereric, and to go home in his company. It was a great joy to be
together again, not only with no one missing, but with one more, the
faithful Bassus, added to their company.

"At one time," said Godric, "I feared that our Atheling would become a
monk, but now I know that he never will." "Wherefore?" asked the rest.
"Because he is in love," replied Godric. Hereric blushed crimson when
Godric went on to declare that the name of Braga was often on his lips
when he slept. "Truly," said Porlor, "the Prince used to be very fond
of our little sister. If he ever had a present to give, it was always
for Braga. Do you remember, Coelred, the day when Alca came to visit
us at Stillingfleet? That very day Hereric presented little Braga with
a pretty scarf. I think it was the last gift she received from any of
us." "Hereric is not the only one," said Forthere, wishing to turn
attention from the Atheling. "Lilla is also in love, if words spoken
in sleep are to be so explained. Twice have I heard him whispering
the name of Bergliot." "'Tis true," said Coelred, "that the young
Princess's last message was for our Oswith, when she left us on that
fatal day." So the light talk went on, full of joyous reminiscences
of home and friends; until Hereric said that they must all speak
reverently of their loved ones, if they spoke at all, until they knew
certainly what had befallen.

During the days that they were waiting for Augustine, the companions
helped Peter in his work at the monastery, and Hereric was a good deal
employed in teaching English to the monks. In the long summer evenings
they engaged in conversations. The most important took place a few days
before they all set out for home, and was chiefly conducted by Porlor.
He dwelt upon their peculiar position among their countrymen, and
suggested rules of conduct. "We are like men apart," he said. "I have
felt already in my intercourse with the AEskingas that there is a sort
of gulf between us. Our knowledge is immeasurably greater than that of
our people. This is not due to any merit of our own, but simply to what
has happened. But it is a fact. We are as if we had been born in some
later age."

"I do not think that Godric and I know very much more than our
countrymen," said Forthere. "It is true," replied Porlor, "that there
are differences amongst us. Hereric is as learned as any monk. Sivel
understands the laws and the arts of the Greeks. Both can read and
write. Lilla and Bassus have acquired a practical knowledge of Roman
strategy. Coelred and I have learnt much in our wanderings. Nor can
Forthere and Godric be left out. They too have stored up knowledge in
their travels and at Rome. No, Forthere; you and Godric are included
in all that I shall say. What I feel is that our knowledge is a gift
from above, but a gift that we must not use for ourselves only. It is
a trust that we are to use for our people, and we must think how it
can best be used. My fear is that if we openly proclaim our greater
knowledge, if we suddenly begin to tell of what we know and to advise,
if we assume that we are wiser than our people, we shall be distrusted,
by many disbelieved, and our power for good will pass away. Remember
Coifi. All men confess that he is more learned than any one else in
Deira, yet who would listen to him in counsel or take his advice? He
talks too much, and is without credit or influence."

The others thought a great deal over what Porlor had said. On
the next evening Lilla continued the discussion. "We have," he
began, "been gifted with rare knowledge and experience, such as
our fellow-countrymen can never possess except through equally
extraordinary accidents. Our gifts are, as Porlor says, a trust to be
used with great care for our country. I have thought long over the
matter, and I believe with him that we shall lose the power we may
surely gain unless we act wisely. What think you, my Coelred?" "My
rede is," said Coelred, "that, accepting the counsel and the warning
of Porlor, we should keep silence until such time as the knowledge
that any of us possesses above that of our countrymen would be useful
to them. Then we should use it, but even then by action rather than by
speech. Such conduct will be very hard to adopt, and we shall need much
counsel amongst ourselves." Hereric added that he agreed with all that
had been said, except that the Princess Alca and their other loved ones
must be told all they knew, withholding nothing. In this all concurred.
Sivel asked Porlor to propose rules of conduct which might serve as
laws for them in this grave matter.

Next day Porlor said, "I have been thinking carefully over a scheme
for us to adopt. We are dear friends, tried by companionship in danger,
in sorrow, in shame, in hardships, and we know and are certain that
our friendship can have no change for ever. We must make a compact to
watch over our gifts for the good of our countrymen. We must often
take counsel with each other how to maintain our credit and influence,
and how to use our gifts prudently and wisely. We will be one body,
devoted to the weal of our countrymen, but in a sense apart. We will
form a _Gemot_ of close friends and brothers for ever." The rede of
Porlor was the judgment of all. They clasped hands upon it, and the
Coelred-_Gemot_ was formed.

Soon afterwards Augustine returned in all the importance of his
episcopal dignity. His head was busy about the things pertaining to
his office. Although as yet he scarcely had a flock, he promptly sent
a long series of puzzling questions to Gregory about the degrees of
kindred within which members of his flock might marry, and on other
abstruse points. He also began to work miracles again, and to quarrel
with the Welsh bishops about the calculation of the date of Easter. He
did not conceal his satisfaction that Hereric was about to leave him,
which surprised the simple-minded Atheling, but which did not surprise
Godric or Forthere. Hereric explained to the King of Kent that he was
a Prince of the house of Deira, and Ethelbert ordered an escort to see
him and his friends as far as the Humber. A message was also sent to
London, to secure hospitality for them from Sledda, the King of Essex.
Ethelbert wished them a cordial farewell. They also had a friendly
parting from their old teachers, Laurentius and Peter, who gave their
blessings.

They first rode to London, then sparsely inhabited, and saw the old
Roman walls, the ruins of the temple of Diana on the hill, and the
_miliarium_ whence all the main roads diverged. Sledda and his wife
Ricula received them well in the ruined old praetorium near the temple,
and sent them on their way with a fresh relay of horses. In two days
they came to the country of the Gainas, and reached Godric's home near
the banks of the Idle. To the boy's great joy he found his old father
Ulchel still alive, but failing, and their meeting was most pathetic.
The friends were received very hospitably, and Bassus, who was ill,
remained behind with Godric until they should be sent for by Coelred.
The rest pressed northwards, with pack-horses bearing the precious
bales. They intended to proceed in a body to Bilbrough, and hear all
the news, bad and good, from their kind old friend Saebald the Fairfax,
before they ventured to seek their homes. Going rapidly along the old
Roman road, they came in sight of the well-known Ingrish Hill with
feelings of deep anxiety.




    CHAPTER II

    HOME AGAIN


Saebald, chief of the Billingas, had just returned from visiting his
outposts on the Wharfe. He was standing at the gate of his burg when
he beheld six horsemen and some pack animals advancing towards him up
the hill. As they came nearer he saw that the men were fully armed
and accoutred, but he could not guess who they could be. They rode
up, dismounted, and stood before him. He looked from one to the other
with doubt and astonishment, until his eyes rested upon Sivel, whom he
recognised at once. In a moment they were in each other's arms, and
Sivel spoke the names of his companions. It was long before Saebald
could recognise his little friends in these stalwart young warriors.
His surprise was extreme, but his welcome was hearty and cordial. He
showed unfeigned joy at their marvellous reappearance. "Knowing your
friendship," said Coelred, "we came here first to hear from you all
that has happened in our absence, for we know nothing. We did not
dare to go to our homes, fearing to find empty hearths." He then very
briefly told the story of the kidnapping, said that they had had many
strange adventures, but that they had sworn to each other to come home
together, and that at length they had succeeded. "Our stories will
keep," he added, "but our anxiety is so great that we cannot wait
longer for your news." Saebald insisted upon their having supper first,
and then they went out and sat round the Billinga chief on the hillside.

"You have given me a melancholy task," said the Fairfax, "for I shall
cause grief and pain to each one of my young friends. No anxiety was
felt until you had been missing for two days. Then search was made
in every direction, and vigilant watch was kept on the rivers. The
Princess Bergliot was overwhelmed with grief, and told some story
about the curse of a nixy, but neither she nor the dog could guide the
search farther than to the mouth of Stillingfleet beck. Guthlaf stopped
every boat that passed up and down the river, hanging all the crews
whose answers did not satisfy him. By this means many sea-thieves were
disposed of." "But not our sea-thieves," said Porlor, "for they were
all hanged by the Franks when we were landed." "At last," continued
Saebald, "anxiety gave way to despair. There was mourning in many
homes, for no boys were ever so beloved. My poor Forthere, your loss
must be told first. Verbeia, your gentle mother, never held up her head
again. She died of grief within a month." Forthere and Sivel bowed
their heads to hide their tears. The eyes of the rest were full, for
too surely they felt that worse was coming.

"Towards the end of the year," Saebald went on, "a great calamity
befell Deira. Our King died very suddenly with suspicion of poison.
Some looked askance at Coifi; for the dirge he chanted at Aldby when
King Ella returned victorious from the borders of Elmet was remembered
against him. Things looked even more suspicious when it was known
that Coifi had taken refuge with King Ethelric of Bernicia. Ella was
scarcely in his grave before news arrived that the King of Bernicia
was advancing upon York with a large army, led by his two fierce sons,
Ethelfrith and Theobald. Elfric, the unconquered Atheling, hastily
assembled a force to oppose them. The gathering was at York. I came
first with the Billingas. Seomel, Guthlaf, and Brand, with their men,
were close on my heels. But there was no time to wait for more. The
Heslingas were to guard the Princess and little Edwin, the hope of
Deira, at Aldby. Elfric then advanced to encounter heavy odds. Battle
was joined beyond the forest. We were overpowered by numbers. First
the noble Guthlaf fell, like a stag at bay surrounded by the dogs.
Seomel was slain while valorously warding off blows from the Atheling.
Finally, Elfric himself, after dealing death around him, bowed his
proud head and breathed his last. Brand and I were fighting near,
and when we saw that all was lost, we drew off our men. 'Edwin must
be taken out of the land or he will be murdered. The sons of Ida are
merciless.' These were Brand's words as we galloped towards York. The
old warrior said he would go to Aldby and secure the child, if possible
inducing the Princess to come with him, while I placed relays of fresh
horses outside York and at Tadcaster.

"Old Brand, as I have been told, broke the fatal news to the Princess,
and urged upon her that there was no time to lose, and that she and
Edwin must escape out of the country. She replied that her duty was to
remain; but that she would entrust the child to her father's oldest
and most faithful friend. There was no time to be lost. It was known
that the Bernician army was marching rapidly on York. The Princess
Alca folded the child in a tender embrace, and put it into the arms
of Brand. 'Most valorous warrior,' she said, 'I entrust to your care
the hope of Deira.' Her own resolution was immutable. Brand knelt and
kissed the hand of the elf-maiden, then mounted his horse and galloped
away. I waited with fresh horses on the Mount at York, and rode with
them to Nehalennia's ford. There I bade farewell to old Brand, my
beloved uncle, and swore obedience to young King Edwin, returning
disconsolately to Bilbrough.

"Brave old Ingeld, with the Heslingas, remained as a guard at Aldby.
But they were not molested. Ethelric advanced to York, and, as
resistance was unavailing, the country submitted. We had no Atheling to
lead us. Hereric was lost, his brother Osric was a child. The Bernician
King was an old man. He appointed Coifi Priest of Woden, with charge of
all the sacred images at Godmundham. Four years afterwards he died, and
was succeeded by his son Ethelfrith the Wild--a fierce, dangerous man,
hating all opposition, and often false to his plighted word. He had
twice asked for Alca in marriage, but had been repulsed.

"The Princess continued to live at Aldby, with the children of Elfric,
Osric and Bergliot, the Lady Volisia, and her young daughters Braga and
Nanna. Worn out with grief and anxiety, Volisia died a year after the
coming of the Bernicians. Month after month, year after year, passed
away, and nothing more was heard of Brand and little Edwin. One day an
aged British priest, named Urien, arrived at Aldby and asked for an
interview with the Princess. He came owing to a solemn promise he had
made to Brand when he died in Gwynedd. Urien brought up the boy after
Brand's death, but one day Edwin said that he would leave Gwynedd, and
go to a country where Englishmen dwelt. The boy departed, and Urien had
heard nothing more of him. So the old man kept his vow, undertook the
long journey to tell Alca, and then returned. The Princess remained
quite confident that Edwin was safe, and all knew that she must be
right.

"The last event I have to relate is the strangest of all. About a year
ago King Ethelfrith again asked for Alca in marriage, and she consented
on conditions. She sent for us, the surviving thegns of Deira, and said
that she only lived for her country, and that she would consent to be
Queen of Bernicia on condition that Ethelfrith would solemnly declare
that Edwin was King of Deira, and that he only ruled until the child
was old enough to assume the government. 'The King has consented,'
continued the Princess, 'and is here,' Ethelfrith came into the great
hall and made the declaration in our presence. He looked haggard and
fierce, but cowed. Then Alca became his Queen. She has a beautiful
child named Oswald. Ethelfrith is devoted to Alca, but we all think
that his devotion is more like terror than love. A glance from her
stills his rage, and he almost cowers in her presence. Fierce, cruel,
and suspicious when he is away from the Queen, her presence at once
calms and softens him. All who are under her protection are safe. It is
evident that he dare not molest them. It may be her goodness and purity
which effect this change, but she must also possess some power which
is incomprehensible to us. Thus we his enemies, the thegns of Deira,
are not molested, though we must obey the King's summons to war. And
now, my boys, my sad story is told. I see that you are overwhelmed with
grief, and it is best that you should all seek rest."

The lads got little sleep that night. The wounds were too fresh, the
grief too acute during the first hours. They wept long and silently
over their lost ones and the desolated hearths. In the morning they
besought Saebald to make their plans for them. He said that he would go
with Forthere and Sivel to Ulfskelf. The other four should cross the
Ouse at Acaster, whence Lilla would visit his home at Hemingborough.
"You must go to your homes at once," he said, "and assume your
positions among your people. On the first of the next moon you shall
all meet again at Stillingfleet, and thence fare onward to Bambrough,
where the Queen now is. I will send a messenger in advance with the
wonderful news of your arrival, to prepare her mind. The little girls,
too, must not be taken quite by surprise. A great war with the Scots is
threatened, so you must promptly offer your swords to King Ethelfrith."

It was so arranged. Hereric, Coelred, Porlor, and Lilla (Oswith) rode
over to Stillingfleet, where Tanwin, the old and faithful servant of
Seomel, had kept things in order and led the Stillingas since his
master's death. He was overjoyed at the sight of them, and it was long
before he could believe his eyes. Hereric and Coelred, he declared,
were Elfric and Seomel over again, as he remembered them when they
first bore arms. They went slowly up the hill to the deserted hall,
their hearts too full for words. An aged dog was lying on a heap of
ferns in the yard. "Shuprak," they cried, and the faithful old dog
raised itself on its forelegs, gave a joyful bark, and fell forward.
The lads burst into tears. It was the last straw. When they ran up,
Shuprak was dead. Tanwin said that it had lain for months without
moving, and taking little food. They made its grave on the other side
of the beck, near the place where it generally ran into the forest.
As they covered its remains with earth, slowly and reverently, Porlor
said, "Suparaka is Yama. We will not be less worthy than Yudisthira."
The lads understood each other.

Next day the Stillingas assembled and swore that Coelred and Porlor
were their leaders. Each ceorl walked past his chiefs and touched their
weapons in token of fealty--the ceremony of the wapentake. Sad as it
all was, it was necessary to give a great feast in the old hall. Lilla
wished his friends to accompany him to Hemingborough, where the same
scenes were repeated. The Hemingas crowded round the son of Guthlaf,
and swore that Oswith (they did not yet know him by the name of Lilla)
was their leader, also performing the wapentake ceremony. They might
well be proud of the splendid young warrior as he went round to each
man, renewing the acquaintance of his boyhood. Again and again, both
at Stillingfleet and Hemingborough, the tale of their disappearance,
of the long-continued but fruitless search, of the despair of their
parents, was repeated to the friends, with many details passed over by
Saebald. They heard about the great battle in which their fathers fell,
and were told of the numerous losses on the field, and of the sullen
submission of the survivors, while curses were heaped on the head of
Ethelfrith the Wild. Their homes seemed desolate without the loved
faces of their dear ones and the welcome bark of old Shuprak. It was
indeed a sad home-coming.

They were glad when, at the appointed time, Forthere and Sivel arrived
from Ulfskelf, where they too had passed a mournful time. The gentle
mother of Forthere had been killed by extremity of grief. Old Brand had
died far away from home and kindred. The hearthstone was quite cold at
Ulfskelf.

The six lost ones, found again, set out together from Stillingfleet and
rode northwards into Bernicia. Pack-horses, with their precious bales,
were in charge of old Tanwin and his son Froda, and of Ingebrand, the
faithful servant of Elfric, who had now attached himself to Hereric. In
three days they reached Bambrough, the capital of Bernicia. It was an
almost impregnable place. The fortress rises up from a solitary rock of
black basalt overlooking the sea. The building of Ethelfrith's time was
constructed by his grandfather Ida in A.D. 550, on the site of a fort
built by order of Agricola, and was named Bebbanburgh after his wife
Bebba. The interior court was extensive, with a great hall of timber,
and many rooms opening into the hall or directly upon the court. The
whole had been surrounded by a quickset hedge at first, for which a
stone wall was afterwards substituted.

Orders had been given for the suitable reception of the guests, and
they were soon ushered into the presence of the Queen. Alca was more
stately and more beautiful than when they parted from her at Aldby.
Her cheering words had sunk into their hearts, and had inspired their
actions, keeping alive hope when their need was greatest. Coelred and
Porlor regarded her with such devoted love that no one else ever found
a place in their hearts. The adoration of the others was little less
profound. She embraced them all as dear brothers returned after a long
absence, but with no surprise. "I knew you would return," she said,
"and I know by your looks that you have returned unscathed by sin or
shame. You have returned, strong and bold and full of knowledge, to
serve your country in its sore need. May the All-father bless and
preserve you!"

Then the girls and little Osric ran in, and after the first warm
greetings, Bergliot burst into tears at the thought of the last parting
with her boys. The nixy's curse had always been ringing in her ears. It
would cease now. She put her small hand shyly into her dear Oswith's
large one, while Braga nestled close to Hereric, and Nanna tried to
divide herself between her brothers Coelred and Porlor. The rest of the
day was passed very happily, and on the morrow the young warriors were
to be presented to Ethelfrith at a great audience.

Ethelfrith sat in the hall, surrounded by his thegns. He scowled
savagely as the young men came in and stated their names and positions,
offering him their swords. But when Alca entered and looked at him with
a calm searching glance, his mien changed and he welcomed them warmly
enough, accepting their services with thanks. Next day Coelred sent for
Bassus and Godric, who arrived at Bambrough soon afterwards.

In the following days the young men, one after the other, related
all they had seen and heard to Alca in the minutest detail. They told
her of their conversations at Canterbury, of their perplexities, of
their proposed _Gemot_; and they besought her guidance and advice.
The precious bales were opened before her and offered for her
acceptance. There were gold ornaments of eastern workmanship, precious
stones, spices, myrrh and frankincense, the small parcel of bdellium
presented by the Guru, boxes of sandal-wood, fine calico and muslin,
besides many bags of gold coin. She insisted upon Coelred and Porlor
retaining the money, and they afterwards dug a hole by the side of
Shuprak's grave, which became the "_uvaru_" for their treasures. Alca
kept the bdellium and a few things to please her young friends, and
distributed the rest among the delighted girls. Alca had had described
to her the whole realm of France; the buildings and people of Rome,
Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, and Ujjayani; the navigation
of the Eastern Mediterranean, the Red and Erythraean Seas, and the
German Ocean; the habits and customs of many peoples; the religion of
Christ, with Porlor's version of some heresies; and the religions of
the Fire-worshippers and the Hindus; besides innumerable anecdotes and
stories. In the minds of most people such an enormous mass of fresh and
surprising information could not have been assimilated. It would simply
have caused utter confusion. But it was not so with Alca. She told the
boys that she would take a long time to think over all they had told
her, and arrange everything clearly in her mind. When she had done so,
she promised to take them into her counsels, to consult with them, and
to let them know her thoughts. But first they must all fight bravely in
the coming struggle in which their country would be engaged.

[Illustration: The Young Warriors Presented to Ethelfrith]

AEdan, the King of the Scots, was assembling an immense army with the
object of invading Northumbria and destroying Ethelfrith, his forces,
and his kingdom. Ethelfrith's followers were very numerous, and both he
and his brother Theobald were valiant soldiers. But they were ignorant
of the art of war, head-strong, and without judgment. Alca consulted
privately with her young friends. It was ascertained that AEdan would
advance up the valley of the Eden, intending thence to pour his forces
down the western valleys and converge on York. To defeat this plan
Lilla and Bassus conceived the brilliant idea of imitating the strategy
of Narses in the Median Mountains. Ethelfrith was to advance down the
valley of the Eden with the main body of his army, while his brother
Theobald occupied the mountains and threatened the enemy's flank,
but with strict orders to avoid an engagement. Lilla and Bassus were
to remain with the King and direct the campaign. Coelred and Porlor
were to be at the head of the troops gathered from between Ouse and
Derwent. Saebald, Forthere, and Sivel were to head all the levies from
the west of the Ouse. Hereric and Godric were to fight in company with
the thegns and their followers from the east of Derwent. Thus all the
Deirans would be with the King, as well as part of the Bernician army.
The detached force of Theobald would consist wholly of Bernicians.

"But how are we to induce King Ethelfrith to adopt all these measures?"
said Bassus. "Leave that to me," replied the Queen. "You and Lilla, as
you have named our Oswith, are experienced men of the world. You now
have to practise that forbearance for the cultivation of which you have
resolved to take counsel with each other. Take care that Ethelfrith
gives all the orders, and so manage as that he will think that they all
originated from himself. Let him have the glory, and it will be well.
It is sufficient for you to serve your country as brave and faithful
warriors."

Soon afterwards there was a great assembly of chiefs in the hall
of Bambrough to hear the final instructions of the King. To the
astonishment of Lilla and Bassus, they heard Ethelfrith make the
following speech:--"I have conceived the plan of marching down the
valley of the Eden to meet the enemy in front, while my brother with
a picked force of Bernicians will threaten their flank from the
mountains. But it is my strict and positive order to Theobald to avoid
an engagement. Lilla and Bassus are to remain near my person. The whole
Deiran force will form part of my division, and I shall have my eye on
their chiefs, especially on the young men who lately offered me their
swords. My plan is perfect, and victory is certain if our men do their
duty. Prepare to march in a few days."

Ethelfrith believed that all the arrangements were originated by
himself when the army set out from Bambrough in two divisions, to fight
one of the most decisive battles in the dawn of our history.




    CHAPTER III

    DEATH OF ALCA


It was in the autumn of the year 603 that the battle was fought which
finally settled the question of supremacy between Scots and English.
Sivel had already introduced the system of counting time _Anno Domini_
among the associates of the Coelred-_Gemot_, which was a valuable
help to them, both in discussing the past and forecasting the future.
This year was a great epoch in their lives. Lilla and Bassus were
comparatively veterans. All the rest were about to fight in their first
battle.

Ethelfrith's army was in the upper part of the Eden valley. It was
known that a mighty host was being led by AEdan and by Hering the son
of Hussa up the course of the river. Bassus had arranged with his
friends that strong parties of scouts should be thrown out to watch the
movements of the enemy. They were led by Forthere, Godric, and Sivel.
After a few days Forthere came back with the news that a large body of
the enemy, apparently nearly half their army, had been detached, and
was marching up the hills to the west. "Our plan works," said Bassus
to Lilla, "just as the plan of Narses worked, our great master in the
art of war." "But," said Lilla, "the King's brother is not another John
the Prefect. The reckless Theobald will never avoid an action." An hour
afterwards Ethelfrith sent a message to his brother with reiterated
commands to retreat before the advancing foe. Then the English host,
by rapid marches, hurried down the valley and attacked the weakened
army of AEdan with overwhelming force. The result was never doubtful.
The Scots were nearly exterminated, and AEdan fled almost alone from the
field. After two days to rest and recruit their strength, the English
warriors were fresh and ready to complete their work. Then a messenger
arrived with the news that Theobald had refused to obey his brother's
orders. He would retreat before no man, he declared. He attacked the
superior force of the enemy when weather and ground and everything was
against him. He gave himself no chance. There was a desperate fight,
followed by the death of Theobald and a prodigious slaughter of the
Bernicians. But the Scots were reported to be much weakened and worn
out with long marches.

"Now for the final blow," said Bassus. The scouts, under the direction
of Forthere, kept him well informed of the movements of the enemy and
the nature of the ground. The Scots were marching so as to expose their
flank. At the right moment the English army was set in motion and came
upon the enemy at a place which was long famous, called Degsastan. The
remnant of the army of the Scots was here literally annihilated.

The news of this great victory spread over the island. It was thought
that no leader so skilful and prudent, so wise and valorous, had
ever been known in England as Ethelfrith the Wild. The fame of his
generalship continued long. A hundred years afterwards the Venerable
Bede declared that Ethelfrith "ravaged the Britons more than all the
great men of the English, insomuch that he might be compared to Saul.
To him might justly be applied the saying of the Patriarch, 'Benjamin
shall ravin as a wolf: in the morning he shall devour the prey, and
at night he shall divide the spoil.' He was a most worthy king, and
ambitious of glory." Lilla and Bassus, the real generals, had far more
precious fame in the praise of the Queen, and the full and ample reward
of all the friends was in the approval and smiles of Alca. Bede says
that "from that time no King of the Scots dared to come into Britain to
make war on the English to this day."

For the next few years all the leaders in the service of Ethelfrith
had much harassing work in repelling incursions from the direction
of Strathclyde, and it became known that the King of Gwynedd was
assembling a great army to stake his fortune where the Scots had
failed. His standard was raised at Chester. Bassus was deeply impressed
with the maxim that knowledge was power. He acquired a minute personal
acquaintance with the routes across the moors to Chester. Forthere
again commanded the bands of scouts, and kept Lilla and Bassus well
informed of the numbers and movements of the enemy. There was no
difficulty in marching through Elmet, as old Certicus was neutral,
indeed he had only too good an understanding with Ethelfrith. The
English army was assembled at York. The Deiran chiefs were at the head
of their people, who were more numerous than the Bernicians, the latter
having suffered severely in the war with the Scots.

Lilla and Bassus explained their plans to the Queen, and a few days
afterwards Ethelfrith announced them in council as his own. That wild
King was managed with consummate tact. The march was made direct over
the moors to Chester. The men of Gwynedd were found drawn up outside
the old Roman camp of the 20th Legion. It was their colony of Deva. As
battle was about to be joined, Ethelfrith observed a crowd of priests,
who had come from the adjacent monastery of Bangor-Iscoed to offer up
prayers for the soldiers, standing apart in a place of more safety.
The King asked who they were, and Forthere told him that they were
monks praying for his defeat, and that there was a guard to protect
them, commanded by a British chief named Brochvael. "If, then," said
Ethelfrith, "they cry to their God against us, though they do not
bear arms, yet they fight against us because they oppose us by their
prayers." He ordered them to be attacked first, and then the chiefs
of Deira charged the host of Gwynedd, and, after a long and desperate
fight, the English gained a complete victory. About two hundred priests
were slaughtered, and only fifty escaped, their defender Brochvael
having decamped at the first appearance of danger. Their great
monastery of Bangor-Iscoed was destroyed. The holy monks of Canterbury
taught that the massacre of British priests at Chester was a sign
of Divine vengeance on them for presuming to differ in opinion from
Augustine on the subject of the time of keeping Easter. That charitable
prelate, who died in 604, had already cursed them on the same account.

The victory of Chester was gained in 607, and from that time there
was peace in Northumbria for many years. The Deiran thegns returned to
their homes. Coelred and Porlor were at Stillingfleet, and Hereric was
generally with them. Lilla and Bassus abode at Hemingborough, Forthere
and Sivel at Ulfskelf, and Godric was now at Markham, near the banks of
the Idle, his father, Ulchel, having died. Queen Alca, in these latter
years, passed most of her time at her old home at Aldby. She had her
little child Oswald, and the charge of Osric the Atheling, both future
kings. There were also several sons of Ethelfrid, fine little fellows,
to whom she was very kind--Eanfrid, Oslac, Oswudu, Oslaf, and Offa, who
adored her, and a little child named Oswy, recently born to Ethelfrith,
but who was not her son. The King was almost always near the northern
frontier of his dominions, making raids into the country of the Picts.

The friends often met at their respective homes, and discussed schemes
for the benefit of their countrymen, who under their auspices were
making considerable advances in many ways. But they always remembered
the broad lines of conduct laid down by Porlor at Canterbury, and the
friends frequently met to hold consultations. Coelred and Porlor having
ascertained from Alca that, after investigation, she was convinced that
Coifi was not guilty in the matter of her father's death, received
their old friend, who was now too great a man to act as gleeman at
their feasts. His was not an estimable character. He asked innumerable
questions, but the friends were not inclined to be communicative. He
had to go on praying to his own gods, who never gave him inspirations,
nor even made his spells work with effect.

Lilla's fondness for Bergliot had ripened into love. The fearless
warrior was married to the Princess in the hall of Aldby in the
presence of the Queen. They lived at Hemingborough, where the buildings
had been enlarged and improved, and they were soon blessed with two
sons, who were named Trondhere and Trumhere. At the same time Osric
the Atheling married Elfleda, the daughter of Ingeld, chief of the
Hemingas. They had a son named Oswin, destined like his father to be
king in troublous times. From childhood a devoted friendship sprang up,
and became stronger with years, between the Atheling Oswin and the two
sons of Lilla. A year passed away, and there were two more marriages.
Godric's prophecy came true. Hereric had really cherished his love for
Braga all through his long exile. He was diffident, but when he saw
Lilla boldly seek the hand of Bergliot, he also told the story of his
love. The Atheling Hereric was married in the hall at Aldby to Braga,
the sister of Coelred and Porlor. He tried to persuade her to become
a Christian, but she clung to the worship of Nehalennia, her mother's
deity, and when the noble-minded Prince saw that the subject distressed
her he desisted. They had two fair daughters, Hereswith and Hilda.
Lastly, young Godric succeeded in winning the heart of little Nanna,
and they also were married, going to live at Markham, near the Idle,
in the country of the Gainas. Hereric and Braga lived at Stillingfleet
with their brothers.

Alca became the guardian and inspiring influence of the
Coelred-_Gemot_, which now included three wives among its members. At
first, and indeed for some years, she had conversed little respecting
the mass of information brought to her by her friends. But after
the marriages she began to talk more on the subject, and asked many
searching questions of Porlor and the others. One summer day they were
all in attendance upon the Queen, under that spreading ash tree at the
foot of Garraby Hill where she had talked to the boys so impressively
long, long ago. She then began to speak freely about the manifold
wonders she had heard, and on the impressions they had made on her
mind. "The Son of God has indeed risen to save sinners," she said with
conviction, "as I have believed so long, and as the good man told
you all outside the gate of Amiens. Balder has risen, for I see much
goodness and true bravery coming back into the world," and she looked
round at her warriors with an ineffably winning smile. "But I cannot
think that Balder and Krishna were Christ, as the learned Guru told
you, though I believe there was some truth in what he said. All that
leads to good actions, from belief in the beautiful story of Balder, in
the traditions about Krishna, or in the worship of Nehalennia, my sweet
Braga, is of Christ, but it is not Christ. It is of Christ, because our
Hereric tells us that Christ is all love and truth. By these sacred
stories, in all languages, the peoples of the world, when they follow
what is good and true in them, are led to the Son of God, and are
prepared to receive him. I think that all this is working, but very
slowly, and that some day, when God wills it, all people will worship
Christ. We cannot hasten this event, at least not much; but we can
follow resolutely and humbly all that is good and true and beautiful
in our own religious tales, which is following Christ, and some day we
or our children will be called to enter into the full light." They all
listened breathlessly, but did not speak.

Alca next turned to other subjects, and spoke, among many things that
she touched upon, of the journey of the Pandus to reach Heaven. She
reverted to this legend some days afterwards, and told them to keep
the names of Draupadi and Suparaka always sacred in their _Gemot_.
"The one is an emblem of the experience of all of us. We strive for
higher things, but are borne down by our besetting sin. The other is
a lesson how the humblest may find grace." Porlor asked her what the
Guru intended to convey when he said that Suparaka was Yama. "Yama,
or Adam," she said, "was the first man, and represents humanity. I
think he intended you to understand that the faithful dog, like human
beings, had a soul to be saved." That day she ended the conversation by
expressing thanks to the Guru. "He told you many beautiful tales," she
said. "Always remember his kindly gift to me, and let 'Bdellium' be the
watchword of your _Gemot_."

On another day she pleased Lilla by telling him how fond she was
of the story of the Simurg. "We yearn for knowledge beyond our own
experience, yet we can know little of what happened before our birth,
and nothing of what will befall after our death. That there should
be a being, coeval with the world, who has seen and knows all that
ever happened, and who imparts her wisdom for the good of man, is a
beautiful conception. This too is a seeking for the Son of God, and
must work for good." Many other conversations of the same kind were
held at Aldby, sometimes in the hall, at others under the shade of
trees; and though at first absorbed in listening to the Queen, the
friends gradually began to take more part, making suggestions and
asking questions. All remembered these meetings to the last day of
their lives. The happiness seemed too great to continue. On one of the
last evenings Coelred and Porlor asked the Queen whether she received
their cloud message. "Yes," she said simply. "I heard the words in my
sleep, and I think it must have been on the same day. They were--'We
are well. We have never forgotten. We will return.'" They started with
astonishment and awe, for they had not told her. "There are many things
that we can never understand here," she went on; "but we shall know
hereafter." Then came the far-away look they knew so well. She rose to
retire, saying, "For me it will not be long."

They went home with some forebodings. Not long afterwards, towards
the end of the year 612 A.D., the Queen gave birth to a daughter, who
was named Ebba. In the following spring she was taken ill, and soon
her attendants began to despair of her life. She said that she was
dying, and sent for her friends. All her warriors were called into the
presence. "When I die," she said to them, "Ethelfrith will be false to
his promise. He will be under no restraint. All his evil passions will
break loose. He will try to exterminate the house of Deira. Swear to
serve Edwin and to make him King." They all swore. "That is good," she
said. "When I die, go to him with the Athelings. I think you will find
him in Mercia; perhaps at Repton. Tell him I loved him to the end. Tell
him that you are my dearest friends, and that you will be his servants
until death. Farewell, my more than brothers." They bowed their heads
in grief, and left the room silently.

On the next day Alca was sinking fast. At the last there were present
with her Lilla, Coelred, Porlor, Hereric, Bergliot, Braga, and Nanna.
They watched her pale but beautiful face while she slept. At noon she
awoke and smiled. She looked at them all, and then her gaze rested
on the Atheling. She said in a scarcely audible voice, but quite
clearly--"My sweet cousin Hereric, let me be received into the fold
of Christ." He quickly performed the rite of baptism. Soon after he
finished she passed away. Her face was indescribably lovely in death.
A veil must be passed over the intense grief of the mourners. If
immediate action had not been necessary, they could not have borne it.
Alca slept the last sleep at Aldby by the side of her father, Ella the
King.

Ethelfrith arrived two days afterwards, like a wild man as he was,
all restraint cast aside. He roughly snatched little Oswald out of the
arms of Bergliot, and sent all his sons to Bambrough. But he did not
ask for Ebba, and Bergliot took the Princess with her to Hemingborough.
Ethelfrith then swore that he would exterminate the royal house of
Deira. "If Edwin is King," he shouted, "a dead man shall soon be King."
Osric and his little son Oswin were concealed by Saebald near the crags
above Nehalennia's ford. Hereric was in greater danger. As the eldest
scion of the house of Deira, the usurper thirsted for his blood. He was
at York. Coelred and Porlor, with Godric, who was their guest, remained
for some days on their guard at Stillingfleet; Lilla and Bassus were in
the same attitude at Hemingborough; Forthere and Sivel at Ulfskelf. One
evening Hereric galloped into the court at Stillingfleet, accompanied
by a single servant, his faithful Ingebrand. He said that an attempt
had been made to seize him, and that he and Ingebrand had fought their
way through his assailants. But he believed he was followed. He was
bleeding from a slight flesh-wound. He had determined to take refuge
for a time in Elmet. His friends tried in vain to dissuade him. Taking
a tender farewell of Braga and his two little daughters, he continued
his flight with a strong escort of Stillingas led by Tanwin. But
he dismissed it at the Roman road. Coelred had the rest of his men
under arms. Next day a large body of Bernicians rode up to the gate,
and demanded, in the name of King Ethelfrith, that Hereric should be
surrendered. On receiving a defiant refusal, they assaulted the hedge.
A fierce combat ensued, and the superior number of the Bernicians was
beginning to tell, when they were suddenly attacked in rear. They broke
and fled, closely followed by the Stillingas, who did execution upon
them as far as Moreby. This diversion was caused by the return of the
escort under Tanwin.

Next day there was a consultation with Lilla and Bassus. It was
decided that the wishes of Alca should be carried out to the letter.
They must seek for Edwin at Repton. There was no reason to fear for
their loved ones. The Angles, even Ethelfrith, did not make war upon
women. The brothers opened the "_uvaru_" by Shuprak's grave and
provided themselves with treasure. Bidding farewell to sisters and
wives, full of high hopes and noble aspirations, Coelred, Porlor,
Lilla, Bassus, and Godric crossed the Ouse and fared southwards into
Mercia, well armed and mounted. They sent a messenger to Forthere and
Sivel, arranging to wait for them at Godric's home near the river Idle,
in the country of the Gainas.

Hereric and his escort had crossed the Ouse, by swimming at slack
tide below the junction with the Wharfe. At the Roman road he dismissed
the Stillingas, telling Tanwin that he would be wanted soon to defend
his master's home. The Atheling and his servant then rode westward to
the banks of the little river Cock, a tributary of the Wharfe, which
they crossed by a bridge, consisting of a semicircular arch, a little
above Tadcaster. Beyond, at a short distance from its left bank,
there was a range of wooded heights where the territory of Certicus
of Elmet commenced. The range was a high bank rather than a line of
hills, and the two fugitives made their way up it, and rode over some
level country until they came to another bank covered with ferns and a
great variety of wild flowers. The winding little Cock beck was again
at their feet. Here the Atheling resolved to pass the night, and his
servant made a hut of boughs for him. The place was afterwards called
Beck-heigh (Becca)--"the hill by the stream." Next morning Hereric
sent Ingebrand, who knew the language of the Britons, with a message
to the King of Elmet at Barwick, which was about a mile distant. The
Atheling announced his arrival, requesting protection and hospitality.
The answer was a cordial welcome, and when Hereric reached Barwick,
he found Certicus waiting to receive him with a crowd of natives. His
palace was a large circular hut raised on a platform of earth, and
the town consisted of a number of smaller huts scattered over the
valley. One of these near the King's residence was assigned to Hereric.
Certicus was a little man with a scanty white beard, brown complexion,
and small black eyes, which generally had a cunning, and sometimes a
malignant, expression, in spite of his efforts to appear frank and
affable to his guest. Hereric regretted that he had not remained at
Stillingfleet. He had insisted on the course he had taken, lest his
presence should bring trouble on his friends, and their efforts to
dissuade him had been in vain. He now determined, on the first excuse,
to take leave of Certicus and fare southwards in fulfilment of the wish
of Alca.

Certicus sent meals and horns of mead to the Atheling from his own
hut. A few days were passed in hunting. One morning Ingebrand reported
that he had seen Coifi riding away before dawn. He had noticed a
muffled stranger near the King's residence on the previous evening.
This seemed very strange, almost unaccountable. Hereric remembered
the suspicions of the gleeman after the death of King Ella. He had
melancholy forebodings, without being able to assign any tangible
cause for entertaining them. So he tried to shake them off, and went
out hunting with Ingebrand and a few natives of Elmet to attend him.
Returning tired and thirsty to his hut late in the evening, some
servants soon brought the usual meal and the cup of mead. The mead had
a curious taste, and soon the Prince was seized with violent pains.
"Ingebrand," he said, "my faithful friend, the treacherous Briton has
poisoned me at the instigation of Ethelfrith. The Priest of Woden, the
plausible Coifi, was not here for nothing." Ingebrand was devoted to
his master, but, surrounded by enemies, he knew not what to do. There
was a period of insensibility, followed by convulsions. Hereric spoke
with difficulty. "Tell Braga," he said, "that I entreat her to be
baptized with my children. Take my message of love to my dear friends.
Tell them to remember the words of Alca, and to be loyal warriors of
King Edwin." These were his last words. He died in the night. Next day
the body was hastily buried, and Ingebrand was kept a close prisoner
in the hut. But he effected his escape during the night, and reached
Ulfskelf.

Hereric had been foully murdered, and in two days Ethelfrith was
openly glorying over the crime. Forthere was nearly mad with rage. He
vowed that his avenging hand should rid the earth of both Certicus and
Ethelfrith. But he could not bring himself to believe in the guilt of
Coifi. Forthere and Sivel assembled all their followers and plunged
into the wilds of Elmet, killing and destroying. They fought their way
to Barwick, whence old Certicus had fled. Here they raised a small
tumulus over the remains of the beloved Prince, and pressed onwards in
pursuit of the murderer. At last Forthere overtook him, resting after
a long journey, with a small escort. The old wretch then received his
deserts. His skull was cleft by the avenger. The two loyal subjects of
Edwin then led back their followers to Ulfskelf, bade them farewell,
and fared southwards to join their friends at the home of Godric,
taking Ingebrand with them. The peerless Atheling was partly avenged.
Next it would be the turn of Ethelfrith to meet the avenger of blood.

Coelred and his friends had scarcely crossed the Ouse when the wild
King arrived at Stillingfleet with an overwhelming force, and searched
both the court and the various buildings for the Deiran Athelings.
Edwin was beyond his reach, but he thirsted for the blood of the other
three--Hereric, Osric, and Oswin. He then proceeded to Hemingborough
and made a similar search in person, returning to York to receive news
from Certicus, with whom he had long had a secret understanding, that
Hereric was in his power. None of the ladies were ill treated, and
though Ethelfrith saw his own daughter Ebba in the arms of Bergliot, he
took no notice of her.




    CHAPTER IV

    EDWIN


In the depths of the forests of the upper Trent valley there was a
wide clearing, and, near the river-bank, on a rising ground sloping
gently inland but abruptly towards the bank, there was an extensive
range of buildings erected round a large court, and surrounded by a
quickset hedge. This was Repton, the royal seat of Kearl the son of
Kinemund, King of the Mercians. Large bodies of men and many tethered
horses were at the foot of the slope. Under the hedge, a few paces from
the gate, sat a handsome young man about twenty-eight years of age,
with his weapons thrown down on the grass beside him. It was evidently
a time of listlessness and peace. He was playing with two little
boys. He was making them go through their _idrottir_, or exercises.
"Now, Eadfrid," said the young man, "stand up by the side of thy tall
brother Offrid." The little lads stood like small sentries. "Mark your
distance, and pick up your clubs." This manoeuvre was also successfully
performed. "Offrid, whirl thy club; Eadfrid, raise thine over thy
head and lower slowly." The boys went to work, looking delighted.
After a time they began playing at ball, while their father looked on,
encouraging them and laughing. Meanwhile there was a stir among the
men at the foot of the hill, and presently seven warriors, splendidly
accoutred, walked up towards the gate, which startled the boys at their
play. The young man rose, and, to his astonishment, the strangers knelt
down and saluted him as their King. He told them to rise and explain
whence they came and who they were. Coelred, Porlor, Lilla, Bassus,
Forthere, Sivel, and Godric stood before Edwin, the son of Ella. They
gave him the message from his sister Alca, and said that they would
fight by his side until he was restored to his throne, and serve him
until death, for his own and his sister's sake. Edwin was a tall man,
like his father and his uncle Elfric, beautifully proportioned, with
fair curling hair, and earnest eyes, which betokened habits of thought
and reflection, unusual in that age. He received his loyal friends
cordially, but without any strong demonstrations, introduced them to
the Mercian King, and saw to their comfort.

At the first opportunity, Coelred explained the state of affairs in
greater detail, and Edwin said it was right that he should put his
position fully before his supporters. "You have doubtless heard,"
he began, "that I was carried off by old Brand when the Bernicians
conquered my country. He took me to the land of Gwynedd, and found
shelter and a home for me near the abode of a good old British priest
named Urien, whose son was my playmate. The grand old warrior watched
over my helpless childhood and my youth. But at last he began to
fail and died. To him I owe my life and all the good that is in me."
Coelred pointed to Forthere and said, "There stands the son of Brand of
Ulfskelf." Edwin at once went up to Forthere, embraced him, and took
both his hands, pressing them affectionately. "As my father was to
thee," said Forthere, "so will I be until death parts us."

Edwin proceeded with his narrative. "When I grew to be a boy, I
remembered the stories of old Brand, and longed to be again among the
English. So I bade farewell to Urien, and to my playmate Rhunn, his
son, who was also intended to be a priest, and went to seek my fortune.
They never tried to convert me to their religion--the British priests
never do--and I worship the gods of my fathers. I will not weary you
with the story of my wanderings and adventures. At last I sought
protection from the King of Mercia. He received me, and treated me as
a brother. I have fought for him in all his wars, and he gave me his
sister Quenberga for my wife. She died, leaving me two little sons. I
am now dependent on the will of my brother-in-law; my horse, even my
arms, are not my own. I cannot even entertain my friends. How then can
I hope to recover my kingdom?" "We have considered all these things,"
said Coelred. "We have not come empty-handed to be a burden to you.
We have enough to equip a bodyguard of a hundred men, well armed and
mounted, with which our King may fight his way from one end of England
to the other, and appear as a worthy son of Ella." Edwin went round and
pressed the hand of each. "How can I express my thanks?" he said. "By
using our services as you see best," they all replied. "But the time is
not yet ripe for the recovery of Deira."

A few days afterwards Edwin called his followers together. "My
brother-in-law, King Kearl of Mercia," he said, "has granted license
to me to take a hundred men into my service. There are tidings from
Wessex that the Britons are gathering together a great army to
overwhelm the sons of Cerdic. Let us offer them our swords and fight
for them, while the course of events in Deira ripens for action." The
proposal was received with acclamation. "There is one thing only that
troubles me, the care of my little sons. I dare not leave them here,"
he continued, "for if anything happened to Kearl, and his cousin, the
savage and brutal Penda, succeeded, they would be as lambs in the jaws
of a wolf." Godric then spoke. "My King," he said, "although I am a
man of the Gainas, I am married in Deira, and came with my friends to
swear obedience to Edwin. I must return to my home, there to prepare
the way for your march northwards at the appointed time. Entrust your
sons to my care. I will guard them with my life. My place is strong, my
followers are true. There will be no suspicion of their identity. They
will be safe."

There were several weeks of preparation. Edwin bade a tender farewell
to his little boys, who rode away with Godric. Soon afterwards he
took leave of his brother-in-law, and fared southwards with his six
paladins, followed by a hundred well-armed Mercian warriors.

The Gewissae had acquired their still disputed territory after a long
and obstinate struggle with the Britons. When Cerdic and his son Cynric
landed in 495 they had to fight on the first day. In 508 there was a
great battle, in which the British king Natan-leod was slain with 5000
men. Cerdic did not assume the position of King of Wessex until 519; he
fought another battle in 527, and conquered the Isle of Wight in 530.
Dying in 534, Cerdic was succeeded by his son Cynric, who fought two
desperate battles with the Britons at Old Sarum and at Banbury, before
he also died in 560. His two sons Ceawlin and Cutha continued the
struggle with great vigour. In 571 Cutha fought the Britons at Bedford,
and captured the four British towns of Lenbury, Aylesbury, Benson, and
Eynsham. Advancing westward, Ceawlin took the towns of Gloucester,
Cirencester, and Bath, and in a great battle killed three British kings
named Comail, Candidan, and Farinmeail at Derham. He fought another
battle at Frethern, taking many towns and vast spoils, but on this
occasion his brother Cutha was slain. Ceawlin was deposed and put to
death in 593, and his successor Ceolwulf had to fight incessantly, that
the Gewissae might hold their own. In 611 Ceolwulf was succeeded by his
nephew Kingils, or Cynegils, who, during his long reign of thirty-one
years, did much to consolidate and extend the realm of Wessex. He
was a grandson of Cutha, the brother of Ceawlin, who were grandsons
of Cerdic. In some way Cynegils had his faithless and truculent son
Cuichelm associated with him in the government, and in 614 the two
leaders were collecting all their forces to the north of the Thames, to
repel a great invasion of the Britons.

Edwin, with his small but effective reinforcement, was received
with great joy by Cynegils. Under the advice of Lilla and Bassus, the
little force was formed into scouting parties, which were of immense
use in keeping Cynegils well informed respecting the movements and
position of the enemy. The two armies gradually approached each other
at a place called Bampton. A council was held, and Edwin advised, at
the suggestion of Bassus, that Cuichelm, who held a separate command,
should be detached round some woods and swampy ground to make a
diversion, while the Kings attacked the hostile army in front. Cuichelm
whispered with his principal thegn, a fierce and savage-looking man
named Eumer, and then spoke against the adoption of Edwin's advice.
After a few more remarks from other thegns, he refused to move. His
force was encamped on a rising ground apart from the main army. "At
least," said Cynegils, "I shall expect you to support me as soon as
the battle begins." "Let your new friends support you," said Cuichelm
brutally, and both he and Eumer scowled sullenly at the strangers.
Eumer was heard to say, "Let us see if these new friends of Cynegils
can win the fight without us. We will not help them." The Britons
were advancing rapidly, and a few hours afterwards Cynegils led
his army to the attack. The fight was long and obstinate. Without
the aid of Cuichelm's force the Britons had a great superiority in
numbers. Cynegils and Edwin were hard pressed. At one time their men
began to give way, but they were gallantly rallied by the paladins
and some of the Wessex thegns, and fought on with renewed vigour.
Message after message was sent to Cuichelm for help, but he would
not move. At length, towards sunset, the Britons began to retreat,
but it was not until their retreat had been converted into a rout
that the recreants led their men down and began the pursuit. It was a
desperately-contested battle, and the Britons left 265 men dead on the
field. Ethelwerd gives the number of slain at 2040. Edwin, Forthere,
and Bassus were wounded, the latter severely. Old Ingebrand, who had
attached himself to Forthere since the death of Hereric, fell fighting
by his side.

Next day Cuichelm and Eumer came to Cynegils to give an account of
the success of their pursuit. Edwin was present, and before all the
thegns declared them to be niddring and unworthy companions. The King
of Deira was then assisted into his camping hut, while Cuichelm and
Eumer cast looks of malignant hatred at the warrior they had treated
so shamefully. The wounds healed under nature's treatment, and the
patients were nearly in a state to resume work, when the King of Wessex
paid a visit to his guest. He seemed ashamed and deeply moved. Thanking
Edwin and his friends warmly for their most efficient aid, he entreated
them to leave the country. "There is a plot against your life," he
said, "and at this moment I cannot promise either to ensure your safety
or to be able effectually to punish the guilty. If anything evil befell
my guests while they were within my jurisdiction, I could not survive
the shame."

Immediate departure could be the only answer to this appeal. Edwin,
with his friends, fared northwards, wanderers and homeless. The
treasure that Coelred brought with him was nearly spent, and it was
necessary to pay and dismiss the Mercian bodyguard. After a long
consultation, Edwin resolved to seek protection from Redwald, the King
of East Anglia.

The kingdom of East Anglia had been founded in about 495 A.D. by Uffa,
a leader of the English, and closely allied to the Deirans, whose
descendants were known as Uffingas. Redwald, who was a grandson of
Uffa, had succeeded in 593. His dominions extended over the territory
included in the counties of Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, and the
south part of Lincolnshire. Redwald was a sovereign of considerable
capacity. He enjoyed great influence, and after the death of Ethelbert
of Kent in 616 he was acknowledged as Bretwalda. Redwald received Edwin
and his friends with hospitality. They found him at a fortified grange
or country house near Sleaford, not far from the northern frontier of
his dominions; and here they continued to reside, sending messages to
Godric, who assured Edwin that his boys were well, and that the Gainas
and Lindisfarnas were being persuaded to join him, when he should
advance northwards.

It was not long before the presence of Edwin and the great Deiran
thegns at the court of Redwald reached the ears of Ethelfrith the Wild.
He immediately sent messengers offering the East Anglian King a large
sum of money if he would murder Edwin. Redwald indignantly refused.
Soon afterwards a second embassy arrived with the same result. Then
came a third embassy offering the choice of compliance or war. Redwald
hesitated. Ethelfrith had the reputation of being the ablest as well as
the most ruthless leader among the English, and he was very powerful.
The King of East Anglia was fond of "hedging." In after years he had
a chapel containing an altar to Christ and another to Woden, and he
worshipped at both. He promised to deliver Edwin up to Ethelfrith's
envoy or else to make away with him. The interview was secret and at
night, but Coelred and Porlor had the eyes of lynxes in the service
of their master. Among the Bernician envoys they noticed one who was
evidently disguised and ill at ease. They suspected him of being Coifi.
As the envoys went from Redwald's presence to their lodging, the two
brothers seized the man they suspected, hurried him under a clump of
trees, and whispered "Coifi!" He trembled. "Coifi! we know you. If a
hair of our King's head is harmed, we have sworn to kill you. Tell us
everything, or this is your last hour." The wretch confessed all.

Coelred went at once to Edwin's chamber, where he was going to
bed, and told him what was designed by his host. "If you see fit,"
he said, "we will at once take you out of this place, fighting our
way if necessary, and conduct you to Godric's home, where the Gainas
are friendly, and where you will be safe for the time." But Edwin had
lost heart, and for the moment he was overwhelmed by his calamities.
"I thank you for your good will," he replied, "yet I cannot do what
you propose. If I must die, let it rather be by Redwald's hand than
by that of any meaner person." Coelred retired, in great sadness, to
seek his brother, while Edwin dressed and sat against the outer wall of
the palace. He was overwhelmed by many thoughts, not knowing what to
do, or which way to turn. When he had been there a long time, brooding
over his misfortunes in anguish of mind, he saw a person approaching
in the dead of night. The stranger, coming closer, saluted him, and
asked him "why he sat there alone and melancholy on a stone, at that
time of night, when every one else was in bed and fast asleep?" Edwin
in his turn asked, "What is it to thee whether I spend the night within
doors or abroad?" The stranger in reply said, "Do not think that I am
ignorant of the cause of your grief, your watching, and sitting alone
without. For I know who you are and why you grieve, and the evils which
you fear will befall you. But tell me what reward you will give the
man that shall deliver you out of this anguish, and persuade Redwald
neither to do you any harm himself nor to deliver you to be murdered by
your enemies." Edwin replied, "I will give that person all that I am
able, for so singular a favour." The stranger added, "What if I also
assure you that you shall overcome your enemies and surpass in power
not only all your progenitors, but even all that have reigned before
you over the English nation?" Edwin did not hesitate to promise that
he would make a suitable return to him who should so highly oblige
him. Then said the other, "But if he who foretells that so much good
is to befall you can also give you better advice for your life and
salvation than any of your progenitors or kindred ever heard of, do you
consent to submit to him, and to follow his wholesome counsel?" Edwin
did not hesitate to promise that he would in all things follow the
directions of that man who should deliver him from so many calamities
and raise him to a throne. The stranger then laid his hand on Edwin's
head, saying, "When this sign shall be given you, remember this present
discourse that has passed between us, and do not delay the performance
of what you now promise." It was too dark for Edwin to make out the
stranger's features, and he disappeared in the obscurity of the night.

Meanwhile, Coelred and Porlor had not been idle. Porlor had found
favour with the Queen's attendants, and persuaded them to prevail
upon her to grant him an audience, even at that late hour. He told
her what he had discovered from Coifi, and entreated her to save her
husband from the shame of perpetrating such a disgraceful crime as was
involved in the murder or betrayal of an honoured guest. She promised
to do all in her power, telling Porlor to await the result without.
Soon afterwards Redwald went to the Queen's apartment. His mind was not
made up, although he had wished to satisfy the envoys. His wife now put
the matter before him in such dark colours that there was a violent
revulsion of feeling. His face was crimson with shame. He left her
swearing that not only was Edwin safe, but that he would help him to
gain his crown. The Queen then sent for Porlor, and told him the result
of her interview.

Coelred and Porlor were overjoyed. They hurried off in search of
Edwin, and as they came up to him, Coelred cried out, "Arise. Go in and
compose yourself to sleep without fear, for the King's resolution is
altered. He designs to do you no harm, but rather to assist you with
his power." "Was ever man blessed with truer friends!" cried Edwin,
as he embraced the brothers. Next day Edwin related to Coelred his
midnight interview with the stranger, which Coelred repeated to the
other friends. Forthere greeted it with a loud laugh, and said, "I have
seen a monk secretly prowling about, and I recognised him as one I had
known before at Monte Cassiano. His name is Paulinus. Redwald allowed
him to come, and listened to his discourses several times through an
interpreter, but would not permit him to appear in the daytime. The
King of the East Anglians wishes to keep on good terms both with Woden
and with Christ. Hence this secrecy. The night bird has gone now,
and will not be seen again. But mark my words. He is busy hatching a
miracle." And Forthere laughed again.

The King of the East Anglians announced his intention of defending his
guest, and, if the gods were favourable, of restoring him to his crown.
But he said that Ethelfrith was a most formidable antagonist, and that
he would give them but little breathing-time. Redwald's fine young
sons, Reynhere and Eorpwald, were sent to bring together fighting men
as rapidly as possible. Messengers were despatched to Godric, for Lilla
and Bassus felt that their hopes must rest on the result of Godric's
work during the last year, and on the blunders of Ethelfrith. The news
from Godric was excellent. Saebald had arrived at Markham with his
Billingas and with the Athelings, Osric and Oswin. Blecca, the great
thegn of Lindum, promised to join with the Lindiswaras, and the Gainas
were stanch.

The Bernician envoys were dismissed with contumely and defiance.
Ethelfrith was furious, and committed every blunder of which an angry
man could be guilty. He summoned the Deiran thegns to York, and acted
so suspiciously, and with such insolence, that they refused his summons
to join him with their men, and remained neutral, if not hostile.
Levies came in from Bernicia, and as soon as he had what he considered
a sufficient force, the doomed King marched rapidly to the south. He
committed the further blunders of despising his enemy and of taking no
trouble to ascertain his numbers or his plans. The wild King crossed
the Don and marched across the country of the Gainas, direct for
Sleaford.

"We must be satisfied with our present force, and with the aid that
Godric will bring us, as time will not allow us to wait for further
reinforcements," said Bassus, in consultation with the two Kings. "I
know the wild King, and he will do everything in haste. We should
advance rapidly to Godric's home at Markham, near the river Idle.
There will the blow be struck." His advice was taken, and in two days
Redwald's army was massed at Markham. Once more Edwin embraced his
little boys, and saw his two cousins, Osric and Oswin, for the first
time. With himself, the house of Deira now consisted of five male
scions.

Lilla and Bassus laid their plans with admirable skill, leaving
nothing to chance. The village of Markham is divided from the river
Idle by a gentle rising ground. Godric and Blecca were placed half a
mile to the north, with the Gainas and Lindiswaras, just below the
rise, so as to be out of sight from the river. Redwald's main army
was to begin to appear on the rise the moment Ethelfrith reached
the river-bank. This would make him hurry his men across furiously,
and not until the last man was over was the advance to be made. The
river was to be just in rear of the Bernicians. Scouts kept Bassus
exactly informed of the enemy's approach. Ethelfrith despised all such
precautions. Things fell out exactly as was intended. The wild King
shouted and waved his sword when he saw the East Anglians appearing on
the crest of the hill. They halted, and, directly the last Bernician
was across, Redwald and Edwin advanced resolutely to the attack.
Godric alone was visible on the sky-line to the north, and the excited
Ethelfrith did not notice him. A desperate hand-to-hand combat
commenced. Forthere was in the thick of it. He saw the Bernician King
with the glittering gilded boar on his helmet, shouting and calling
on his men. The Berserker rage possessed the son of Brand. Furiously
dealing blows to right and left, he hewed his way to that gilded boar,
and reached it just as Ethelfrith killed the brave young Reynhere
and brutally stamped on his body. The two warriors glared at each
other. Forthere was a much younger and stronger man. "Niddring and
murderer!" he shouted, as he beat down the wild King's guard. "That for
Hereric, and that! and that!" and he dealt him three tremendous blows.
Ethelfrith was on one knee, and Forthere ran him through.

At the moment when Forthere first descried the helmet with the gilded
boar, Godric disappeared from the sky-line. By the time Forthere had
crossed swords with Ethelfrith, the Gainas and Lindiswaras were pouring
over the hillside and falling furiously on the enemy's left flank.
When the wild King was seen to fall, the Bernicians tried to retreat.
The river was in their rear, a fresh enemy on their flank. Very few
prisoners were taken, and Ethelfrith's forces were nearly annihilated.
Next morning Edwin bade farewell to Redwald in a speech full of
graceful thanks. The voice of the East Anglian King was broken with
grief. He said, "I have opened the road wide for you, my friend. I must
now go home to bury my dead. Farewell!"

Lilla urged upon Edwin that if his movements were prompt the whole of
Deira and Bernicia could be secured as far as the Forth. Edwin fully
concurred. Not an hour must be wasted. He thanked Godric and Blecca
warmly for their effective aid, and marched northwards. At first his
little force only consisted of Saebald's Billingas and some Gainas
under Godric. But the march was like a triumphal procession. By the
time he reached York the whole available force of Deira was under
his banner. There was scarcely a halt. Osric was left in command at
York to restore order, and the King marched rapidly northwards. At
Bambrough he found that one of the Bernician thegns had taken all the
sons of Ethelfrith and fled with them into the country of the Picts.
Edwin lamented the loss of Oswald, his sister's son. Nearly all the
other Bernician thegns came into Bambrough and promised obedience. He
then advanced to the shores of the Forth, the northern frontier of his
dominions. Here he established a settlement, and built a fortress on a
high and impregnable rock. It was called Edwins-burg (Edinburgh). When
he returned to York, Edwin was undisputed ruler of the great united
kingdom of Northumbria, extending from the Humber to the Forth.

The work was not yet done. But there were a few weeks of rest. Lilla
was able to visit his beloved Bergliot at Hemingborough, bringing the
little Atheling Oswin with him, to be brought up with his own two
sons and the Princess Ebba. Coelred strongly advised that a final end
should be put to the independence of Elmet, which had become a serious
nuisance. He had been at Stillingfleet, and when he returned to the
King he found that Coifi was in prison. The friends determined to
intercede for him. They remembered the gleeman of their boyhood, he
who had taught them the glorious song of Beowulf and all the northern
lore, they remembered that Alca had acquitted him, and that his latest
treason was atoned for by full confession. At their intercession Edwin
contemptuously told Coifi that he was free to return to his images at
Godmundham.

A large force was organised for the final conquest of Elmet. The
King invited his cousin Braga to accompany him, to take part in a
sacred duty. There was little resistance. The Britons fled in a body
towards Strathclyde, leaving the country to be settled by the advancing
English. At Barwick-in-Elmet the small tumulus hurriedly raised by
Forthere over the body of Hereric was found. The beloved remains were
embalmed with the frankincense and myrrh brought from Ujjayani, and
wrapped in the precious calico and muslin. All his companions, who had
loved the Atheling so well, stood round the body of Hereric, with his
wife Braga and his two little daughters. There was not a dry eye in
the assemblage. King Edwin then ordered that the largest and highest
tumulus in the land should be raised above the most noble and the most
beloved prince of his race.

The King resolved to extend his power from sea to sea, and to include
the Mevanian Islands in his dominions. Scarcely any resistance was
made, and to Coelred was entrusted the conquest of the isles, he being
the ablest and most experienced seaman in Edwin's service. Coelred and
Porlor equipped a small but efficient fleet of armed boats at Chester,
having brought over a number of good sailors from the Humber. Their
expedition was ably conducted and was most successful. The inhabitants
of both the islands submitted, and agreed to acknowledge King Edwin as
their lord.

When the sons of Seomel returned home, there was lasting peace
throughout the vast dominions of Edwin the Great. The members of the
Coelred-_Gemot_ formed the seven firm and solid pillars which supported
the edifice of his power.

At first the friends had served Edwin for his sister's sake, but they
soon began to love him for himself. His good qualities were not on
the surface. He was generous, unsuspicious, and not vindictive. His
friendships were not quickly formed, but they were deep and lasting. He
now looked upon his seven paladins as brothers. He was a man of rare
ability and sound judgment. He was slow to form a decided opinion.
He pondered long over what he was told, dismissing it from his mind
and recalling it again two or three times, before he reverted to the
subject and announced his decision. When a resolution was once taken he
acted promptly and vigorously. He soon became devoted to his country,
and placed the good of his people before all earthly considerations;
and he was endowed with rare gifts which enabled him to secure it. He
had common sense surely guiding him to the right course, even when the
materials for forming a sound judgment were incomplete or inadequate.
He was far in advance of his age by reason of his genius, and not owing
to the extraordinary accidents which raised his paladins so high above
their countrymen in knowledge and experience. Such a man, with such
marvellous assistance, could not fail to become a great sovereign. The
friends had not poured their experiences into his ears at once and in
full detail, as they did in the case of his sister Alca. After much
anxious consultation they had only astonished him with a bare outline
of their stories, reserving particular points to be explained to him in
order to illustrate discussions on measures or decisions, as the cases
arose. By this course they believed they would be most useful in the
service of their King.

Aldby, his birthplace and the beloved home of his peerless sister Alca
the Queen, became the favourite residence of King Edwin.




    CHAPTER V

    BAPTISM


Edwin, about two years after his accession, resolved to take another
wife, and he decided upon sending an embassy to the King of Kent to
ascertain whether a proposal for a princess of his family would be
favourably entertained. Sivel was selected for this delicate mission,
and he proceeded to Canterbury in 619, where he was cordially received
by King Eadbald, and by his old master, Archbishop Laurentius. He found
that a number of changes had taken place in the years that had elapsed
since he and his friends left Kent.

Two years after the boys set out for their homes, Gregory sent a pall
to Augustine and a reinforcement of monks, including Mellitus, Justus,
Rufinianus, and Paulinus, with vestments and ornaments for the church.
A letter was also sent by the Holy Father to Augustine, exhorting him
not to glory overmuch in his miracles. They were becoming a little too
numerous. This was in 601, and in the following year poor old Peter,
having been sent on an embassy to France, was drowned in landing at
Amfleet (Ambleteuse). Gregory died in 605, and near the same time
Augustine had an interview with the Welsh Bishops in Gloucestershire.
It was ostensibly on the subject of the correct way of calculating
Easter, but it was really intended to force the native church into
obedience to Rome. The overbearing Italian expected the British clergy
to submit their judgment to his. He lost his temper, performed one of
his miracles, cursed the British clergy, and kept seated when they
appeared--all which proceedings worked irretrievable mischief. In 604
he ordained Mellitus Bishop of London, where Ethelbert's nephew Sebert,
King of Essex, was willing to receive him. At the same time Justus was
made Bishop of Rochester. In the next year Augustine died, and was
succeeded as Archbishop of Canterbury by good old Laurentius. Ten years
afterwards Ethelbert died, after a reign of nearly sixty years. Besides
adopting Christianity, he introduced a code of laws after the Roman
model, which was written in English, and confirmed by the Witena-gemot
of Kent.

Then there was a panic among the cowardly monks. The new King Eadbald
refused to become a Christian, and the consequence was that the people
returned to the faith of their fathers. The monks declared that, as a
sign of divine anger, he was troubled with frequent fits of madness
and possessed of an evil spirit. Sebert of Essex also died, and was
succeeded by profane sons. They refused baptism, but wanted to eat the
sacramental bread, and told Mellitus that if he would not give it to
them he must leave London. These events were looked upon as alarming by
the monks of Canterbury. They resolved to desert their posts and run
away. Mellitus and Justus actually fled into France. Laurentius was
about to follow, but ventured first to try a miracle. He had not been
accustomed to resort to such practices, like Augustine, but he seems
to have thought that a great occasion justified the means. He went to
Eadbald, took off his shirt, and exposed some marks of recent stripes
on his back. The King was astonished, and asked who had dared to treat
so great a man with such indignity. Laurentius gravely replied that St.
Peter had come down from heaven and scourged him for his intention of
leaving England. Strange to relate, King Eadbald believed the story,
abjured the religion of his fathers, and was baptized. Henceforward he
promoted the affairs of the Church to the utmost of his power, and the
fugitives ventured to return.

Sivel gathered these particulars during his stay at Canterbury,
regretting the proceedings of Laurentius. The King's sister was still
very young, indeed the dates point to her having been a grand-daughter
of Ethelbert. The monks also induced Eadbald to say that it was not
lawful for a Christian virgin to marry a Pagan king. He, however, gave
Sivel to understand that arrangements might be made which would remove
this difficulty, if there was a similar proposal when the Princess
Ethelburga was a little older. During the progress of the negotiations,
Sivel had been busily engaged in procuring a copy of Ethelbert's
laws, and other documents likely to be useful to King Edwin in his
administration. As soon as he was ready, he took a friendly leave of
Eadbald, and visited Archbishop Laurentius to bid him farewell. Sivel
had been grieved to hear of the miracle, and frankly said as much.
"The Prior used to resort to those practices," he said, "but you never
did." Laurentius replied, "My son, these matters are too high for you.
Extreme measures are sometimes needed for the safety of God's Church."
The old man was ill at ease. He had been the instructor of Oswith and
Sivel, Coelred and Porlor on the Caelian Hill, and they loved him.
"Alas!" said Sivel, "you used to tell us that God is truth." Laurentius
bowed his head in shame. Sivel said, "My dear old master!" and put his
hand affectionately on the Archbishop's shoulder. "Will you take my
blessing?" asked the old man. "Thankfully," cried his former pupil, as
he threw himself on his knees. It was a sad leave-taking. A month had
not passed before Laurentius was no more. He was succeeded by Mellitus,
who suffered a good deal from the gout. It carried him off in April
624, and Justus became Archbishop.

Sivel returned to York with an account of the results of his mission,
and was occupied for the next five years in assisting and advising
Edwin concerning administrative measures of various kinds. In 624 Edwin
again sent his trusted minister to Canterbury to ask for the hand of
Ethelburga. He was instructed to assure Eadbald that the Princess
and all her attendants would have leave to follow their faith and
to worship after the customs of Christians. He was even to hold out
hopes that, if Edwin was convinced that Christianity was more holy and
worthy of God than the religion of his fathers, he might embrace the
new belief. This time no objection was made. Eadbald promised that
the Princess Ethelburga should be sent to Edwin. But Sivel found that
Paulinus, the very man who played the trick at Sleaford, which was
exposed by Forthere, was to accompany the bride. Paulinus was ordained
a bishop by Justus before starting, on 21st July 625. He is described
as having been a tall man with a stooping gait, black hair, a meagre
visage, and nose slender and aquiline. James the Deacon was also to
accompany Ethelburga, a zealous and devoted missionary, untainted
with personal cowardice or timidity, and not addicted to tricks. When
Paulinus deserted his post in the hour of danger, James remained and
braved the storm. By the advice of Justus, the Pope Boniface IV. wrote
a letter to King Edwin urging him to become a Christian, accompanied by
a present of a shirt with one gold ornament, and a garment of Ancyra.
Ethelburga received a silver looking-glass and a gilt ivory comb as
papal gifts.

Sivel took his leave of Eadbald and rode with all speed to Aldby to
announce the success of his mission. It was considered right that, as
Paulinus was coming as bishop, the King should be informed by Forthere
of the trick that had been played upon him by that holy person at
Sleaford. Ethelburga came by sea, and was met by Coelred with a fleet
of armed vessels to escort her up the Humber and the Ouse. The King was
at York, where they were married, and then went to Aldby. The Kentish
Princess was handsome, with a serious expression, and was very silent.
She was surnamed "Tate." She received the admonitions and orders of
Paulinus with great humility, but at the same time she was devoted to
her husband.

After about a year had passed away since the marriage, the arrival
of an embassy from Wessex was announced to Edwin. To the general
surprise, the envoy was no less a person than Eumer, the truculent
thegn who, with Cuichelm, acted such a treacherous part at the battle
of Bampton. Edwin ordered him to be treated with hospitality, and
announced his intention of receiving him in audience on the following
day. He supposed that Eumer came to give some plausible explanation
of his master's conduct, and to offer amends. The King took his seat
in the great hall at Aldby, with his thegns on either side of him,
unarmed except with the _seax_, or long knife, worn at the girdle on
the right side. Eumer was introduced, made a low obeisance, advanced
up the hall, and came close to the King. He put his hand into his
breast as if to draw out something to present. Suddenly a long dagger
was flashing over his head and descending like lightning. But devoted
love is ever vigilant, and even quicker than lightning. Lilla had flung
himself between the King's breast and the dagger. The stroke descended
with tremendous force, passed right through Lilla, and slightly wounded
Edwin. In another instant the assassin had turned and plunged his
dagger into the body of Forthere, who was rushing forward. The vile
wretch was then cut down, and almost hacked to pieces.

Lilla and Forthere were dead, the two brave and most loyal paladins.
Never did king have truer and more faithful servants, never were
there more constant and unchanging friends. Bitter rage was mingled
with the intense grief of the Deirans, from the King downwards. Lost
in their prime, and in an instant! Such sorrow as is felt by men who
have shared every hope and every joy, almost every thought, with the
lost ones cannot be described. After the first agony was passed,
Coelred and Porlor saw most vividly the stalwart little Oswith ready
to wrestle with them on the green at Hemingborough, and the brave boy
Forthere sinking exhausted from running and swimming, in the court at
Stillingfleet. Then the whole array of gallant deeds and warm-hearted
thoughts of their beloved comrades came one after the other to their
minds and overwhelmed them with grief. Next followed a stupor, replaced
by more sad reminiscences. The grief of Bergliot was heart-breaking,
and Sivel could not be separated from the body of his beloved Forthere.
Godric too had lost one who had been to him more than a brother, and
Bassus was inconsolable, and went about with a settled sternness on his
handsome features.

[Illustration: Lilla Saves the King's Life]

They buried the fearless son of Guthlaf, the bright boy Oswith, the
unrivalled warrior Lilla, in the old Roman fort at Hemingborough. In
after ages a beautiful church with a tall spire shooting up into the
sky was raised on the spot--a fitting monument to Oswith the fearless,
chief of the Hemingas. Sivel and Godric found a last resting-place
for the body of their beloved Forthere in the tumulus of Vidfinn at
Bilbrough.

On the same day, it was Easter Sunday, the Queen gave birth to a
daughter, who was named Eanflaed. Edwin consented that she should be
baptized at Whitsuntide. Twelve women and children of the Deiran family
were baptized at the same time. Braga had long felt remorse that she
had not complied with the wishes of her beloved Hereric. She joyfully
received the rite with her two daughters Hereswith and Hilda. It also
gave Bergliot some consolation to be baptized with her two little sons.
The wife of Osric came to the font with the young Atheling Oswin, and
Nanna with the son and heir, named Edwin, she had borne to Godric. By
the desire of Godric, Nanna was christened by the name of Mary, to
which her husband added the word "Audr," to denote her rare gifts. The
wife and child of a son of old Saebald made up the twelve.

"Now for vengeance!" said Bassus, with a stern inexorable look, as he
stood before the King. "Now for justice," said Edwin, looking equally
full of righteous anger. A carefully-selected force was assembled, well
armed and supplied by the care of Coelred and Porlor, Sivel and Godric.
It was in four divisions, one commanded by each of the paladins, while
Bassus attended the King's person. Rapid marches were made across
Mercia, where every assistance was offered, and when the Northumbrians
crossed the Wessex frontier they began to devastate, destroying
buildings and crops, and beating down all resistance. They had nearly
reached Sarum when a messenger arrived from Cynegils entreating an
interview. Soon the King of Wessex arrived. He solemnly swore that
he was innocent. He declared that if Cuichelm had not escaped and
concealed himself, he should have been given up. He assured Edwin that
he had arrested at least thirty of Cuichelm's thegns and advisers.
They were handed over to Bassus and hanged before the sun went down.
He paid the full amount of "were-gild" for the murdered thegns. What
more was desired of him? Edwin was appeased. He believed Cynegils to be
innocent. The King of Wessex then fully acknowledged the overlordship
of Edwin, who returned to York the most powerful sovereign that ever
reigned over Britain. He had been Bretwalda since the death of Redwald
in 624 over all the other English kingdoms except Kent.

Edwin had long been pondering deeply over the religion of his people,
and the question of introducing Christianity. Personally he had ceased
to believe in the gods of his ancestors. He also felt that the old
religion was fast losing its hold on the people, while some abiding
faith was necessary for their happiness and well-being. He conceived
that the belief in Woden and the Asyniars had suffered a severe wrench
when it was transplanted from its native land to a new country. It was
like an uprooted tree that had been replanted and failed to thrive.
It was fast withering. So he turned to Christianity. Since the death
of Hereric, Porlor was the friend who was most competent to explain
its tenets, which he did to the best of his abilities. He advised the
baptism of Edwin and the active propagation of the new religion on very
much the same grounds that had recommended such a measure to the King.
Porlor concluded one long conversation by saying, "Alca, thy sister,
was the wisest being this world will ever see. She also pondered over
this question--this solemn question--for years. Her last words were,
'Hereric, my sweet cousin, bring me into the fold of Christ.'" Edwin
was deeply moved, but he only said, "My own mind is made up. But I
think of my people, not of myself."

One day he was meditating deeply, after Porlor had left him, when
Paulinus entered and came towards him with an air of mystery. He
put his right hand on the King's head and said, in a solemn voice,
"Dost thou know that sign?" The effect was very different from what
he anticipated. Edwin sprang to his feet with a look of scorn and
contempt, and waved him away. He said, "Here you will always be treated
with hospitality and respect as a servant of the Queen. But when I
am baptized, it shall be by an honest man, not by a trickster. Go!"
Paulinus slunk off, seeing that his miracle had failed to work.

Edwin resolved to assemble the Witan, and to submit the question to
the great and wise men of the kingdom. The assembly met in the large
hall of the Aldwark at York. Coelred was selected to explain to them
the tenets of the Christian faith, which he did as nearly as he could
in the words of the beloved Hereric when he addressed Ethelbert and his
nobles at Thanet. Edwin then asked the notables what they thought of
the new religion. Coifi had the assurance to speak first. He said that
the old belief had no virtue in it, for that no one had more diligently
applied himself to the worship of the gods than he had, but they
neither inspired him nor would they make his spells work. "Many are
more preferred than I, yet, if the gods were good for anything, they
would rather favour me, who have been more careful to serve them. Let
us receive the new religion without any delay."

Then Saebald, chief of the Billingas, now a very old man, rose and
addressed Edwin. He said, "The present life of man, O King, seems to
me, in comparison with that which is unknown to us, like to the swift
flight of a sparrow through the room wherein you sit at supper in
winter, with your commanders and ministers, and a good fire in the
midst, whilst the storms of rain and snow prevail abroad. The sparrow,
I say, flying in at one door and immediately out at another, whilst
he is within is safe from the wintry storm; but after a short space
of fair weather, he immediately vanishes out of your sight, into the
dark winter from which he had emerged. So this life of man appears for
a short space, but of what went before, or what is to follow, we are
utterly ignorant. If, therefore, this new doctrine contains something
more certain, it seems justly to deserve to be followed." The other
thegns and councillors spoke, generally to the same effect. Osric,
however, manfully maintained that the people should not abandon the
religion of their ancestors.

Coifi again stood up and advised that the temples and altars they
had consecrated without reaping any benefit from them should be set
on fire. "I, who worshipped through ignorance, will first profane
the temples, as an example to others, with the King's permission."
Edwin contemptuously, and perhaps thoughtlessly, gave permission,
for the buffoonery of the recreant priest would cause pain to many
conscientious men. Then Coifi mounted a stallion and set out to
destroy the idols. The people thought he was distracted. As soon as he
reached the sacred enclosure at Godmundham, he profaned it by hurling
a spear into it, and then ordered the venerable images and altars to
be destroyed. Coifi was a bad priest of Woden, and was not likely to
be a good Christian. He had no faith. His name appears to be Celtic,
and as the priesthood was, as a rule, looked upon as hereditary, it
is probable that he was some stray lad who had been adopted by the
"Godi" or priest. His guardian, seeing his natural talent as a gleeman,
allowed him to pass the first half of his life in that capacity, and
Ethelric, for some secret service, promoted him to the priesthood. His
final performance in a priestly capacity was that of a buffoon. He was
equally dissatisfied with his new religion, and died a year afterwards.

Osric was much incensed at the desecration of the venerable images
which had been brought by his ancestors from the Continent when they
first settled in England. Coelred and Porlor also thought that the
conduct of Coifi was contemptible, and that the things highly valued by
their fathers, if their use had ceased, should have been put away with
becoming reverence.

King Edwin, with the full consent of the Witan, had now determined
to undergo the rite of baptism. He began to build a timber structure
near the north-eastern angle of the walls of York, which was to serve
as a baptistery. When it was nearly completed he sent for Sivel, and
entrusted him with a mission. "You remember," said the King, "the
story of my early life, how I was befriended in Gwynedd by a Christian
priest named Urien, and that his son was my playmate. This son was to
be brought up for the priesthood. They were true and honest people.
My Sivel, I want my playmate to come here and to baptize me." He then
explained some topographical details bearing on Urien's country. "It is
a difficult, perhaps a dangerous, mission, but I entrust it to you in
full confidence that it will succeed in your hands. I and my friends
shall be baptized by an honest man, not by a trickster."

Sivel set out alone. His quiet manner, his coolness, and his great
experience made him a most skilful diplomatist. He easily made his way
to Gwynedd and found his man, the British priest Rhunn ap Urien, who
readily consented to return with him. Two months had not elapsed before
King Edwin greeted the simple British priest who had once been his
playmate, and lodged him comfortably in the Aldwark. On Easter Sunday
of the year 627 King Edwin was baptized, in the wooden baptistery at
York, by the British priest Rhunn ap Urien; and with the King his two
sons, most of his thegns, and a vast number of common people also
received baptism. But Osric the Atheling refused the rite. The baptism
was an epoch in the life and reign of Edwin the Great.




    CHAPTER VI

    THE GREAT BRETWALDA


Edwin had achieved the most excellent and most difficult work that
could have been undertaken in that age. He had established profound
peace which continued until his death. His sons Offrid and Eadfrid
had grown to be fine young men. The former was married and had a son
called Iffi, after the King's grandfather. Ethelburga had borne Edwin
four children--Eanflaed, born on the fatal day of the assassinations;
Ethelhun and Etheldrith, who died in infancy; and a son named Wuscfrea,
after the King's great-grandfather. The five paladins were constantly
in attendance on Edwin, ready with their services and advice; including
Godric, whose sons were old enough to manage his affairs in the country
of the Gainas, with the help of his man Wiglaf. Mary Audr (Nanna)
lived with her sister Braga at Stillingfleet, to be near her husband.
Bergliot, with her two sons and the royal children Oswin and Ebba,
was at Hemingborough, for the wife of Osric was dead, and he too was
generally with the King.

The most important matter requiring statesmanlike treatment was the
change of religion. The baptism of the King had led to a strong and
general tendency among the people in the same direction, but Edwin was
determined that no constraint should be used. The choice was to be
absolutely free. Rhunn ap Urien remained, baptizing all classes, and
by his preaching many believed on Christ. James the Deacon was a most
zealous missionary, and visited all parts of the country, explaining
the precepts of Christianity, catechising and baptizing. He was the
man whom Edwin would have preferred as bishop. But he found that the
dismissal of Paulinus would be painful to Ethelburga. He therefore
sent for the Roman monk, who was certainly a zealous preacher and a
man of ability. The interview took place in the same chamber where he
had failed to dupe the King. Edwin said to Paulinus, "Do your work
zealously as the bishop of my church. Preach and baptize. Attend to
the spiritual needs of my household and of that of the Queen. But
remember! there must be no miracles. In this country men are too shrewd
to be treated with such stimulants." Paulinus replied in a becoming
manner, and henceforward confined himself to legitimate work; and Pope
Honorius sent him the pall. The Bishop of York preached and baptized in
Bernicia and in Deira, and in the parts of Lindsey, where he converted
Blecca, thegn of the Lindiswaras, and all his family. A man named
Deda informed the Venerable Bede that a very old man had told him how
he, with a great number of people, was baptized in the river Trent by
Paulinus, near Southwell. Deda's informant even described the personal
appearance of the Roman Bishop. Edwin himself persuaded Eorpwald, who
had succeeded Redwald as King of East Anglia, to embrace Christianity
with all his people. There had been a close friendship between them
since the battle on the Idle. There was, however, a revolt of the party
adhering to the old religion, headed by a chief named Richbert, and
King Eorpwald was murdered. The worship of Woden again prevailed in
East Anglia for three years. Then Sigebert, a half-brother of Eorpwald,
who had been educated in France, succeeded in 630. The new King invited
a monk from Burgundy named Felix to assist him, and when he was made a
bishop, gave him Dunwich for his see. Under Sigebert and Felix the East
Anglians once more became Christians.

After much consultation with his paladins, the King resolved to build
a church of stone at York to replace the wooden baptistery, and to be
dedicated to St. Peter. Edwin entrusted the provision of materials to
Coelred, and the erection of the edifice to Sivel. The chief of the
Stillingas had organised a very efficient fleet to patrol the Humber
and its tributaries. There must be no more kidnapping. Every unknown
boat was stopped and examined, and the crews had to give a strict
account of themselves. A strong patrol was always maintained at the
junction of the Ouse and Wharfe. Coelred employed some of his vessels
to convey the blocks of limestone from Calcaria to York, and Porlor
superintended the work at the quarries. They were near the ford of
Nehalennia, and the brothers often remembered with affection the deity
worshipped by their gentle mother, and the memorable day when they
visited the shrine at Appleton with the Princess Alca. Sivel was well
able to design a working plan. He built with the objects of durability
and strength, constructing his walls by laying the stones in the
herring-bone fashion. Part of Sivel's walls may still be seen in the
crypt of York Minster. The work progressed steadily. The King dedicated
a large gold cross and a golden chalice for the use of his church of
St. Peter at York, which was not finished at the time of Edwin's death.

The paladins of Edwin desired that as Bretwalda of all Britain he
should assume some of the imperial state they had seen at the court of
the Emperor Maurice. Sivel called him Basileus and Sebastos in state
documents. His banners were borne before him when he rode about to
visit all parts of his dominions. On the occasions of his walking along
the streets a tuft of feathers fixed on a spear, called _Tufa_ by the
Romans, was carried before him. The privilege of performing this duty
belonged to Godric.

The King appointed a council consisting of Coelred, Porlor, and
Sivel to examine the code of laws established by Ethelbert, to adapt
them for use in Northumbria, and to prepare a code for submission to
the national "Witan." This assembly of notables of the kingdom was
called at regular intervals throughout the reign of Edwin. With some
alterations, they adopted the code proposed by the King as the laws
of Northumbria. When these great men returned to their homes they
were the means of making known the beneficent measures of the King,
and of impressing upon all men the importance of abiding by the law
and keeping the King's peace. "It was reported that there was then
such perfect peace in Britain, wheresoever the dominion of King Edwin
extended, that, as it is proverbially said, a woman with her new-born
babe might walk throughout the island from sea to sea without receiving
any harm." Once Porlor related to Edwin the story of his journey with
Coelred across the Vindhya Hills to Ujjayani in India, and described
the care of the Malwa Rajas for the comfort of their subjects by
building fountains along the road at intervals and planting trees. The
King was much struck by Porlor's account, and was anxious to imitate
a measure which must add so much to the convenience of travellers. He
saw the importance of encouraging traffic and movement of all kinds.
"In several places where he had seen clear springs near the highways he
caused stakes to be fixed with brass dishes hanging at them for the use
of passers-by; nor durst any man touch them for any other purpose than
that for which they were designed, either through the dread they had of
the King or for the affection which they bore him."

All matters relating to the currency were naturally entrusted to
Sivel, who was so well informed respecting the working of the mint at
Antioch. In Britain it was in a deplorable state of decadence. The
Roman coins of three metals were used long after the legions departed,
until those in circulation were quite worn out. The expedient was then
adopted of melting the defaced money of all three metals together,
from which very small coins were struck called _stycas_. They may
be considered to have been worth about a shilling of our time, with
reference to buying power. They had some letters or runes on them, but
nothing the meaning of which was intelligible, and no king's name.
Sivel began with a reform of the _stycas_. He caused Edwin's name as
King of the English to be clearly stamped on the obverse; his own name,
as the moneyer, with the place (EOFER), on the reverse, and a cross in
the centre. There was no room for more on these minute pieces. Sivel
was also anxious to introduce a silver penny like those of the Eastern
emperors, and he actually designed one. On the obverse was King Edwin's
head, with the inscription--

                       EDVIN : REX : A : BRET :

and on the reverse a winged figure of Alca, and the letters--

                      SIVEL : SERV : ALCA : DIV :

Several were struck; but it was found that the precious metals at the
command of Edwin's government were not sufficiently abundant to bring
it into circulation. Sivel had his mint and treasury at York, and he
taught several young English lads to read and write, so as to serve as
his scribes. He recorded the events of the reign, the measures that
were adopted, and even notes of important speeches delivered in the
Witan, such as those of Coifi and Saebald on the occasion of the debate
on the change of religion. No one can doubt that such a record once
existed who compares the number of anecdotes and incidents and speeches
chronicled by Bede respecting the reigns of Edwin and his immediate
successors with the meagre lists of dates and names and battles which
is all we are told of the other kings of the Heptarchy. Exclusive of
monkish miracles and discussions about the date of keeping Easter, no
other reign is to be compared with that of Edwin for the amount of
information that is given by Bede. It cannot, therefore, be disputed
that the good monk of Jarrow must have had before him either Sivel's
record or very full extracts from some such document.

Edwin's favourite residence always continued to be at Aldby, near the
grave of Alca, but the duties of administration made his sojourns at
York very frequent. He periodically visited all parts of his dominions.
In the far north he had a country seat called Adgefrin on the river
Glen, where the court often remained for a month at a time. Another
country seat was at Catterick, where the fine buildings of the Roman
station of Cataractonium were rendered fit for habitation. Here the
Deacon James eventually took up his permanent abode. Another was at
Campodunum--the modern Tanfield, near Ripon; another at Driffield
in the Wolds. At Barwick-in-Elmet the King sometimes resided in a
fortified house, near the lofty tumulus erected to the memory of
Hereric, the good Atheling. On these occasions he usually invited his
cousin Braga, with her saintly little daughters, to keep him company.

Coelred and Porlor snatched occasional intervals to rest from the
cares of state with their sisters at Stillingfleet. Good old Tanwin had
been gathered to his fathers, but his trusty son Froda was lieutenant
to the brothers, and they intended, in the fulness of time, that he
should succeed them as leader of the Stillingas. They enjoyed the rest
in the old home and the visits to Bergliot at Hemingborough, where they
played with the sons of their beloved Lilla, and taught them warlike
exercises. But what Coelred and Porlor loved most in their advancing
years was to sit or recline together on the grave of Shuprak, and talk
over the past of their eventful lives. Here they could pour out the
innermost thoughts of their hearts to each other, and revive all the
old memories. From the time that they were little boys they had loved
Alca with a pure and holy fervour which entirely prevented any other
woman from obtaining a place in their hearts. Now that she was gone,
the devoted, loving service was changed into worship and a tender
memory. They were, while this life lasted, all in all to each other. It
was a very pleasant spot. The mighty trees of the primeval forest, with
masses of ferns at their roots, overshadowed them, while a grassy slope
extended from Shuprak's grave to the bright little beck which babbled
over rounded pebbles under the willow trees. The quickset hedge and the
open gateway forming the boundary of the court of Stillingfleet were
visible on the crest of the opposite hill.

One evening, as they were reclining together against the mound over
their faithful dog, a clap of thunder rumbled in the distance. It
reminded both of the day of the kidnapping. For a long time neither
had spoken. How enjoyable is an occasional interval of silence by the
side of a dear friend! Coelred was the first to speak. "I remember," he
said, "when we all dashed wildly into the forest on that fateful day, I
turned my head for a moment and saw our mother standing in the gateway,
looking at us with her hand shading her eyes. We were near this very
spot." "Dear gentle mother!" said Porlor, "she never saw us or heard of
us again. Yet Alca must have cheered her last moments with her gracious
confidence that we should return." "I often think," said Coelred,
"that there is no difference between the parting of friends on earth
and the parting by death--at least it has been so in our case. We came
back and found father and mother and many friends cut off by death. We
left friends far away, and have never heard of them since. To us there
is no difference." "I think there is a difference," answered Porlor.
"Sivel heard of the wicked murder of the Emperor Maurice when he was at
Canterbury, and of the cruel slaughter of the good General Narses by
the usurper Phocas. How gladly would we have drawn our swords in their
defence, or to avenge their deaths! Of the rest of our far-off friends
we have heard nothing, it is true. But if we know our friends we can
make forecasts which cannot be far wrong. We may be certain that the
dear Guru ended his days happily and peacefully, and that death had no
terror for him. Good old Monas, after a few years of prayer under his
palm trees, passed away in the certainty that his doctrine was the true
one, and in the undoubting belief of reward hereafter. But I wonder
what has become of that strange young Arab, Muhammad ben Abdallah."
"No common fate," exclaimed Coelred. "I think that he now leads the
believers in some new religion that he has preached. Remember what old
Monas said."

They then talked of themselves, "And what of ourselves?" continued
Coelred. "The Valkyrie have been long in choosing us. Our turn cannot
be far off now. Are we ready, my brother?" "I believe," said Porlor,
"that we have done the work that was set before us with all our might.
That work cannot fail to appear to ourselves, and it certainly appears
to the world, to have been of service to our King and our countrymen.
Our country has been raised to great prosperity. Alca would have smiled
upon us. It is enough. We may rejoice when the Valkyrie choose us."
"But this great prosperity--this happiness enjoyed by our country--will
it last?" "No," said Porlor, "it cannot last. We must work on until
our appointed time, without comprehending the ways of the All-father.
There will be wild kings and confusion again and again. But of this
be certain:--No good work is ever wasted. All may appear hopeless to
those who come after us. They may think our work was in vain. But it
is not so. We have done little. Much of our seed is cast among thorns
or by the wayside. But some few seeds have fallen on good ground and
will bear fruit for ever. We are not unprofitable servants. Our work is
done. I feel that our time is near. My Coelred, we will die together."
They wound their arms round each other in a brotherly embrace, as they
had done under the palm trees by the Red Sea.

Presently the sound of horse's hoofs was heard, and Godric emerged from
the forest. He had come on a visit to Stillingfleet for a day or two,
and announced that on the third day they were all summoned to attend
the King to Adgefrin. The days passed away happily, and when the time
came, Coelred and Porlor bade their sisters a tender farewell. Mounting
their horses, they passed through the well-known old gateway for the
last time.

At the Aldwark they found the King engaged in conversation with
Bassus and Sivel. The great general was representing to Edwin that
neither Penda nor Cadwalla was a neighbour on whose good faith reliance
could be implicitly placed. Penda, the King of Mercia, had succeeded
in 626, not without suspicion that he had made away with his cousin
Kearl, the late King, by violence. He was a truculent, faithless man,
always committing aggressions on his neighbours, and ever thirsting
for blood. He had, however, freely acknowledged the Bretwaldaship of
Edwin, assisted him in his march to Wessex, and continued to profess
friendship. Bassus thought that he protested too much. Cadwalla,
the King of Gwynedd, although professing Christianity, was a more
brutal savage than Penda. He was endowed with some cunning, and also
professed friendship for the great Bretwalda. Bassus had reason for
suspecting that there was a secret understanding between the two
traitors. He was no alarmist, but there had been a long peace, and
the King was unsuspicious and over-confident. A sudden invasion would
find him unprepared. "What has happened to make you speak thus, my
Bassus?" asked the King. The faithful paladin was unable to say that
anything had actually happened. "Ah! you think we are rusting in the
long peace. If there should ever be war, which God forbid," he added
affectionately, "in Bassus will be our hope and our reliance." The
other friends had unbounded faith in the military sagacity of their
beloved companion. But Edwin would hear no more. Bassus and Sivel
remained at York. The rest fared northward, with the King and his
family, to the royal country seat of Adgefrin.




    CHAPTER VII

    THE END


The day had been passed delightfully, hunting in the forests at the
bases of Cheviot Hill and Yeavering Bell. The royal party had assembled
at a trysting-place for an early supper, and was now riding home to
Adgefrin. Edwin looked splendid in his hunting-dress, with his golden
locks falling from a light cap, and his fair beard resting on the
darker leathern coat. He was superbly mounted, and in one hand he held
a hunting-horn. His eyes brightened with pride as he glanced at his
gallant young sons, Offrid and Eadfrid. Close behind him rode Osric and
his young son Oswin. Then followed Coelred, Porlor, and Godric, with
Froda and other faithful retainers bringing up the rear. Alas! it was
the good King's last hour of pleasure. The joyous laughter of the young
Athelings rang through the glades as the cavalcade reached home.

Sivel was at the gate, his face full of anxiety, his horse covered with
foam and ready to drop. He brought certain news that Penda, the King
of Mercia, was marching across the country of the Gainas with a large
army, and had given a defiant answer to a messenger who had been sent
to ask the cause of his invasion. In a few days he would be on the Don.
Cadwalla was known to have an equally large force in motion, and Bassus
was sending out scouts to ascertain his position day by day. He had
also summoned the Deiran tribes to meet at York.

Edwin sorrowfully remembered the timely warning of his faithful
general. Fresh horses were ordered, and the King set out at once,
accompanied by the four paladins and his two sons. Osric undertook to
guard the Queen, Paulinus, and the children, and to escort them as
quickly as possible to Aldby. The King reached York in the first week
of October 633. Still worse news awaited him. Cadwalla, with an immense
army, had crossed the moors from Chester, and was marching rapidly with
the apparent object of forming a junction with Penda. In a hurried
consultation Bassus pointed out that every hour was of moment, as the
only hope was in engaging the two armies in detail, before they were
in touch of each other. But the Northumbrian force was very small, and
there was no time to wait for reinforcements. Bassus wished to attend
on the King's person, but Edwin insisted that he must remain at York.
"If anything happens to me," he said, "who is to guard my wife and
children, who is to save the kingdom if you fall by my side?" Bassus
reluctantly yielded. He was to strive to form a second army at York,
and guard the Queen.

Edwin left York with a small but valiant force, commanded by himself
in person, Coelred, Porlor, Godric, Sivel, the two Athelings, and the
principal thegns of Deira. He felt confident that he could dispose
of Penda if he could engage him before the arrival of Cadwalla. All
depended upon that. At the ford of Nehalennia loyal old Saebald joined
the King with his Billingas. But news also came that Cadwalla was
already advancing down the valley of the Calder. Edwin increased the
rapidity of his marches to the Don.

Hatfield Chase was a vast extent of lake and morass on the lower
course of the Don, overgrown with reeds and other water plants, and
dotted with islands covered with trees and frequented by deer in great
numbers. Penda led his army across this labyrinth, from island to
island, wading and sometimes swimming. He had just escaped from his
difficulties and drawn up the forces of Mercia on the firm land, when
the well-marshalled army of Edwin came in sight. They passed the night
facing each other, with the camp fires of both sides visible, and next
morning they joined battle.

Edwin rose at dawn and called his chiefs around him. "We must beat the
Mercians," he said, "before our other enemies arrive, or we are lost.
It is in the hands of God. If it is His will I will die on this field
fighting for the right. But keep the men in good heart. Friends and
brothers, never in the world's history had king such faithful servants!
Living or dying, our hopes, our aims, are one. True and loyal friends,
we stand or fall together." He embraced his sons, his four surviving
paladins, and the venerable Saebald, whose hair was now white with
age. He was seventy-three. They then all knelt down and received the
sacrament from James the Deacon, who offered up prayers for the good
men and true who were to fight that day in a righteous cause. It was
the morning of the 14th of October 633.

Edwin's army was in three divisions. He entrusted the right to Godric
and Saebald, with his son Offrid. Porlor and Eadfrid commanded the
left. The King and Coelred were in the centre. Sivel was well mounted,
and undertook to bring news to the King from the two wings and to carry
orders. The whole line advanced bravely to the attack, the numbers of
the two armies being about equal, but Penda had his back to the swamps.
Both sides fought most valiantly. At last the Mercians began to give
way. Porlor had actually driven a large body into the swamps. The day
appeared to be won. At this critical moment Sivel galloped up to report
that the Welshmen under Cadwalla were in sight, and rushing down upon
the rear of the English right flank in overwhelming numbers. Edwin was
obliged to order two-thirds of his force, under Godric and Saebald, to
face round and advance to meet the Welsh. Before leaving with these
orders, Coelred called Sivel aside, and entreated him, by their sacred
friendship, to save his life. "One of us must survive," he said. "The
safety of the widows and children will be in your keeping. My Sivel,
you must live on." They pressed each other's hands, and Sivel galloped
off with his orders.

Penda now saw that the force opposed to him was so weakened that it
was less than half his own strength. He rallied his men, and a terrible
slaughter commenced. The Deirans fell where they stood. None fled.
There was not a man who was not ready to die for his beloved King.
Porlor had closed up from the left, and the brothers were now fighting
by the side of Edwin. At this moment Froda arrived with the appalling
news that Godric, Saebald and his sons, and Offrid had all been slain,
and that the right wing was falling back, overwhelmed by numbers.
"Froda, my true friend," said Coelred, "go at speed to the Humber bank,
where you will find one of my boats. Hurry to Hemingborough and to
Stillingfleet. Tell the ladies to fly with the children to Driffield in
the Wolds. Then speed to York and announce the tidings to Bassus that
all is lost. Remember that, when we are dead, Froda the son of Tanwin
is chief of the Stillingas." The young man knelt down, kissed the hands
of the King, of Coelred, and Porlor, then galloped off in the direction
of the Humber.

The very thick of the fight now centred round the King and his two
paladins. Their brave men had fallen in heaps. Not one yielded an inch
of ground. Edwin retreated fighting until he had a bank about six
feet high, covered with tangled briers, at his back. Here he made his
last stand. He wielded his sword like a true Viking, but at length a
spear-thrust dealt him a mortal wound. He fell. Coelred and Porlor
now stood over the body of their King--their backs to the bank, and
half surrounded by the foe. It was not the Berserker rage that flashed
from their eyes, yet something as terrible. It was the righteous wrath
of brave men who foresee the ruin of a great cause. Their blows were
dealt with deadly force and with deadly skill. Before the death-dealing
strokes their assailants recoiled and paused more than once. In such
moments the brothers clasped hands and exchanged a few words. Then
again their swords flashed right and left with lightning speed, dealing
death around. Penda himself had been carried away, sorely wounded.
There was a semicircle of Mercian dead round the hero brothers, as
they protected the body of their King. Another pause. "The Valkyrie
have chosen us at last, my Porlor," said Coelred. "They are carrying
us away." "To Christ," continued Porlor. Then they both quoted the
words of Alca spoken long ago when they were little boys. "We fall in
battle, fighting in a righteous cause." These were their last words.
There were loud yells and shouts, and an irresistible rush of spearmen,
for no sword could touch them. They both fell dead across the body
of the King, which they had defended so long and so valiantly. Their
hands were clasped, their faces turned to heaven. The battle swept
away in another direction, and there was silence. Brambles and ivy and
the straggling branch of an overhanging yew tree, through which the
sunbeams found their way in flickering light, shaded the mortal remains
of three heroes, three among the chief makers of England.

[Illustration: King Edwin. Coelred, and Porlor Slain]

       *       *       *       *       *

"All is lost!" Froda had realised the fears of Bassus. No hope.
Few men had come to his standard. The time was too short. There was
no choice for the Queen but immediate flight. The three widows at
Hemingborough and Stillingfleet had escaped, with the children, to the
fortified post of Driffield on the Wolds. Bassus hastily got one of
Coelred's finest vessels ready, and the Queen, with the three children,
Eanflaed, Wuscfrea, and Iffi, came from Aldby. Paulinus was at York,
and said that he would accompany the Queen to Kent. "Are you not Bishop
of York?" said Bassus with surprise. "Is not your duty here? The Queen
is safe with me." "My duty is to accompany the Queen," replied York's
first bishop, who wanted a safer see. "Coward!" muttered Bassus. "He
deserts at the first hint of danger, like the monks sent by Gregory,
like Mellitus and Justus when they ran away from Canterbury." Unknown
to Bassus, Edwin's golden chalice and cross belonging to the church at
York were appropriated by Paulinus, who wished to make his appearance
in Kent more acceptable by the presentation of these treasures.
Cadwalla would scarcely have perpetrated such an act as this. So
Ethelburga and her children, and her timid bishop, sailed for Kent
under the protection of Bassus.

They arrived safely in Kent, where Ethelburga was affectionately
received by her brother King Eadbald, and she brought up her daughter
Eanflaed at Canterbury. But she could not feel that the boys were safe
while they remained in England. She persuaded Bassus to take Wuscfrea
and Iffi to Paris, and to put them under the protection of her cousin
King Dagobert. They both died in infancy, and were buried with the
honours due to royal children, it is believed at St. Denis. Bassus is
supposed to have then returned to his native country, and to have died
at Rome full of years, fondly cherishing to the last the memory of his
beloved friend Lilla.

The saddest thing of all was the fate of Edwin's two brave young sons.
The body of Offrid was never found. Eadfrid was taken prisoner, and
shortly afterwards was basely murdered by his cousin Penda.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the second night after the battle three lights might have been
seen flickering over the ghastly field. One came from a lantern held
by Wiglaf, Godric's man, who was searching for the body of his master,
accompanied by the two sons of that valiant paladin. They found it, and
carried it to his home, where it was buried amidst fruit trees, on the
site on which afterwards rose the church of East Markham. The other
two lights were carried by Sivel and the Deacon James. They found the
precious remains lying as they fell under the yew tree. Long they gazed
on those peerless forms. "When will God send us their equals?" sighed
Sivel. "It must be long, alas!" assented the good Deacon. "Perhaps in
His own good time men like them may arise again." The three bodies
were borne away to the Humber by many loving hands, and placed in a
boat. Proceeding up the Ouse, the boat was met opposite to Acaster by
Froda and a few surviving Stillingas. The bodies of Coelred and Porlor
were handed over to them, and were borne slowly to Stillingfleet,
where they were interred by the side of Shuprak on the spot they had
loved so well. The Deacon James performed the funeral service, and
afterwards a tumulus was raised over their grave. Sivel then went to
York with the body of the King. Bassus and Ethelburga had already
departed. The head of Edwin the Great was interred under the porch of
his unfinished church. His body was borne to Aldby, and buried by the
side of his sister Alca. Long afterwards it was removed to Whitby by
his grand-daughter the Abbess Elflaed.

The work of Edwin and his paladins seemed to be all undone. But it was
not so. The good seed was sown. Northumbria flourished wonderfully for
nearly a century through the initiative given to progress by Edwin's
brilliant administration, and her Kings were Bretwaldas of Britain.
A great calamity swept over the land, a storm beat down the ripening
grains, but they rose again, bright and golden, and the sowers had not
lived in vain.

          Through labour to rest,
          Through combat to victory.

                              THOMAS A KEMPIS.




    EPILOGUE


This story will be incomplete if a concluding narrative is not given
of the subsequent fates of the friends and relatives of King Edwin and
his paladins, of their children and immediate descendants, as well as a
brief notice of the historian to whose laborious zeal our knowledge of
this striking episode in our annals is due.

As soon as Sivel had performed his pious duties, he took refuge at
Driffield, for the Welsh were close upon his track.

Penda and Cadwalla met after the slaughter. As the former was wounded,
he determined to return to Mercia, after making a bargain for a
share of the plunder. Cadwalla dispersed his army in large parties,
moving northwards to kill, harry, and destroy. The Welshmen committed
every conceivable atrocity: neither age nor sex was spared, and the
savages revelled in their cruelty. Bilbrough and Ulfskelf were sacked.
Hemingborough escaped, but of Stillingfleet not a vestige was left,
and the ancient buildings of Aldby were levelled with the ground. Few
houses escaped their fury. Finally, they occupied York itself, where
there were new scenes of devastation and horror.

Osric collected the remnant of the Deirans at Driffield, who
proclaimed him their King. He declared that he adhered to the religion
of his ancestors, and if the wretched old Coifi had not died soon after
he polluted the sanctuary of Woden, he would probably have been taken
to Godmundham and put to death. After months of preparation, Osric
advanced to York, where the King of Gwynedd still remained. The King
of Deira attacked the Decumanian Gate; but Cadwalla sallied out with
his whole army and put the English to flight. Osric was himself among
the slain. Cadwalla then marched northwards to subdue the Bernicians.
On the death of Edwin, the sons of Ethelfrith had returned from their
exile among the Picts, and the eldest, Eanfrid, had been accepted as
King of Bernicia. On the approach of the ferocious Welsh King, he sued
for peace, and it was arranged that there should be an interview.
Eanfrid came to the enemy's camp with six attendants, and was foully
murdered by Cadwalla. Eanfrid had also adhered to the religion of his
ancestors. Consequently both these gallant young princes, Osric and
Eanfrid, are vilified and slandered by the monks.

Oswald, the son of the peerless Alca, then succeeded, and was joyfully
received, both by the Bernicians and Deirans, as their King. He saw
that there could be no terms with the faithless Welshman--he must be
stamped out. Cadwalla was in the neighbourhood of Hexham, near the
Great Wall. When Oswald reached a spot called Heavenfield, he put up
a cross, helping to fix it in the ground himself. Then, raising his
voice, he cried to his army, "Let us all kneel and jointly beseech the
true and living God Almighty in His mercy to defend us from the haughty
and fierce enemy. He knows that we have undertaken a just war for the
safety of our nation." Advancing towards the enemy at dawn, he gained
a great victory, and Cadwalla was killed at a place called Denisburn,
perhaps Dilston.

Oswald came to York, and visited the melancholy ruins of Aldby, where
his happy childhood had been passed with his mother, and where he
had been torn from the arms of Bergliot by the savage Ethelfrith. He
consulted with Sivel, and encouraged him to persevere with the work of
building the church of St. Peter at York until it was completed. Oswald
applied to the monks of Iona for a bishop, and in 635 they sent him a
devout man named Aidan, to whom he assigned the island of Lindisfarne
as his episcopal see. "A man of singular meekness, piety, and
moderation, and zealous in the cause of God." Oswald was acknowledged
as Bretwalda of all Britain in succession to his uncle, Edwin the
Great, and "when raised to that height of dominion he always continued
humble, affable, and generous to the poor and strangers." The ruthless
savage Penda had to add one more crime to the long list before his
cup was full. He invaded Northumbria, and killed the good and saintly
Oswald at the battle of Maserfield, probably at Winwick in Lancashire,
in the year 642. Oswald's niece Osfrith, Queen of the Mercians,
translated her uncle's bones to the Abbey of Bardney in Lincolnshire in
697, and in 909 they were removed into Mercia. The monks traded much
with them, as a means of working miraculous cures.

Oswald was succeeded in Bernicia by his half-brother Oswy, who had
received a mother's care from Queen Alca, though not her son. He
usurped the rights of Oswald's son Ethelwald, the grandson of Alca.
In Deira Oswin became king in succession to his father Osric. This
excellent prince had been brought up by Bergliot with the sons of
Lilla, to whom he was warmly attached. Trondhere, the eldest, became
his adviser and constant companion. The younger son, Trumhere, entered
the priesthood. During the first year of Oswin's reign the Princess
Bergliot died, and was buried by her sons, by Lilla's side, in the
old Roman fort at Hemingborough. Oswin was a man of wonderful piety
and devotion, and governed Deira very prosperously, with the aid of
Sivel, Trondhere, and Bishop Aidan, during seven happy and prosperous
years. He was tall and graceful, affable and always courteous, and most
generous, so that he was beloved by all ranks of the people. He was
warmly attached to Aidan, who was astonished at his humility, a virtue
rare in kings.

A story was recorded by Sivel, and repeated by Bede, which exemplifies
this virtue. The King had given Aidan an extraordinarily fine horse,
either to use in crossing rivers or in any extraordinary emergency,
for ordinarily the Bishop travelled on foot. Soon afterwards, meeting
a beggar, Aidan dismounted and presented the horse, with all its royal
furniture, to the miserable creature. This was told to the King when he
and the Bishop were going in to dinner. Oswin said, "Why did you give
the beggar that royal horse which was necessary for your use? Are there
not many other horses of less value which would have been good enough
to give to the poor?" Aidan answered, "What is it you say, O King? Is
that foal of a mare more dear to you than the Son of God?" Upon this
they went in to dinner, and the Bishop sat in his place, but the King,
who had just returned from hunting, stood warming himself, with his
attendants, at the fire. Suddenly, calling to mind what the Bishop had
said to him, Oswin ungirt his sword, gave it to a servant, and hastily
knelt before the Bishop asking forgiveness. Aidan was much moved,
and, starting up, raised the King, saying he was entirely reconciled,
if he would sit down at meat and lay aside all sorrow. The King then
began to be merry. The Bishop, on the other hand, became so melancholy
as to shed tears. His priest asked him in Gaelic why he wept. In the
same language Aidan answered, "I weep because I know the King will not
live long. For I never before saw so humble a king, whence I conclude
that he will soon be snatched out of this life, for this nation is not
worthy of such a ruler."

It was too true. In 650 the ambitious Oswy collected a great army
to invade Deira. Oswin assembled a smaller force, and advanced, with
Trondhere, to Catterick. But finding that the King of Bernicia had
a much larger number of troops, he dismissed his men to their homes
to avoid useless bloodshed, resolving to go into concealment until
better times. A certain Earl named Hunwald promised him a safe place
of retirement at Gilling. But Hunwald was a traitor. The place was
betrayed to Oswy. On the 20th of August 650 a commander named Ethilwin
and several followers forced their way into the house. Like his father
Lilla before him, Trondhere threw himself before his master to protect
him from the blows of the assassins. But in vain. He was slain and
thrown aside, and then the good King Oswin was despatched. One may hope
that this was not done by order of Oswy, and that, as in the case of
Henry II. and Becket long afterwards, he was only guilty of a hasty
word misinterpreted by an unscrupulous servant. For some time the crime
was concealed.

It was not known to Sivel, who could hardly have taken a lenient view
of the King's conduct, when bitterly resenting the murders of the son
of Lilla and of the nephew of Hereric. But he was even then on his
death-bed. During the reign of Oswin the last of Edwin's paladins had
been chief of the Billingas, but he had resigned the duties and given
up all his rights to Saebald's grandson Osbert, whose two brothers,
named Adda and Utta, had become priests. For Sivel was now advanced in
years. He lived at York, occupied with his chronicle, his coinage, and
the completion of King Edwin's church of St. Peter, or York Minster.
His cousin Utta had been one of his clerks, and had since taken orders,
but continued to attend on Sivel in his old age. At last his long and
useful course was finished, having reached his seventy-first year,
and survived all his friends. More than two hundred years afterwards
there was a moneyer at York of the same name, who struck coins for
King Edwig, and who may not improbably have been a descendant of
Sivel's cousin Saebald. Osbert, Adda, and Utta conveyed the body of
the last surviving paladin of Edwin the Great from York to Bilbrough.
They buried Sivel in the tumulus of his father Vidfinn, by the side of
his beloved Forthere. The tumulus was then raised to nearly twice its
present height.

Adda became Abbot of Gateshead, and was afterwards employed in the
conversion of the Mercians. Utta was "a man of great gravity and
sincerity, and on that account honoured by all men, even the princes of
the world." When King Oswy resolved to send an embassy to Ercombert,
King of Kent, who had succeeded to his father Eadbald, in 641, to ask
for the hand of the daughter of Edwin the Great, he had consulted Sivel
with regard to the selection of an ambassador, who recommended his
cousin Utta. But the mission did not start until after the funeral of
Sivel. King Oswin, Bishop Aidan, and Sivel died within a week of each
other; and soon afterwards the mission left York.

Bishop Aidan, before his death on 31st August 650, made an excellent
suggestion to Utta. He thought it likely that a storm would be
encountered either going or returning, and he gave Utta a keg of oil,
saying that if he threw it overboard the rough sea would become smooth.
The experiment was remarkably successful, as Bede was told by a priest
named Cynemund, who had it from Utta himself.

Eanflaed, the daughter of Edwin by Ethelburga of Kent, arrived
safely, and was married to King Oswy, the step-son of her aunt, the
peerless Alca. She was then twenty-five years of age. The Queen was
horrified when she heard of the murder of her cousin Oswin, and
recoiled from her husband. He appears to have protested his innocence.
Eventually a monastery was built at Gilling, where daily prayers were
said for the soul of Oswin, and for forgiveness to the repentant Oswy.
The first abbot was Trumhere, the younger son of Lilla and Bergliot,
and brother of the murdered Trondhere. Born in 611, Trumhere was a
cousin of the slaughtered King, his mother Bergliot having been a
sister of Oswin's father. He was brought up in the same monastery with
Chad, the future saint, but not under his direction, as Bede says, for
they were contemporaries. Trumhere went from Gilling to be the first
bishop of the Mercians, with his see at Repton. Resigning his bishopric
into the hands of King Wulfhere, who appointed Jaruman to succeed
him, Trumhere retired to a monastery. When a very old man, he was the
instructor of the historian Bede, and told him the anecdote of St.
Chad, remarked upon by Jeremy Bentham in his _Life of Christ_, touching
his habit of praying whenever there was a storm, and the reason he gave
for the practice. St. Chad succeeded Jaruman as bishop of the Mercians,
and having transferred the see from Repton to Lichfield, he died there
in 674. Trumhere survived him for sixteen years.

A few years after Oswy's marriage, his kingdom was exposed to the
desolating incursions of the bloodthirsty King Penda of Mercia. He did
all in his power to appease the old man. His son Egfrith was even given
up as a hostage to the Mercian Queen Cynthryth. He offered immense
gifts if Penda would return home and cease to devastate the country.
But Penda refused them, swearing to destroy Oswy and all his race. Oswy
became desperate. He said, "If the Pagan will not accept our gifts, let
us offer them to Him that will, the Lord our God." He vowed that if he
was victorious he would dedicate his youngest daughter, Elflaed, to the
service of God.

On 15th November 655, the two armies met on the banks of a stream
near Leeds, which was much swollen by the rains. The place was
called Winwidfield. Penda's army was vastly superior in numbers to
the Northumbrians, and consisted of all the power of the Mercians,
besides a contingent of East Anglians led by their king, Ethelhard.
The dethroned son of Oswald, Etheldwald, the grandson of Alca,
was a spectator, but he did not engage in the battle against his
countrymen. Oswy had with him his (illegitimate?) son Alchred. After a
well-contested battle, the Mercians were forced back into the swollen
water of the flood, where there was much loss of life. Both Penda and
Ethelhard were among the dead. There was a great slaughter, and Oswy
gained a complete victory. The unfortunate son of Oswald is not again
mentioned, and his fate is unknown.

Oswy became very powerful. He was acknowledged as Bretwalda in
succession to Oswald, and for some years he personally administered
Mercia. Afterwards Peada, the son of Penda, having become a Christian,
was allowed to succeed, and was followed by his brothers Wulfhere
(659) and Ethelred (675), who married Oswy's daughter Osfrith. Oswy
must have been a man of considerable ability. He died on 15th February
676, leaving a son, Ealhfrith, by a first wife, and four children by
Eanflaed. These were Egfrith, his successor; Elfwin, cut off in his
youth, which was full of promise; Osfrith, the Mercian Queen; and
Elflaed the nun--the four grandchildren of Edwin the Great.

       *       *       *       *       *

The daughters of Braga now claim our attention. Her younger sister
Nanna, or Mary Audr, as Godric loved to call her, died at Driffield
soon after their flight thither, and was buried by the side of her
brothers. Like her namesake, the wife of Balder, she could not survive
the death of her lord. Braga lived on. At the time of Hereric's flight
she had a strange dream. She fancied that she was seeking for him most
carefully, and could find no sign of him anywhere. After having used
all her industry to seek him, she found a most precious jewel under her
garment, which, whilst she was looking at it very attentively, cast
such a light as spread itself throughout all Britain. It was thought
that this dream was fulfilled in the life of her daughter St. Hilda.
Soon after her daughters were grown up, Braga died, and was buried at
Stillingfleet with her sister and brothers.

Braga's eldest daughter, Hereswith, married Ethelhard, King of East
Anglia, who was slain fighting for Penda at Winwidfield. Her son
Aldwulf, who succeeded, eventually became a monk. Hereswith herself
retired to the monastery of Chelles near Paris. Hilda wished to follow
her sister, but Bishop Aidan recalled her and induced her to lead a
monastic life on some land near the banks of the river Wear. She was
made Abbess of Heruteu (Hartlepool), and, after some years, was removed
thence to be Abbess of Streaneshalch (Whitby), where she was an example
of good life and a person of singular piety and grace. She also had
considerable influence in church and state; and the famous synod, with
Oswy presiding, when Wilfrid confuted Colman in the Easter controversy,
was held in her abbey. She was a great sufferer during the last year
of her life, and died at Whitby on 17th November 680, aged sixty-six
years. She had built another monastery at Hackness, and at the moment
of her death one of the Hackness nuns named Bega (St. Bees) saw her in
a vision being carried up to heaven by angels. When the monks came next
morning with the news, the Hackness nuns told them that they had known
it for some hours. Thus died St. Hilda, the child of Hereric and Braga.

Elflaed, the grandchild of King Edwin, was entrusted to her cousin
Hilda when she was at Hartlepool, and removed with her to Whitby. On
Hilda's death, Elflaed became abbess, and, on the death of Oswy, her
mother Eanflaed came to pass the last years of her life with her child.
They translated King Edwin's body from Aldby to Whitby, and there they
both died and were buried. Oswy was also buried at Whitby. The death of
Elflaed took place in 714.

Both the children of Alca were canonised--St. Oswald and St. Ebba.
The sweet little Ebba was brought up by Bergliot at Hemingborough, and
early took to a religious life. She was abbess of the monastery of
Coludi, now called Coldingham, in Berwickshire. Bede tells us that Ebba
died before 679, when the Abbey of Coldingham was burnt down.

Egfrith, the grandson of King Edwin, succeeded his father Oswy in
670, at the age of eighteen, and married Etheldrida, daughter of Anna,
King of East Anglia, who preferred a monastic life, and bore him no
children. Eventually she obtained her husband's permission to take the
veil at Coludi, where St. Ebba, Egfrith's cousin, was abbess, whence
she removed to Ely. In 679 this king and his brother-in-law of Mercia
had an unfortunate quarrel, and there was a battle on the banks of
the Trent, in which young Elfwin, Egfrith's brother, was killed. He
was a youth of great promise aged eighteen, and his loss was deplored
by both sides. This made it easy for Archbishop Theodore to offer his
mediation, and the combatants were appeased. Egfrith was restless and
ambitious. In 684 he sent an army to invade Ireland; and the following
year he himself led a force to ravage the country of the Picts, much
against the advice of Bishop Cuthbert and his other councillors. He was
led into an ambush at Dunnichen, on the coast of Forfarshire, and slain
on the 20th of May 685, aged forty years, and having reigned fifteen.

Ealhfrith, a son of King Oswy, but not by Eanflaed, succeeded his
brother Egfrith, and retrieved the ruined state of the kingdom. He had
been instructed by St. Wilfrid, and was very learned in the Scriptures.
Adamnan, the Abbot of Iona, was ambassador at Ealhfrith's court, and
presented a book he had written on the Holy Places to that King, who
sent him back to his country well rewarded. In 697 Osfrith, Queen of
the Mercians, sister of Egfrith and grandchild of King Edwin, was
murdered, but the circumstances are not related. Her husband Ethelred
abdicated in 704 and became a monk at Bardney, where he died in 716.
Their son Coelred succeeded his cousin Kenred as King of Mercia in 709,
and dying in 716, he was buried at Lichfield. Coelred survived his aunt
Elflaed by two years, and was thus the last descendant of King Edwin.

King Ealhfrith of Northumbria died at Driffield in 709, and was
succeeded by his son Osred, who was then eight years of age. When only
fifteen, he appears to have been murdered, and a usurper named Coenred,
or Kenred, seized the government and held it for two years. He was
followed by a king named Osric, who reigned for eleven years, when he
is said to have been slain. Then, in 731, King Ceolwulf became ruler
of Northumbria, and reigned until 739. He was not of the family of
Oswy, but was descended directly from Ida, the first King of Bernicia.
He became a monk in 739, leaving the kingdom to his cousin Eadbert,
whose brother was Egbert, the Archbishop of York. This learned prelate
collected a large library, and ruled the see from 729 to 776. Alcuin
was his scholar. Eadbert, after a reign of twenty years, also became a
monk in 757, and died in 768.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Ecclesiastical History of the Venerable Bede is the source whence
nearly all the information respecting the historical persons in this
story is derived. Bede was born during the reign of King Egfrith in
673, in the country between the Tyne and the Wear. Egfrith granted
a tract of land to a friend of his named Biscop in 675, on which
he founded Wearmouth; and in 682 Biscop erected the monastery of
Jarrow on the banks of the Tyne, and became abbot under the name of
Benedict. This remarkable man travelled several times to Rome, bringing
back books and works of art, masons and glaziers. Bede lived in the
monastery of Jarrow all his life, from the age of seven. He received
instruction in theology and the Scriptures from Trumhere, the son of
Lilla and Bergliot, then very old, who thus trained him for his future
historical labours. Bede was ordained priest in 705, during the reign
of King Ealhfrith of Northumbria, by John, Bishop of Hexham, better
known as John of Beverley. Bede seldom left his monastery, but he
certainly paid a visit to Archbishop Egbert at York, and was also most
probably the occasional guest of Ceolwulf, King of Northumbria, who was
a man of singular learning and a great patron of literature. It was
Ceolwulf who requested Bede to write the ecclesiastical history, and to
whom Bede sent the sheets for his perusal. The great historian died on
the 26th of May 735, four years before the retirement of King Ceolwulf
into a monastery.

Bede wrote his history about a century after the death of Edwin the
Great. He received his education from the son of Lilla, and derived
his materials for the Northumbrian part of his history from the
chronicle of Sivel. It was providential that such a man should have
arisen at such a juncture, gifted with talent and ardour in the pursuit
of learning, and that the times should have been favourable for the
composition and preservation of his work. He lived under the reigns of
enlightened Kings of Northumbria, whose culture was due to the impetus
given to progress by Edwin and his paladins. To one of those kings,
the good Ceolwulf, he dedicated his history. He enjoyed the friendship
of the best and most learned of the Archbishops of York before the
conquest, Egbert, the brother of Eadbert the King. He was furnished
with materials from many quarters. But for Bede's history, written
under these favourable circumstances, we should know nothing of the
early proceedings of the makers of England, nothing of the story of
Edwin the Great.

In spite of the excessive number of monkish miracles he records, which
testify to his simplicity, and show that he was not in advance of
his contemporaries in the matter of credulity, Bede is transparently
honest. His authorities are perfectly safe in his hands, and he gives
all his information without a word of alteration. The confidence we may
justly repose in its author increases the interest as well as the value
of the earliest of our histories.


                                THE END


      _Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh_.




                            THE WOLF PATROL

                 A Tale of Baden-Powell's Boy Scouts.

                                  BY

                            JOHN FINNEMORE

 AUTHOR OF 'JACK HAYDON'S QUEST,' 'THE STORY OF A SCOUT,' 'TWO BOYS IN
                WAR-TIME,' 'IN THE TRENCHES,' ETC. ETC.


  Large Crown 8vo. Cloth. Containing Eight Full-page Illustrations in
                        Colour by H. M. PAGET.

                      Price =3s.= =6d.=

This story is the only boy's book which Mr. Finnemore will publish this
season, and deals with a subject now of burning interest among all
boys--the scouting movement founded by Lieut.-General Baden-Powell,
C.B., the hero of Mafeking. The story deals with the adventures of
boy scouts who formed a patrol, and above all, the doings of two
patrol-leaders who, beginning as bitter enemies, become close friends
under the influence of the boy scout movement. The book is dedicated by
special permission to General Baden-Powell, who has been so kind as to
read the story in manuscript, and to approve of it most heartily. In
a letter to the author he says, "Wishing you all success for this so
excellent a work." The book is thus stamped with the hall-mark of the
founder's approval.


                             PUBLISHED BY

          A. & C. BLACK, 4, 5, AND 6 SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W.




                           THE GOLDEN GIRDLE

                                  BY

                         COL. MOCKLER-FERRYMAN


  Large Crown 8vo. Cloth. Containing Eight Full-page Illustrations in
                       Colour by ALLAN STEWART.

                      Price =3s.= =6d.=

The hero of this thrilling story of pluck and adventure is a young
Englishman who, after a course of training at the British Museum, is
sent out by his uncle to Babylon, to unearth a mysterious girdle,
known to have been worn by one of the ancient Assyrian Queens. Making
a start from Baghdad, young Henderson, accompanied by the Residency
Surgeon, crosses Mesopotamia, and eventually enters the Arabian
desert. Here the two friends became the guests of a tribe of Bedouins,
and, while prosecuting their search, enjoy many strange experiences.
They return to Baghdad after a fruitless quest, and subsequently the
hero returns alone to the desert, when, with his Bedouin friends, he
resumes the pursuit of what he now discovers to be the object of the
most superstitious dread. The chase, as told, is replete with exciting
adventures, and the interest of the story is maintained to the end. The
young Englishman's indomitable determination has its reward, and the
mysteries ascribed to the Golden Girdle are laid at rest.


                             PUBLISHED BY

          A. & C. BLACK, 4, 5, AND 6 SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W.


                          TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

-Italic text is denoted by _underscores_; bold text by =equal signs=.

-fixed plain print and punctuation errors.

-Page 33: the word "Sose" has benn changed in "Sose" as below

-Page 96: "Monte Cassiano" is obviously an error; corrected as
 "Monte Cassino".

-Page 169: Every source gives "Naravatna" as a single word; I left it
 as spelled by author.

-Page 291: "united kingdom" has not been capitalised because doen't
 refer to the modern United Kingdom.

-Page 322: Colons spaced because they mean separation between words and
 not punctuation, following the ancient inscription style.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Paladins of Edwin the Great, by
Clements R. Markham

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PALADINS OF EDWIN THE GREAT ***

***** This file should be named 45543.txt or 45543.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/5/4/45543/

Produced by Giovanni Fini, sp1nd and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

