The Project Gutenberg EBook of Poems, by Iris Tree

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Poems

Author: Iris Tree

Release Date: May 14, 2014 [EBook #45643]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS ***




Produced by Clarity, Charlie Howard, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









  POEMS BY
  IRIS TREE


The author returns thanks for permission to use in this collection of
her poems, those which have appeared in Poetry, Vanity Fair and the
"Wheels" Anthology.

[Illustration:

  HEAD OF IRIS TREE         BY JACOB EPSTEIN
]




[Illustration]

  Poems
  by
  Iris Tree

  Decorations by
  Curtis Moffat

  LONDON: JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD
  NEW YORK: JOHN LANE COMPANY
  MCMXX




  Press of J. J. Little & Ives Company
  New York, U. S. A.




CONTENTS


ROCKETS AND ASHES

                                                                PAGE
  "YOU PREACH TO ME OF LAWS, YOU TIE MY LIMBS"                    11

  "WE ARE THE CARETAKERS OF EMPTY HOUSES"                         12

  "FROM FAR AWAY THE LOST ADVENTURES GLEAM"                       13

  "GIVE ME, O GOD, THE POWER OF LAUGHTER STILL"                   14

  "WINDING DOWN THE STREET IN WEARIED GAIETY"                     15

  "TRANQUILLITY STIRRED BY A SUDDEN SPASM"                        17

  "I COULD EXPLAIN"                                               18

  "I FEEL IN ME A MANIFOLD DESIRE"                                19

  "SILENCE"                                                       20

  "I SHOULD LIKE TO SAY TO THE WORLD"                             21

  "YOU PASS AS IN A DRUGGED DELIRIUM"                             22

  "O FACES THAT LOOK SO COLDLY AT ME"                             23

  "I SEE MYSELF IN MANY DIFFERENT DRESSES"                        24

  "THERE ARE SONGS ENOUGH OF LOVE, OF JOY, OF GRIEF"              25

  "HOW OFTEN, WHEN THE THOUGHT OF SUICIDE"                        27

  "IT IS STILL SOMETHING TO HAVE CHEATED GOD"                     28

  "WHAT WORDS THAT MOVE ON WINGS IN A LONG DRIFT"                 29

  "I THINK MYSELF"                                                30

  "THE ADORED, WILD, STRANGE, IRRESISTIBLE"                       31

  A ROSE                                                          32

  "LIKE FLOCKS OF TIRED BIRDS WHEN AUTUMN COMES"                  33

  "OH, JUST BEYOND THE CURVE OF IDEAL QUEST"                      34

  "AH! YOU, FROM THE SMALL HIGH-WALLED ACRE OF YOUR LIVES"        35

  "MOUTH OF THE DUST I KISS, CORRUPTION ABSOLUTE"                 36

  "THE CURTAINS ARE DRAWN AS THOUGH IT STILL WERE NIGHT"          37

  BLACK VELVET                                                    38

  NERVES                                                          39

  "MY PAIN HAS ALL THE PATIENCE OF A NUN"                         40

  "THE SCANDAL-MONGER AFTER ALL IS RIGHT"                         41

  "WOODS OF BROWN GLOOM SOMBRING WITH THE HUSH OF DEATH"          42

  "I FEEL SO MUCH ALONE"                                          43

  THE COMPLEX LIFE                                                44

  "SHALL WE BE CHRISTENED POETS, CHILDREN OF GOD"                 46

  "WHEN I AM WEARY AT THE ANTIC CHANCE"                           47

  MOODS                                                           48


SMOKE

  "NOW IS THE EVENING DIPPED KNEE-DEEP IN BLOOD"                  53

  "BLOW UPON BLOW THEY BRUISE THE DAYLIGHT WAN"                   54

  "A RAGGED DRUMMER RIDES ALONG THE STREET"                       56

  ZEPPELINS                                                       58

  "O FLATTERY, IMPOSTURE, BATTLE SHOW"                            62

  "WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO THE BEGGAR, AND THE SINNER, AND THE SAD"   63

  "IF I WERE WHAT I WOULD BE, AND COULD BREAK"                    64

  HOLY RUSSIA                                                     65

  "HOW DEEPLY NURTURED IS YOUR FOOLISHNESS"                       67

  "OF ALL WHO DIED IN SILENCE FAR AWAY"                           68

  "AND AFTERWARDS, WHEN HONOUR HAS MADE GOOD"                     69

  "PITY THE SLAIN THAT LAID AWAY THEIR LIVES"                     70


FLAME

  "YOU HAVE UNDERSTOOD SO LITTLE OF ME, AND MY ADORATION"         75

  "LULLED ARE THE DAZZLING COLOURS OF THE DAY"                    77

  "WASHED AT MY FEET BY THE CURDED FOAM OF SLUGGISH WAVES"        78

  "MY POEMS CANNOT LAUGH. THEY ARE THE VOICE"                     79

  "ON THE HILL THERE IS A TAVERN, LONG-LOVED, WELL-REMEMBERED"    80

  "OH CANST THOU NOT HEAR IN MY HEART ALL ITS WHISPERING FEARS"   81

  "AS IN THE SILENCE THE CLEAR MOONLIGHT DRIPS"                   83

  "I CAN BUT GIVE THEE UNSUBSTANTIAL THINGS"                      84

  "I HAVE NO OTHER FRIEND BUT THEE"                               85

  "BODIES HEAVING LIKE WAVES"                                     88

  "YOUR FACE TO ME IS LIKE A BEAUTIFUL CITY"                      89

  "OH! WHY WILL YOU NOT LET ME LOVE YOU"                          90

  "MY DEVOTION KNEELS TO YOU"                                     92

  ISLANDS                                                         93

  "MANY THINGS I'D FIND TO CHARM YOU"                             94


LAMPLIGHT AND STARLIGHT

  LAMP-POSTS                                                      97

  LONDON                                                          98

  "SLOWLY THE PALE FEET OF MORNING"                              100

  "WHAT HAVE I TO DO WITH THEM"                                  101

  "AMONG THE CRUMBLING ARCHES OF DECAY"                          103

  "AS A NUN'S FACE FROM HER BLACK DRAPERIES"                     105

  "THE SUN IS LORD OF LIFE AND COLOUR"                           106

  BAHAMA ISLANDS                                                 107

  THOUGHTS OF LONDON                                             108

  STREETS                                                        109

  "LAUGHTER AND SINGING COME WITH THE MORNING"                   113

  "IN THE NIGHT I HEAR MY LONELINESS CALLING"                    114

  SUNDAY                                                         115

  "THE LEAVES ARE SINGING, AND THE SEA"                          116

  "HOW SOUNDLY SLEEPETH THE FOOL"                                117

  "MOONLIT LILACS UNDER THE WINDOW"                              118

  "OLD WOMAN FOREVER SITTING"                                    119

  "LONELINESS I LOVE"                                            120

  I MET AN INDIAN                                                121

  "FROM THE FATHOMLESS DEPTH OF MY BOREDOM"                      124

  "LOLLING IN SNOW, LIKE KINGS IN ERMINE COATS"                  125

  "THE ROOTS OF OUR LONGING ARE PROBING THE HEART OF NIGHT"      126

  VAHDAH                                                         127

  "STARLIGHT SILENCES"                                           128

  "THE MOUNTAIN IS AN EMPEROR"                                   130

  "I KNOW WHAT HAPPINESS IS"                                     131

  "LONG HATH THE PEN LAIN IDLE IN MY HAND"                       133

  "I LAY MY HEART ON A STONE"                                    134

  "THE COLD LIGHT STEALS INTO MY SOUL"                           135

  "THE CARAVANS OF SPRING ARE IN THE TOWN"                       136

  "I DREAD THE BEAUTY OF APPROACHING SPRING"                     137

  TO MY FATHER                                                   139

  TO MY MOTHER                                                   140

  "LONDON GROWS SAD AT EVENING"                                  142

  AH! THE SPRING                                                 143

  THE UNDERTONE OF THE VOLGA BOAT SONG                           144




ROCKETS AND ASHES

[Illustration]




  You preach to me of laws, you tie my limbs
    With rights and wrongs and arguments of good,
  You choke my songs and fill my mouth with hymns,
    You stop my heart and turn it into wood.

  I serve not God, but make my idol fair
    From clay of brown earth, painted bright with blood,
  Dressed in sweet flesh and wonder of wild hair
    By Beauty's fingers to her changing mood.

  The long line of the sea, the straight horizon,
    The toss of flowers, the prance of milky feet,
  And moonlight clear as glass my great religion,
    And sunrise falling on the quiet street.

  The coloured crowd, the unrestrained, the gay,
    And lovers in the secret sheets of night
  Trembling like instruments of music, till the day
    Stands marvelling at their sleeping bodies white.

  Age creeps upon your timid little faces
    Beneath each black umbrella sly and slow,
  Proud in the unimportance of your places
    You sit in twilight prophesying woe.

  So dim and false and grey, take my compassion,
    I from my pageant golden as the day
  Pity your littleness from all my passion,
    Leave you my sins to weep and whine away!

  1914




  We are the caretakers of empty houses,
  The moon leans her slender body against the door,
  But the lock is jarred with rust.
  The sun looks in through the window,
  But its closed shutters are as blinded eyes.
  Our souls are full of dead and beautiful things
  Like bowls of potpourri,
  A dust of petals
  Rustling through the tired fingers of a ghost.

  1918




  From far away the lost adventures gleam,
  The print of childhood's feet that dance and run,
  The love of her who showed me to the sun
  In triumph of creation, who did seem
  With vivid spirit like a rainbow stream
  To paint the shells, young blossoms, one by one
  Each strange and delicate toy, whose hands have spun
  The woven cloth of wonder like a dream ...
  The row of soldiered books, authority
  Sharp as the scales I strummed upon the keys,
  The priest who damned the things I dared not praise,
  Rebellion, love made sad with mystery--
  And like a firefly through the twilit trees
  Romance, the golden play-boy of my days.

  1917




  Give me, O God, the power of laughter still,
  I shall have need of humour, deftest foil
  Against the army of infuriated pride,
  Against the shields of reason, and the spears
  Of savage moments, sharp-edged bitterness;
  Against the blazoned armour of intolerance,
  And all the flags of sentiment waved aloft....

  Love, Humour, and Rebellion, go with me,
  Three musketeers of faithful following.
  We will fear nothing.--Is not laughter brave,
  That unconcerned goes rippling through despair?
  Is not rebellion brave, that fiercely moves
  Against the buttressed prisons of the world?
  And is not love the bravest of them all,
  So frail to hold his white hands up to Heaven
  While the red fists are threatening all around,
  And hate is beating on the battledrums?
  As d'Artagnan upon a starved grey horse
  Goes singing ballads on adventurous roads,
  I ride my fancy blithely into danger
  To throw my gauntlet at the feet of pride
  And stick my roses in the cap of Love....

  1916




  Winding down the street in wearied gaiety, the barrel-organ dribbled
        out its song
  Merged with the thud of feet forever dallying indifferent and
        indefinite along.
  The houses stood like rows of cripples, some paralysed, some
        hunch-backed and some bent with age,
  They seemed at war, their chimneys threatening, their brows hung
        heavy in a sombre rage.
  Crab-like the children crawled, while always hammering above their
        heads the scolding shrewish tongue;
  They grew as bloodless flowers unflourishing, waxen and pale from out
        the dust and dung.
  Above I saw the strip of sunset fluttering, even as washed-out rags
        upon the line,
  I listened to the sparrows twittering, and the hours ticking in a
        slow decline.
  Then beaded on the hem of evening, the coloured lights were threaded
        here and there,
  Till proud with sweets and plumes and oranges, the shops grew
        brilliant in the tinsel glare.
  Grey was the death-bed of the twilight, shuddering the faint hands of
        the day stretched to the night,
  Fending it off, or feebly wavering over the pallid glints of stolen
        light.
  And grey the faces that were gathering among the fallen ashes of the
        day,
  And red the faces, yellow, flickering, under the lamps upon the long
        highway.
  And some were gashed with smiles, and quaint grimaces of hate and
        pain and hunger and despair,
  And some wore coloured hats and meek frivolities, limp ribbons, and
        false pansies in their hair,
  But all were cold, and all seemed passionless; there shone no zest or
        splendour in their lives,
  Nor hope in anything but holidays, or watching funerals, or taking
        wives.
  I dared not think, for truth rose horrible, slapping the face with
        coarse uncaring hand,
  But like them cheated into merriment, I wilfully refused to
        understand;
  Turned me away from wan-eyed poverty, trod pity underfoot, oh, danced
        on grief,
  Bade the crowd sing and fill my desolation, bade them be glad and
        hide my disbelief.

  Strange we so love the world--for presently, out of my window looking
        on the city,
  I blessed the night, and the roofs slumbering all huddled, and I felt
        no shame nor pity
  For all our dusty days of journeying amid the wreck and ruins of our
        dreams,
  Meandering in a bleared forgetfulness, where lethe laps the wharf of
        sleeping streams.
  I only breathed the air, intensified by the ascending breath of
        million lungs,
  And heard the labouring metropolis, quickened by whispers of a
        million tongues;
  And felt a king of splendid loneliness, and felt an atom of the
        peopled spaces,
  And felt again my lordly egoism, one face distinct among the blur of
        faces.

  1913




  Tranquility stirred by a sudden spasm,
  Knives of rain that cut the silence,
  Storms that rattle the bones of the forest,
  Calm of the marble-terraced night
  Charred with the spattering of rockets.

  Drums will I hear and battles now,
  And the long death howl of wolves by night,
  Watching the moon on the forest tops,
  Walking with delicate frightened steps
  To the slaughter-house of a red sunrise.

  1918




  I could explain
  The complicated lore that drags the soul
  From what shall profit him
  To gild damnation with his choicest gold.
  But you
  Are poring over precious books and do not hear
  Our plaintive, frivolous songs;
  For we in stubborn vanity ascend
  On ladders insecure,
  Toward the tottering balconies
  To serenade our painted paramours;
  Caught by the lure of dangerous pale hands,
  Oblivion's heavy lids on sleepless eyes
  That cheat between unrest and false repose.
  And we are haunted
  By spectral Joy once murdered in a rage,
  Now taking shape of Pleasure,
  Disguised in many clothes and skilful masks.
  I could disclose
  The truth that hangs between our lies
  And jostles sleep to semi-consciousness;
  Truth, that stings like nettles
  Our frail hands dare not pluck
  From out our garden's terraced indolence.
  We are not happy,
  And you make us dumb with loving hands
  Reproachful on our lips.
  Nor can we sob our sorrows on your breast,
  For we have bartered diamonds for glass,
  Our tears for smiles,
  Eternity for now.

  1917




  I feel in me a manifold desire
  From many lands and times and clamouring peoples,
  And I the Queen
  Of crowding vagabonds,
  Ghosts of lost years in seeming fancy dress,
  With pathos of torn laces
  And broken swords;
  Cut-throats and kings and poets
  Who have loved me
  In visions wild, not knowing
  What I was.
  In me no end
  Even where the last content
  Clasps on my head a crown
  Of shining endurance--
  I slip from all my robes
  Into the rags of a tattered romance;
  The stars crowd at the window,
  Their jealous destiny
  Raps at the door--
  They bob and wink and leer,
  And I must leave the lamplight for the road
  To keep strange company.
  Farewell and Hail!

  1917




  Silence--
  Somewhere on earth
  There is a purpose that I miss or have forgotten.
  The trees stand bolt upright
  Like roofless pillars of a broken temple.
  There is a purpose in Heaven,
  But for me
  Nothing.

  1917




  I should like to say to the world:
  I have launched my soul like a ship upon free waters;
  Beautiful she stands in the docks with proud masts cutting
        the sky,
  Perfectly poised, her white sails spreading like wings,
  Her figurehead a woman with breasts that daunt the spray,
  Her flag a flutter of coloured exuberance.
  I should like to see her plunging out of the idle harbour
  Where the sulky tide drifts scum, and the sailors wrangle and
        shout,
  In a thunder of churning waves ramping before her like dappled
        stallions,
  Blossoming behind her a field of etiolate lilies....

  But to the mimicking, plotting, miserly, cynical,
  To the rabble and gabble that dance and kill on the quay,
  I can only say that my soul is a sleeping gondola
  Lulled by a jester's mandolin, till night is atinkle with tunes
  And lantern-lights, along the indolent backwaters.

  1915




  You pass as in a drugged delirium
  Wrought strange upon the mind's distraction;
  You sing a blasphemous Te Deum
  To harlot virgins, and a fraction
  Of your fulginous colour passes,
  Stains my spirit's great conception
  As it dips into your glasses.
  I that am the sole exception
  To your stillborn, false devices,
  I that know you, I that hate you,
  I that drank now spit your vices
  Through my loathing reinstate you;
  Dive once more into the stagnance,
  Kiss your cynic lips and drink you,
  Concentrate your cruel fragrance,
  Steal your flowers before I sink you,
  Lift with hate instead of praises,
  Show you honour of my scorning,
  Garlanded you go to blazes
  With my rhymes for your adorning!

  1913




  O faces that look so coldly at me,
  Colder than dawn through the windows of festival,
  Colder than dawn with her grey nun's face.
  You blame me, you curse me with your eyes,
  While your lips are filled with flattering syllables,
  With tinkling bells that harass my calm,
  Disturb my silence and shatter my thoughts.
  Your laughter waltzes like musical boxes,
  How can I hear the triumphant symphonies?
  The scarlet rhapsodies and beryl-cold sonatas? ...
  Ah, strangers, ah, vacant tedious faces,
  Bobbing beneath the feathery hats,
  You have stolen the wings of birds for your garnishing,
  And the stars and the dim pale petals of the sea
  To make your breasts resplendent, to glitter your dress,--
  How I might love you and weep for you,
  Crowning your brows with a wreath of songs
  If you could understand my singing,
  If you could understand my love!
  But you are waltzing with your marionettes
  And marching to the music of the clock--
  I cannot bear you to watch me
  With those cold eyes through which I see,
  Emptiness only and dust.

  1918




  I see myself in many different dresses,
  In many moods, and many different places;
  All gold amid the grey where solemn faces
  Are silence to my mirth--a flame that blesses
  From yellow lamp the darkness which oppresses ...
  Or mid the dancers in their trivial laces
  Aloof, as in the ring a lion paces,
  Disdainful of their slander or caresses.
  I see myself the child of many races,
  Poisoners, martyrs, harlots and princesses;
  Within my soul a thousand weary traces
  Of pain and joy and passionate excesses--
  Eternal beauty that our brief love chases
  With snatch of desperate hands and dying tresses.

  1917




  There are songs enough of love, of joy, of grief:
    Roads to the sunset, alleys to the moon;
  Poems of the red rose and the golden leaf,
    Fantastic faery and gay ballad tune.

  The long road unto nothing I will sing,
    Sing on one note, monotonous and dry,
  Of sameness, calmness and the years that bring
    No more emotion than the fear to die.

  Grey house, grey house and after that grey house,
    Another house as grey and steep and still:
  An old cat tired of playing with a mouse,
    A sick child tired of chasing down the hill.

  Shuffle and hurry, idle feet, and slow,
    Grim face and merry face, so ugly all!
  Why do you hurry? Where is there to go?
    Why are you shouting? Who is there to call?

  Lovers still kissing, feverish to drain
    Stale juices from the shrivelled fruit of lust:
  A black umbrella held up in the rain,
    The raindrops making patterns in the dust.

  If this distaste I hold for fools is such,
    Shall I not spit upon myself as well?
  Do I not eat and drink and smile as much?
    Do I not fatten also in this hell?

  Sadness and joy--if they were melted up,
    Things that were great--upon the fires of time
  Drop but as soup in the accustomed cup,
    Settle in stagnance, trickle into grime.

  Faith, freedom, art that fire a man or two
    And set him like a pilgrim on his way
  With Beauty's face before him--what of you,
    Priest, Butcher, Scholar, King, upon that day?

  The dullard-masses that no god can save!
    If I were God, to rise and strike you down
  And break your churches in an angry wave
    And make a furious bonfire of your town!

  God in a coloured globe, alone and still,
    Embroidering wonders with a fearless brain,
  On loom of spaces measureless, to fill
    The empty air with passion and with pain.

  Emblazon all the heavens with desire
    And Wisdom delved for in the depths of time--
  Thoughts sculptured mountainous, and fancy's fire
    Caught in the running swiftness of a rhyme.

  Passion high-pedestalled, pangs turned to treasure,
    Perfected and undone and built afresh
  With concentrated agony and Pleasure ...
    If I were God, and not a weight of flesh!

  1914




  How often, when the thought of suicide
  With ghostly weapon beckons us to die,
  The ghosts of many foods alluring glide
  On golden dishes, wine in purple tide
  To drown our whim. Things danced before the eye
  Like tasselled grapes to Tantalus: The sly
  Blue of a curling trout, the battened pride
  Of ham in frills, complacent quails that lie
  Resigned to death like heroes--July peas,
  Expectant bottles foaming at the brink--
  White bread, and honey of the golden bees--
  A peach with velvet coat, some prawns in pink,
  A slice of beef carved deftly, Stilton cheese,
  And cup where berries float and bubbles wink.

  1917




  It is still something to have cheated God
  And bored the Devil with so easy prey,
  And in the midst of summer woods to raise
  A leafless tree whose stark limbs mock at Heaven,
  Flaunting an iron hatred in the midst of hope--
  Yet sometimes in the loneliness of night
  My buried longings blossom on the boughs,
  My wistful longings come out star by star,
  Till the great sky is light with my desire,
  And on the winds my songs are galloping....
  Ah, to what dismal greyness creeps the soul
  Too weak, too tired, to struggle from the slough!
  My weapons rust, my pen is in the dust,
  The moulting feathers plucked from out my wings
  Lie dangling in the hats I stole them for.
  My heart is floating in a claret cup,
  My brain is toppling drunken at the brim,
  My life is drowned within the lurid dregs.
  I turn and fold my hands in a last appeal,
  What heaven shall I pray to and for what,
  Now that my songs to penny tunes are set,
  And nothing is to save of me but flesh?

  1913




  What words that move on wings in a long drift
  Can waft this silence into weary ears,
  And steal into the veins and fingertips
  Of restless bodies, like magnificent ships
  Proud from the seas that calmly sail through fears,
  Mean streets, and miseries, with passage swift.
  What words pricked from the stars and shimmering together,
  Or swept like little winds through leaves alert,
  Can filter through the chinks of bolted doors
  Deaf to the clamours knocking without pause,
  Steeled with indifference against all hurt,
  Deaf to the cry of man, and rack of weather:
  To sing the hubbub of this glittering night,
  Where all the lamps each with a separate soul
  Throb to the ecstasies of dancing life;
  And Beauty, gleaming high her magic knife
  Cuts free the tethered heart from long control
  And flings it like a ball with mad delight
  Into the silver lap of the young moon.
  What needles quick, what threads, what fingers fine
  Can broider tapestries as rich as these,
  Stranger than dreams and drifting melodies,
  Transparent as the gods we half divine,
  Frail as the thoughts that dwindle in a swoon
  Ghostly before begetting. Tinged with pain
  That glimmers pale on hands we cannot find,
  And visioned faces that our dreams create
  Born in the land forbidden us of fate
  And longed for all our lives ... What words can bind
  Forever Joy, that never comes again!

  1915




  I think myself
  The fool of tragedy strutting upon the stage
  Where murder creeps and whispers.
  The jester clad in piebald tights
  Half black, half golden, with no company
  Save bells that jingle,
  And an effigy,
  The grinning image painted like myself
  Upon a stick....

  I think myself
  The fool of comedy mournfully straying
  Amid the revellers,
  Loving the moon and my own shadow
  With its strange solemn gestures--
  Loving the painted moon
  That lets me play with shadows.

  I am the jester on an empty stage
  Playing a pantomime
  To spectres in the stalls,
  Listening at last
  For ghostly mirth and phantom hands applauding,
  And for some king with decadent tired fingers
  To fling a white gardenia at my feet.

  1918




  The adored, wild, strange, irresistible,
  How they fail one at the last!
  What is there in your faces
  That we should worship with our souls?
  Most lovable, perfidious,
  Vague--
  Molesting even our visions
  With treacherous pathos.
  O vulgarity, mediocrity, stupidity,
  What is it in you that makes us lavish our love,
  Covering your meagre bodies
  With our passionate mantle, dyed with blood and dreams?
  Life and its grey days, and time
  Are a thin curtain through which you shadow,
  Or a dim glass through which you peer.
  You climb in at the windows of our souls
  With ladders and stratagems,
  You mope in corners with reproachful eyes.
  But what do you do for us
  Lute players, dancers, deceivers,
  Other than lie with red lips
  And cajole with tears of beryl?
  People--
  Men and women with laughable, tragic faces
  Winking at love,
  Treading our songs and illusions
  Under petulant feet!

  1917




A ROSE


  What do you ask of me with your beauty, what are you urging
  Of labour and painful aspiring to flatter your perfection?
  What secretness of love with terrible blushes surging
  Unseen, have found in you at last their passionate reflection?

  What dreams that lovers knew, as sleep with subtle magic
  Tore off the rags of life and made her dance with body spangled,
  Drew back the vacant hours, the tedious and the tragic,
  And showed the glittering souls from bodies we had mangled;--

  What visions made you, emblem of longing and love that has died
        unrequited,
  And all lost joys, and tears, and beauty passionately given,
  Winked at by folly, skewered by the butcher, danced on and
        slighted,
  That now spring up from death, showing their slayers the colours of
        Heaven?

  You have burst from the ground with your joy, you are pining and
        bleeding,
  Your scent is heavy with sorrowful love; oh, memories clinging,
  What do you ask of my soul with such fierceness of pleading,
  I that was glad to forget ... What do you need of my singing?

  1916




  Like flocks of tired birds when autumn comes,
  My spirit flags across the darkening fields
  And melts into the drabness of the sky
  And falls like dust upon the huddled corn.
  But many wizened faces brown and sad
  Peer from the bushes as I wander past,--
  They tell me all those things that old men say
  As youth looks up through tears with pallid cheek.
  "When you are grey and crooked as ourselves,
  When you have bowed before all other gods,
  And found them false, then shall you come at last
  To that dark King of grief, and he shall bless
  Your bread with tears, and manacle your hands,
  And call you slave and lover." ...
  Shall not a child take Pain for company
  And share her loneliness with him?
  Does not a youth know tears
  In the first bitterness of broken love?
  Is Grief so proud a king that none shall come
  To seek him save the blind, the halt, the lame? ...
  He is a tramp, a beggar, and a clown,
  He sits a jester at the feet of kings
  And scurries with the leaves in Autumn's train.
  He rides the wooden horses at a fair,
  And dances with the jiggers on the stage.
  Led by the violins of discontent
  That whine their music to my listening soul,
  I dance with him the dance of withered leaves,
  We dance together to the tunes of rain
  Played on one note upon the only string.

  1913




  Oh, just beyond the curve of ideal quest
  That changes as a sea wave to the wind,
  Beyond the cloud that folds around a star,
  And dawn, that stands ajar to let us in,
  Lies that to which our loves and dreams have gone,
  The paradise of all we might have been,
  While we are washed back downwards in the dark
  Where tides recede, to dwindle with the foam.

  1917




  Ah! you, from the small high-walled acre of your lives,
  Your windows only looking upon gardens,
  Only perceiving love and death and truth
  As facts that come to pass,
  That pass and leave you still
  Within your safe small prisons,
  Older, duller,
  To walk and talk among the evergreens.
  You have never known
  Delight of dying slowly,
  Poisoned with raptures
  In many hues from the slim-cut decanters of death--
  The tunes
  That dishevel and smooth,
  Cajole and melancholize--
  The dance
  Which is a whirling of leaves
  In their last scorn of sorrow
  Flung upwards by the wind
  Into the haggard face of winter--
  Nor felt your souls go blowing like balloons
  Tossed by impulsive hands;
  Nor slid as skaters swiftly
  Over the crackling crystals of perilous ice,
  Buffeted with bouquets and blinded with confetti ...
  You have not felt the abandon
  Of light love
  Dragged by the hair across a slippery floor....

  1916




  Mouth of the dust I kiss, corruption absolute,
  Worm, that shall come at last to be my paramour,
  Envenomed, unseen wanderer who alone is mute,
  Yet greater than gods or heroes that have gone before.

  For you I sheave the harvest of my hair,
  For you the whiteness of my flesh, my passion's valour,
  For you I throw upon the grey screen of the air
  My prism-like conceptions, my gigantic colour.

  For you the delicate hands that fashion to make great
  Clay, and white paper, plant a tongue in silence,
  For you the battle-frenzy, and the might of hate,
  Science for giving wounds, and healing science.

  For you the heart's wild love, beauty, long care,
  Virginity, passionate womanhood, perfected wholeness,
  For you the unborn child that I prepare,
  You, flabby, boneless, brainless, senseless, soulless!

  1913




  The curtains are drawn as though it still were night,
  A slip of dawn between them is a dangling silver ribbon;
  And all about the room is quietness--Each patient chair
  Erect, alert, in place. A letter on the table and a book
  Lie as you left them, now bereft of purpose--
  Garish a little in the room's sedateness, you
  Returning dressed so frivolously in all your coloured clothes!
  How grey and sober, full of placid wit
  The furniture, the pictures on the wall;
  How steely swift the light, stabbing you to the heart
  As you stand at the window, bright as rushing blood.
  Garish your hair, your shoes, your startling chalky face
  And white, white gloves ...
  What time is it? ... Still ticks the tireless clock,
  With face grimacing ... nearly six it is....
  Yet hurries not nor lingers, like our hearts,
  For in its dial eternity is housed--
  A cock should crow ... there are no cocks in town!
  But a water cart with surly noise below
  Grates unconcerned along the disconsolate street.
  How cold and how familiar all these things,
  To you so lonely in the enormous dawn
  Slowly unfastening that vermilion dress ...

  1916




BLACK VELVET


  The darkness of the trees at deep midnight
  And sombreness of shadows in the lake;
  A mountain in the starlight wide awake
  Dreaming to Heaven with imperial might
  Of lifted shoulders, huge against the bright
  Bespattered jewelry of stars--the ache
  Of silence, and the sobbing tides that break
  From music. Slumbering cities--candle light
  Snuffed in the flooding darkness, and the train
  Of Queens that go to scaffold for a sin--
  Or splash of blackness manifest of pain,
  Hamlet among his court, a Harlequin
  Of tragedies ... Mysterious ... And again
  Venetian masks against a milky skin.

  1917




NERVES


  These curious looms where we have spun our fancies,
  These intricate webs where our desires are threaded,
  These weird trapezes that our passion frenzies
  Strange acrobats to catch them dizzy headed.
  These tightening strings upon our spirit's fiddles
  Tuneful or out of tune where music hungers
  From writhing bow, these intertwining riddles
  Mazes and labyrinths and storms and languors.
  These colours twinging on a prism's edges,
  These speckled patterns of fanatic madness
  From glittering eyeballs, these unresting dredges
  For pearls within the depths of sadness and of gladness--
  O tortuous thoughts, what are you seeking after
  As flies around a carcass with a humming dreary,
  Gibing the silent dead with treacherous laughter,
  Molesting quietness and waking up the weary!
  What then, what then, can sleep not crush you to forgetting
  With all her body's beauty, cannot peace submerge you
  O wrangling, juggling, jangling, pirouetting--
  What hope can drag you from the small desires that urge you?
  You have lassoed the moon and trapped the sun's bright lion,
  And trodden out the red stars into ashes,
  Destroyed night's temple and broken the pillars of iron,
  And striped the snowy horses of the clouds with zebra gashes
        ...
  You have debauched the world! And as I sit here weary,
  Deafened with your demands and torn in tatters,
  The world seems suddenly most passionless and dreary,
  A poor bewildered clown--and nothing matters.

  1916




  My pain has all the patience of a nun
  Who kneels and prays for Heaven on the stone,
  In some chill cellar where the amens moan,
  Ave Maria, the long penance spun
  Forever. And the tapers one by one
  Stand like cold angels round the Virgin's throne.
  My soul is tired from kneeling all alone,
  Its little candles yearning to the sun.

  Long have I dreamed of Paradise and seen
  Bright mirages of glory on the grey
  Of sad horizons; I have kept the green
  Surprise of spring through winter and dismay,
  Tasting within the bitter dregs of spleen
  Drugs that bring peace, and wine that maketh gay.

  1917




  The scandal-monger after all is right--
  The old and cunning voice with weary repetition
  Is justified in all dull words and warnings.
  I see at last how you,
  Spendthrift of passion
  In love's bankruptcy,
  Borrow new beauty from each passing face--
  How being too lavish you did steal
  From generous hands--
  You are the idol builder and the robber of temples,
  Praising with passionate psalms
  The thing you cannot worship--
  And yet your prayers have stirred
  Belief in us--
  We see beyond the false and weary face
  Into your haggard soul and trust from pity--
  We hear beyond the idle music of your voice,
  A wisdom taught by cruelty
  And a tired scorn of treachery and guile--
  We see your wounds and weep,
  You meet our pity with a traitor's kiss--
  For, you are schooled in suffering and schooled
  In teaching pain to others--
  And all that mob of furious accusation
  To which you turn the cheek, or curse so well,
  Are but the ghosts of bodies you have murdered,
  That drive you on in vengeance to fresh crime.

  1917




  Woods of brown gloom sombring with the hush of death,
  Wind's lassitude that sets the tired leaves shivering,
  Starved yellow leaves sighing beneath the feet, a breath
  Consumptive, old, and fever-red leaves quivering,
  As with an earthward flutter like a ghostly butterfly
  Listless they perish, wavering and hovering.
  Skeleton branches where the rooks flap wings and cry,
  Perched upon ribs and fingers; and the white mists covering
  The far-off hills and bloodless visage of the sun.
  No noise save the meandering dribble of a rivulet,
  No noise save of the slow hours dropping one by one
  As embers, no colour save Time's ashen coverlet....
  How melancholy here the gayest tunes would sound
  From shrill carousers riotous and merry all,
  As echoes of lost joy their dancing feet upon the ground,
  As funeral bagpipes at a burial.
  And I who wander passionless and forlorn,
  A leaf-forsaken tree symbolic of dejection,
  In rags of old desires, dispirited and torn,
  See in the stagnant glass of Time my soul's reflection.

  1916




  I feel so much alone,
  And yet I know that many hopes are storming
  My shut heart;
  For I am bolted fast in my own house.
  I pace distracted through its corridors
  To the music of Love's knocking hands
  Against the gate,
  Or silence when they sleep.
  I cannot find the key to let them in,
  I, my own host and guest and ghost,
  Imprisoned in myself!

  1917




THE COMPLEX LIFE


  I know it to be true that those who live
  As do the grasses and the lilies of the field
  Receiving joy from Heaven, sweetly yield
  Their joy to Earth, and taking Beauty, give.

  But we are gathered for the looms of Fate
  That Time with ever-turning multiplying wheels
  Spins into complex patterns and conceals
  His huge invention with forms intricate.

  Each generation blindly fills the plan,
  A sorry muddle or an inspiration of God
  With many processes from out the sod,
  The Earth and Heaven are mingled and made man.

  We must be tired and sleepless, gaily sad,
  Frothing like waves in clamorous confusion,
  A chemistry of subtle interfusion,
  Experiments of genius that the ignorant call mad.

  We spell the crimes of our unruly days,
  We see a fabled Arcady in our mind,
  We crave perfection that we may not find.
  Time laughs within the clock and Destiny plays.

  You peasants and you hermits, simple livers!
  So picturesquely pure, all unconcerned
  While we give up our bodies to be burned,
  And dredge for treasure in the muddy rivers.

  We drink and die and sell ourselves for power,
  We hunt with treacherous steps and stealthy knife,
  We make a gaudy havoc of our life
  And live a thousand ages in an hour.

  Our loves are spoilt by introspective guile,
  We vivisect our souls with elaborate tools,
  We dance in couples to the tune of fools,
  And dream of harassed continents the while.

  Subconscious visions hold us and we fashion
  Delirious verses, tortured statues, spasms of paint,
  Make cryptic perorations of complaint,
  Inverted religion, and perverted passion.

  But since we are children of this age,
  In curious ways discovering salvation,
  I will not quit my muddled generation,
  But ever plead for Beauty in this rage.

  Although I know that Nature's bounty yields
  Unto simplicity a beautiful content,
  Only when battle breaks me and my strength is spent
  Will I give back my body to the fields.

  1917




  Shall we be christened poets, children of God,
  For blowing sighs into the listeners' ears,
  For tugging at the moaning bells of death,
  And coming as the autumn grave-digger
  To close the eyes of flowers, and shut the fingers
  Of wind upon the rushes,
  Of music upon silence?
  Shall we be given wreathes of bay and laurel
  For forcing tragedy into a rhyme
  As a gaunt beggar in a spangled vest?
  The poet ever wanders after Death,
  The flunkey on a funeral chariot
  Pouring the wine at feasts of burial;
  And all the roses that he plucks from summer
  Are carried to the crypts to deck a corpse....
  How shall the world learn how to laugh again
  When all its songs have only learnt to weep?

  1919




  When I am weary at the antic chance,
  The hobby-horses and the wooden lance,
  The hope and fear in jugglery, and see
  How starved the juggler, mean and miserly,
  And life a laboured trick--the years advance
  A shrilling chorus in affected dance
  With lust of many eyes that watch and wink
  Fixed on them; or a clown in feverish pink
  Will draw gross laughter by a hideous prance--
  Vulgarity and sin and souls askance,
  Where fiddles squeal and all the follies spin--
  Till, when the stage is empty, Harlequin
  Through curtained silence trips as from a trance
  With blushing flowers for Columbine--Romance.

  1917




MOODS


I

  I crouched upon cushions and wallowed in their somnolent caresses,
  And--listening with dread for the moment of my own silence
  Rending the flimsy lace of whisperings--
  My gnome dances before me
  Behind a fan of smoke,
  My dwarf squats on my shoulders
  Tweeking their moulted wings,
  My ape peers in the mirror of my face
  Mimicking my soul's gaunt gestures--
  My wolf bays through my moonly loneliness
  Blotching the night with howls--
  My laughter goes whining away on the wind,
  Laughs that are whipped by a soul too sick with merriment,
  Too satiate with humour's emptiness!...


II

  Ah! loveliness with little pointed feet
  Dancing across the leer of ugliness,
  Skimming like a gold thread
  Through a necklace of vile masks--
  Lifting with lotus fingers
  The blue arras of nightmare--
  Loveliness like a delicate silver flute
  Pressed to a negro's lips--


III

  Do you then wish for all those griefs
  Whose snarling hands you kiss,
  Kneeling in adoration to a dagger
  As saints before a cross?
  You who have tossed all flowers away,
  Coveting the drenched red peonies of blood
  Their javelin-petals wet with slaughter,--
  Do you then crave your own blood's offering,
  Your own breast's pallor pierced with knives of flame?
  In your ears are the pattering of the hunter's feet,
  Softer than death, and omens mouthed by winds of twilight,
  You lean across the precipice of time
  Calling and crying
  For the last abyssmal passion of self-slaughter--


IV

  Waiting,
  Like grey cloud-giants climbing the hills of Heaven
  Carrying vast burdens over the crags of chaos--
  Waiting,
  Like trees that hear the far-off moan of winds,
  Like listening trees that hug their branches round them,
  Their leaves whispering lividly the rumour of storms,
  Waiting like a vast arch of quietness
  Through which a screaming messenger shall dart--
  Like a dense hood of silence
  Pierced by a sword of music--
  Waiting, like the deathly stillness of a pool
  Reflecting the diver poised before he plunges....

  1919




SMOKE

[Illustration]




  Now is the evening dipped knee-deep in blood
  And the dun hills stand fearful in their places.
  Cunning in sin, we shuffle down the streets
  With burdens of vainglory on our backs,
  Spinning with spider-hands the miser's web
  Or sitting placid, gay and fat with ease.
  But out beyond, the armies of the world
  March doomwards to the rhythm of the drum
  Under the thirsting sun. Death holds his state:

  His skeleton hands are filled with scarlet spoil:
  He stands on flaming ramparts, waving high
  The ensign of decay. All his bones are dressed
  With livid roses; all his pillars black
  Are girt in ashen poppies, and on dust
  He raises up his awful golden throne.

  Oh! your fierce shrieks have fainted on deaf ears;
  Your tears have flowed on feet of carven stone;
  Your blood is spilt for the boiling-pot of God
  Where good and evil mix; and all your rage
  Is but a thin smoke wafted in His face.

  1914




  Blow upon blow they bruise the daylight wan,
  Scar upon scar they rend the quiet shore;
  They ride on furious, leaving every man
  Crushed like a maggot by the hoofs of war:
  Gods that grow tired of paradisial water
  And fill their cups with steaming wine of slaughter.

  I fear a thing more terrible than death:
  The glamour of the battle grips us yet--
  As crowds before a fire that hold their breath
  Watching the burning houses, and forget
  All they will lose, but marvel to behold
  Its dazzling strength, the glamour of its gold.

  I fear the time when slow the flame expires,
  When this kaleidoscope of roaring color
  Fades, and rage faints; and of the funeral-fires
  That shone with battle, nothing left of valour
  Save chill ignoble ashes for despair
  To strew with widowed hands upon her hair.

  Livid and damp unfolds the winding-sheet,
  Hiding the mangled body of the Earth:
  The slow grey aftermath, the limping feet
  Of days that shall not know the sound of mirth,
  But pass in dry-eyed patience, with no trust
  Save to end living and be heaped with dust.

  That stillness that must follow where Death trod,
  The sullen street, the empty drinking-hall,
  The tuneless voices cringing praise to God,
  Deaf gods, that did not heed the anguished call,
  Now to be soothed with humbleness and praise,
  With fawning kisses for the hand that slays.

  Across the world from out the fevered ground
  Decay from every pore exhales its breath;
  A cloak of penance winding close around
  The bright desire of spring. And unto Death,
  As to a conquering king, we yield the keys
  Of Beauty's gates upon our bended knees.

  The maiden loverless shall go her ways,
  And child unfathered feed on crust and husk;
  The sun that was the glory of our days
  Shining as tinsel till the moody dusk
  Into our starving outstretched arms shall lay
  Her silent sleep, the only boon we pray.

  1914




  A ragged drummer rides along the street,
  And at his coming
  The silence fills with tunes and rustling feet
  And voices humming.
  He rode a year ago from far away,
  On charger prancing,
  With bright new buttons and with ribbons gay,
  And banners dancing.
  Oh, he was fatter than the bursting drum
  He bore so proudly,
  His roaring music woke the silence dumb
  To thunder loudly.
  And by his side the old men and the young
  Had followed cheering
  Into the sunset smiling as they sung,
  Nor thought of fearing.
  They left their lovers and their mothers' lap,
  Their homes demolish,
  "For, look, I have a ribbon for my cap,
  A sword to polish!"
  And so the town was silent once again,
  Though tunes of battle
  Beat fearful in the wind, or in the rain
  Ghost drums would rattle.
  But at the chuckling dice or careful loom,
  Or candled churches
  A few forgot or prayed or followed doom
  With drunken lurches....
  Now loom and bar and church disgorge the throng,
  In huddled masses
  They stand aghast to hear the drummer's song
  As back he passes--
  Palsied and drear and bent he turns alone
  In rags and tatters,
  And on a soundless barrel with a bone
  He beats and batters.
  "Where march your feet so gaily, careless crowd,
  That we may kiss them?
  Where sound your little songs that rang so loud
  To us that miss them?"
  There are no songs, no happy marching feet,
  No favours flying:
  The drummer passes ... on the quiet street
  The sun is dying.
  Sun that must bleed to death so red and brave!...
  Have done with weeping,
  But put your ribbons on a soldier's grave
  As he lies sleeping.

  1914




ZEPPELINS


                                        MIDNIGHT

  Suddenly
  Shutting our lips upon a jest
  As we are sipping thoughts from little glasses,
  A gun bursts thunder and the echoing streets
  Quiver with startled terrors--
  How swift runs fear: quicksilver that is free!
  Now every muscle weakens, every pulse
  Is set at gallop-pace and every nerve
  Stretched taut with horror and a wild revolt....
  How sweetly spins the world to noise of music,
  How sweet to live life's arrogant adventure!
  Live in a vain world wracked with a thousand pangs,
  Limp in a dull street housed with crumbling dreams,
  To breathe and eat and sleep and love and sigh
  A little longer, oh a little year!
  Forgotten prayers rise up in resurrection,
  And resolutions of new wondrous lives
  Choke up our hearts and fling us to our knees....
  Worms creep in dreadful hunger from the ground,
  The lurid silent people loved by death,
  And peer into our eyes with sly forebodings
  To drag our body's glory from the light.
  Though all the world should fall into their cells
  And lie within their larders shelf on shelf--
  Yet will I toss the sheets of dust away,
  Yet _will I_ be the mistress of the sun!

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        1 A. M.

  Look how they struggle in a mist of fire,
  Those hunchbacked chimneys and distorted domes--
  Now gloat on Hell, the colour seems to roar,
  An army fierce upon its own destruction,
  A famished monster tearing in its claws
  Gigantic foods to glut its lean desire
  Digesting all the world!...
  Look at the eager people open-mouthed
  That stand as foolish rabbits hypnotised
  By the uncoiling rhythm of a snake,
  Their earth adoring senses caught awhile
  In the red whirlwind of ascending wings;
  Their spirits straining upward upon strings
  Like kites and air balloons, but more grotesque,
  Lacking the ephemeral beauty of a toy--
  Yet for an hour
  Dyed with the colour that their drabness fears
  They kiss the feet of beauty as she passes
  Starwards, tremendous in a coat of fire.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        3 A. M.

  The dawn seems drained of blood so colourless--
  Slowly the river moves as though in sleep
  While silent barges
  Slide from the mist like dreams;
  The intricate patterns of the scaffolding
  Are drawn against the sky
  More delicate than lace.
  All the shimmering lights
  Have shrunk away from morning
  As a blue peacock sheaves his starry tail....
  I am alone, most utterly alone,
  More lonely than the last man in the world
  Straying amid the dust of vanished lives.
  More lonely than a spirit stolen from heaven
  Who stands beside that nebulous cold river
  Dividing sleep from death,
  Eternity from time....
  Nothing disturbs the white peace of the dawn,
  She brings no feverous memories of night
  And sheds no tears.

  Only two hours ago
  Fire walked in crimson armour through the city
  Piercing the night's black tent with glittering javelins,
  While shrieks and whispered omens flew like bats
  Among the silver foliage of the stars....
  But rage has left no furrow in the sky,
  No wake of sparks across the placid water....
  This is the ominous and sacred hour
  When priest-like the world kneels
  Bowed low toward the empty throne of day--
  Soon will the herald trumpet-blast be heard
  And the flamingo messengers will come
  Flocking from out the burnished cage of sunrise....
  This is the hour of nothing,
  Colourless and chill
  Oblivion's hands are folded on the world,
  As sits an idol holding in his fingers
  A scentless lotus carven out of stone.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                        4 A. M.

  Leaving the dun river with hurried tapping feet
  And up the long uncomfortable street
  With eyes uninterested yet forced to see and read
  The dingy notices once sharp and bright with greed,
  Now drear with want, that swear the Queen's Hotel
  And Brown's Hotel and King's are doing well--
  A soldier and a beggar mock me as I go,
  The light steals after me, emerging slow
  And pale from the dim alleys shadow-crouched.
  I hurried by the drunkard as he slouched
  From lamp-post unto lamp-post.... Then I saw
  Caught in the mirror of a tailor's door
  My own reflection as I hurried past,
  My flaring colours and my face aghast--
  The scarlet tassel of my hat that hung
  Limp as a spent flame, and my skirt that clung
  About my knees and fluttered at the back:
  An injured moth, with sulphur stripes and black,
  My bag flamboyant as a pillar-box;
  My frayed gilt fringe of hair and tarnished locks.
  Jagged and crude and swift I seemed to pass
  Painted too brightly on that temperate glass.
  ... An omnibus from sudden corner reels:
  Silence lies mangled underneath the wheels.

  1915




  O flattery, imposture, battle show,
  What banners have you woven from the parted raiment,
  What crimes from Calvary, what endless flow
  Of blood from blood, revenge, exacted payment!

  How have you turned the simple truth to lies
  Made capital from creeds and missed their beauty,
  Exalted vainly with self-pitying sighs
  The wrongs enacted in the name of duty.

  And ever quoting God for your excuse,
  Bribing divinity to cloak your shame,
  You train the spirit for material use,
  You sacrifice men's hearts to feed your flame.

  When shall the world be rid of these bald priests,
  Pig-snouted with their gilded wolfish ears,
  The scarlet cardinals of drunken feasts
  Whose hands are washed in blood, whose feet in tears?

  1916




  What will happen to the beggar, and the sinner, and the sad,
  And the drunk that drinks for sorrow, and the maimed, and mad;
  What will happen to the starving, and the rebel run from drilling,
  Cowardly, afraid of fighting, and the child who stole a shilling?
  They shall go to prison black
  With a striped shirt on the back,
  Feast on bread and water there
  In a cell, without a care.
  They shall learn at least their duty,
  Never tempted more of beauty--
  They shall walk in rows and praise the Lord,
  And one or two shall hang upon a cord--
  And two or three shall die of grief alone--
  (And this is well, for sinners should atone,)
  And five or six shall curse the God that made them,
  (And this is wicked, for the priests forbade them,)
  And those that grew from dust shall go to dust
  Downtrodden. Saith the preacher:--"God is just."

  1917




  If I were what I would be, and could break
  The buttressed fortress of stupidity
  Where laws are sentinels, and lies the masonry,
  Surrounded with inertia, weedy lake,
  Where centuries of mud lie curdled, and the fake
  Grandeur of cardboard turrets, solemn puppetry--
  The gods are blinking at us sleepily,
  Tired of our games, the muddles that we make,
  The bloodshed, idol worshipping, the chess
  Of king, queen, castle, bishop, knight and pawn--
  The rigid squares of black and white, they dress
  With their perpetual challenge--faded, worn,
  Are all the creeds and praises you profess
  To weary gods that stretch themselves and yawn.

  1917




HOLY RUSSIA


  The ghostly blood of thee is in my veins,
  Back through the centuries of death and birth,
  Sometime I thrilled with thy gigantic pains,
  My kin lie somewhere covered with thine earth.

  And ever as in dreams I seem to see
  Those streets and people with their colours cold;
  Thou hast the singing hungers of the sea,
  The tides of restless passion ages old.

  I know thy humours and their contradiction,
  I know thy fevers and hallucinations,
  I see beneath the painted mask of fiction
  Thy face of fierce and weary exaltations.

  And art thou come to gaze with wakened eyes
  Into the sick world's travail and her grief,
  Dost thou from thy long battling surmise
  The end of battle and the world's relief?

  While we are creeping in our crooked ways
  Along the crumbling roads of worn-out creeds
  Where Ignorance walks royally through days
  That smell of death, decay and bloody deeds.

  While we still cry to God for strength to kill,
  Reminding Him that Britain rules the waves,
  And grind young bones for the commercial mill,
  And build munition works among the graves.

  Still crying "Honour," "Country" and "The Flag,"
  "The last heroic fight in Freedom's name!"
  Though Kings make mouths at Kings, and Prelates brag--
  They boast of murder and they reek of shame!...

  Thou that hast touched the mystic wounds of God,
  And strewn with broken hearts the Virgin's feet,
  Feeling beneath the burden and the rod
  His justice and Her pity in the street.

  Justice and Pity, crying in the wind--
  We only hear the guns that never cease,
  The flapping of our flags has made us blind!
  We may not see the sacred gods of peace.

  But thou dost build fanatic temples for them,
  And thou dost pave the road with sanity,
  And all the train of bitter ghosts adore them,
  Who died to puff a monarch's vanity.

  I hear thy orchestras of holy cheers,
  The drum that life has snatched away from death,
  And all the sighing rhythm of thy tears,
  And the brave laughter of thy trumpet-breath.

  PEACE! But a cynic whispered in my ear
  How kings like worms still wrangled for a crown
  That lay amid the dust--and I could hear
  A hum of money-changing in the town.

  I feared that afterwards, when all is won,
  We shall forget the meaning of thy deed--
  And man will creep as he has always done
  Along the little gutters of his greed.

  1917




  How deeply nurtured is your foolishness,
  Calling destruction great and slaughter brave,
  Making large triumph of a little grave,
  Imperial purple of a mourning dress,
  The gun an emblem of your godliness--
  A fluttering ribbon or a banner's wave,
  A medal or a bayonet, or rave
  Of singing, marching in the forward press
  Of hatred to the banging of a band;
  Your country's honour and the world's release.
  Are _they_ not strong in courage who withstand
  The armies of your folly and shall cease
  To tarnish with spilt life their motherland?
  Cowards--or martyrs--crucified for peace.

  1917




  Of all who died in silence far away
  Where sympathy was busy with other things,
  Busy with worlds, inventing how to slay,
  Troubled with rights and wrongs and governments and kings.

  The little dead who knew so large a love,
  Whose lives were sweet unto themselves a shepherding
  Of hopes, ambitions, wonders in a drove
  Over the hills of time, that now are graves for burying.

  Of all the tenderness that flowed to them,
  A milky way streaming from out their mother's breast,
  Stars were they to her night, and she the stem
  From which they flowered--now barren and left unblessed.

  Of all the sparkling kisses that they gave
  Spangling a secret radiance on adoring hands,
  Now stifled in the darkness of a grave
  With kiss of loneliness and death's embracing bands.

  No more!--And we, the mourners, dare not wear
  The black that folds our hearts in secrecy of pain,
  But must don purple and bright standards bear,
  Vermilion of our honour, a bloody train.

  We dare not weep who must be brave in battle--
  "Another death--another day--another inch of land--
  The dead are cheering and the ghost drums rattle" ...
  The dead are deaf and dumb and cannot understand....

  Of all who died in darkness far away
  Nothing is left of them but LOVE, who triumphs now,
  His arms held crosswise to the budding day,
  The passion-red roses clustering his brow.

  1917




  And afterwards, when honour has made good,
  And all you think you fight for shall take place,
  A late rejoicing to a crippled race;
  The bulldog's teeth relax and snap for food,
  The eagles fly to their forsaken brood,
  Within the ravaged nest. When no disgrace
  Shall spread a blush across the haggard face
  Of anxious Pride, already flushed with blood.

  In victory will you have conquered Hate,
  And stuck old Folly with a bayonet
  And battered down the hideous prison gate?
  Or will the fatted gods be gloried yet,
  Glutted with gold and dust and empty state,
  The incense of our anguish and our sweat?

  1917




  Pity the slain that laid away their lives,
  Pity the prisoners mangled with gyves,
  Thin little children and widowed wives,
  And the broken soldier who survives.

  Pity the woman whose body was sold
  For a little bread or a little gold,
  And a little fire to keep out the cold,
  So tired, and fearful of growing old.

  Pity the people in the grey street
  Before the dawn trooping with listless feet
  Down to their work in the dust and the heat,
  For a little bread and a little meat.

  Pity the criminal sentenced to die,
  Loving life so, with the world in his eye,
  In his ears and his heart, with the passionate cry
  Of love that will call when he may not reply.

  Pity them all, the imperative faces
  That peer through the dark where we sleep in our laces,
  Where we skulk among cushions in opulent places,
  With indolent postures and frivolous graces.

  Eyes that prick the darkness, fingers thin
  Tearing at hypocrisy, and Sin
  That batters the door and staggers in....
  The streets surround with clamour and din,

  Drowning our flutes, till the cries of the city
  Flurry us, flutter us, force us to pity,
  Force us to sigh and arrange a committee,
  Tea-party charity danced to a ditty....

  The scarlet ribbons flutter and wave,
  A rebel flag on a rebel grave,
  But to us the strong alone are brave,
  And only the rich are worthy to save!

  Yet who shall blame us, plaited and curled,
  Where silk banners fly and the red flags are furled,
  Flags that blow where the dead are hurled,
  Tattered and dripping with blood of the world!

  1918




FLAME

[Illustration]




  You have understood so little of me, and my adoration
  That shone upon my forehead, like a crown of curious stones,
  You turned into a cap and bells for Folly's coronation
  And made a foolish tinkling from my laughter and my
  moans.

  You have led me through the market like an ass upon the halter,
  You have fed me upon thistles; I was driven by the crowd;
  But my faith in what I am, my conceit, you cannot alter;
  I was proud in pomp and purple, as a clown I leave you proud!

  A greater pride than sits upon a throne for mere adorning,
  A fiercer strength than in the gods of wood that cannot bow;
  I tore my purple into rags and knelt to bear your scorning,
  And I am rebel leader to a band of beggars now.

  In the twilight of my love I stand and strew the bitter ashes;
  They are blown into my eyes again, the fires that shone for
        you;
  In the blushing of the sunset their ghostly fervour flashes
  As they sink for everlasting in the darkness and the dew.

  Your heart is as a moonstone hieroglyphed with secret letters;
  You have never read my passion, as I never learnt their sign,
  But I praise your haunting beauty and I bear the bruise of
        fetters
  And I reel from your remembrance as I spill the ancient wine.
  All those women I have envied with their pink and foolish faces,
  Moths that have out-distanced me in circling round your head,
  For the strangeness of your kisses and the curse of your embraces
  And the frenzy of pursuing where your despot feet have led.

  I will shout, and tear the darkness; I will snuff the candles
        sacred
  With the rage of my abasement, with the blast of my farewell;
  I will smile with cynic softness, but my tears are dropping
        acrid
  And sizzling in a gutter down the white-hot streets of Hell!

  1914




  Lulled are the dazzling colours of the day,
  And mild the heavens, burnt out like an ash.
  Hungry and strange along the shadowed dusk
  Walks Melancholy, and with bitter mouth
  Sucks the last juices from the sun's ripe fruit.
  Now can I sing the sickly lines of love
  And of love's failure, spell my sorrows out
  In the sad spaces of the gloaming night,
  And stooping, huddled, hide me in the dark.
  My words were fireless in the flaming sun,
  And all the throats of flowers from their content
  Puffed back my pinings proudly in my face
  And bade me give them tunes to make them dance....
  Lean, hungry, like my love the moon looks down
  From the white solitudes of Heaven. All aghast
  And sterile as the arms of my desire
  She flings her light despairing on the sky.
  The night is strange and still, for dropping tears,
  Or burying hatred in a deep-dug grave.

  1914




  Washed at my feet by the curded foam of sluggish waves,
  As the rain splinters and the mud gleams with malicious light,
  Like a frail shell, million tinged and quaintly wrought
  The thought of you, which held against mine ear
  Hums all the echoed melodies of your soul;
  The sigh of wearied life, the ebbing sweet of love,
  The little tunes of wine mixed with the chants of death,
  The following of beauty's fugitive limbs
  Whose classic feet, and rapturous pale breast
  Gleam on the clouds and foam,
  Call to her lovers.--
  Thus standing in the blasting of the wind,
  And numb with ceaseless drip of moments from the cloud
  Of lowering hours, I toy with this strange relic of the sea,
  Turned with such perfectness from her tumultuous wheels,
  Thoughts of you million tinged and quaintly wrought.

  1916




  My poems cannot laugh. They are the voice
  Of birds that mourn and cry above the sea,
  And this wild joy my love has brought to me
  Lies dumb and knows not how it shall rejoice.

  I am most weary of the petulant songs I sing,
  Most tired of tunes that only learn to weep,
  And long to turn my dreams from their pale sleep
  Into a gentle minstrelsy with harp of silver string;

  To fashion for my love one perfect verse
  Symmetrically threaded by beauty word on word,
  Flowing and flashing like the luted laughter of a bird
  To bless the soul with music which I ravished with a curse.

  But as a coward in the general gloom
  I mimic fortune with my tunes of ill,
  Nor pipe despite her wistful mirth and trill
  Of love that moves with music into Doom;

  Of love that thrills with joy the graveyard cold,
  And like a gay canary in a cage
  Mocks at his prison, and with flippant rage
  Flaunts his bright wing to fill the gloom with gold.

  1916




  On the hill there is a tavern, long-loved, well-remembered,
  Where all the sleepy afternoon the little tables dream,
  And the cool green bottles ranged, laugh and gleam with golden
        highlights,
  And the waiters wrangle, and the flies, with murmurs merged and mixed.
  We will go there, you and I, to wake the nodding contentment,
  And toast our fancies reverently with red wine and with white
        wine,
  And with eyes mesmerised to the horizon gazing,
  Dream our iridescent dreams and sigh our shadowy sighs.

  1916




  Oh canst thou not hear in my heart all its whispering fears
  Whose wind-like voices
  Flutter the leaves of my hope and bow them with tears
  While the body rejoices.
  Till all the pomp and beauty of day, the Cardinal Sun
  Trailing his scarlet vesture
  Leaves after light the pale hills sullen and dun,
  Turns with a gesture
  Colour and glory to smoke that is deathly and grey.
  I follow the shadows of sorrow
  That press so close to the dancing heels of the day
  And darken the morrow.
  The world turns pale and cold, for I seem to see
  Beyond its golden visor
  The leering skull that derides at our lives and me
  Being older than life and wiser....
  I hear the cry of the world that writhes to the lash of the
        whip
  Beyond the sound of the treetops singing
  To the wind's persuasive violins and bells of dews that drip,
  Or rush of feathers winging....
  Dost thou fear death as I? Ah no, but thy lips are against my
        cheek
  Murmuring tenderly
  The perfumed lies stolen from spring that wistfully through the
        bleak
  Windows of frost so slenderly
  Steals her little ghost's flute. Thou tellest of things that might
        be
  If life were as kind as a lover,
  If we were beloved of the world and the world of we.
  Thy white words hover
  Dove-like in rose leaf evenings over the nest
  Silvering heaven
  With rustle of lovers that nestle together for rest.
  If I could have given
  My tired lips to kisses and my body to sleep and to thee,
  Ah then and then only
  The dust were as gentleness mingling thy beauty with me
  And death were not lonely.

  1916




  As in the silence the clear moonlight drips
  Among the fields that love her drowsily,
  These passionate moments trickle on through time,
  From soul to languorous soul.
  Like mad musicians upon fretted harps,
  The senses play upon the poignant nerves,--
  And colours clothe our mood
  As smoke against the light, as shimmering prisms
  Irised with pallors of an opal's heart
  In which the glittered pattern of desire
  Smoulders and changes....
  O love, thou nightingale-throated singer,
  Thread on thy jewelled chords from start to star
  And keep thy silver delicate delight
  Out of the flush and lustre that makes mad.
  Let thy fairy feet
  Go tripping down a scarcely scented path,
  Between an avenue of breathless flowers.
  The hours glide by as swans across a lake,
  Across the luminous waters of desire,
  And beat as wings the rustle of soft words,
  As love bends down,
  Breathing his adoration on a fainting mouth.

  1917




  I can but give thee unsubstantial things
  Wrapt as in rose-leaves between thought and thought,
  No gems or garments marvellously wrought
  On ivory spools with rare embroiderings.
  Nor for thy fingers precious, fabled rings
  That cardinals have worn, and queens have bought
  With blood and beauty. I have only sought
  A song that hovers on illusive wings.

  Accept from me a dream that hath no art,
  I give my empty hands for thee to hold,
  Take thou the gift of silence for my part,
  With all the deeper things I have not told.
  Yet if thou canst, decipher in my heart
  Its passions writ in hieroglyphs of gold.

  1917




I

  I have no other friend but thee,
  But while I tell thee all my thought
  Thine ears are buzzing with gossip of dreams,
  Soothsayings and sighs, and little things--
  How canst thou listen to me?


II

  Perchance I roamed under the old moon too long,
  And when my cheek grew pale
  I laid it against thine to feel the blood beat back
  Responsive in the double rose of joy--
  But I feel thee shifting away into loneliness
  Where the ghost moon glides between us....


III

  When at a masquerade
  I meet thee in the shrill indifferent throng,
  Our faces painted each in some disguise
  Of varnished revelry;
  I whisper in thine ear
  Fables, and flatteries, and inconsequent tales,
  Trivial as the dust that whirls about our feet,
  And shower the multicoloured streamers high
  Where Folly is king of midnight--
  Suddenly dost thou snatch thy mask aside,
  And thy still face looks out,
  Weary and overwise
  Where the mad pretence avails not.


IV

  Long ago we walked together in a garden;
  It was evening and the leaves fell down;
  Silently we passed over the dead, the fallen,
  Over flowers and branches that were withered there--
  And the air was weary with the scent of other days,
  A fragrance faint and pensive.
  The sighing of the leaves beneath our feet
  Were as old dreams retold,
  Stirred from the golden quilt of memory,
  And farewells rang their whispering bells,
  Tolling the days away.
  But peace lay folded between our hands
  As we thought of the vanishing years
  And of love dying in the arms of love.


V

  Sometimes I look into the glass
  And see my face without the conquering light
  That gave me glamour when I gave thee love.
  Fain would I bathe in the fountains of beauty,
  To glitter with the crystals of her sparkling desire,
  And touch with my feet the floors of a bright paven Hell,
  And rear my head among the lilies of Heaven.
  I would be for thee
  As a ring of white flowers on the sward,
  As a red fire playing to thy breath,
  As a flock of kingfishers
  Surprised from the dark fringe of rushes!
  Remember only this,
  My will toward all loveliness, and look
  Deep in thyself for my reflected soul.


VI

  Be perfect--for I love thee more in thought
  Than thou canst reach in every trivial day.
  Since days are as the flowers on a wreath
  That wither while we bind them each to each.
  Only the soul is timeless, and no round of days
  Can wall it in a little space of ground.
  Sometimes our minds are cheated by the clock
  And crave love, wisdom, joy within an hour,
  But the patient spirit stands
  Waiting the last fulfilment.
  Around thy soul my thoughts are as garlands
  Or as an endless rosary.
  Be perfect! lest my psalm should falter
  And my hands part from the unriveted faith
  With Amen scarcely sighed.

  1917




  Bodies heaving like waves,
  Sighing through the dishevelled tresses of foam,
  The massive whiteness of limbs flung out of shadow,
  Splashed with ecstasial moonlight,
  Sculptured voluptuously in ephemeral marbles.
  Lingering touch of fingers,
  Cooler than the curving ringlets of spray
  Fluting the new-blown petals of a shell,
  And kisses murmuring as the lips of darkness
  Against the ivory forehead of the moon.

  1919




  Your face to me is like a beautiful city
  Dreaming forever by the rough wild sea,
  And I the ship upon a wilderness of waves
  Heavily laden with memories....
  I roam over all the earth
  Making rhymes of you, and singing songs,
  Because your face will never let me rest,
  Because I can not frame it in a star
  Surrounded with my cloudy reveries,
  Because I may not pluck it like a flower
  To breathe the incense of its perfumed soul--
  Your face is like the carved hilt of a sword
  Whose sheath is in my breast!

  1918




  Oh! why will you not let me love you
  Well enough?
  You have plucked my blossoms,
  Gathered the leaves
  And revived them with water;
  But all the tortuous roots
  Delving for your spirit
  In subterranean passions
  With a blind unresting desire,
  Have you felt them, have you known?
  In the blackest night of sleep
  Though I be sunk a thousand fathoms
  In the cerulean depths of slow oblivion,
  My soul still swims toward you
  Against the envious pressure of the tide....
  You who are so tired, so filled with sleep
  That you would brush a rose-leaf from your cheek
  Lest its heaviness should stir your rest,
  How can you shoulder the weight of my great burden
  That is too vast for me to bear alone?
  I tell you
  Love is no little thing,
  No moth-winged Cupid painted on the air,
  No thin flute music petaling the silence
  As leaves that flutter from a cherry tree.
  It is the thought that broods upon its death,
  The dread of mountains looking to the storm
  Ere shrieks of lightning cleave their breasts in twain.
  It is the fire that pillars up the stars
  To mix its flame with their eternal gold.
  Oh, listen to me!
  You shall hear my message sung from sphere to sphere
  As star-dust pouring a path through Heaven.
  You shall know me
  In the pensive shadows of trees,
  In the luminary phantoms
  Reflected in the stillness of a lake;
  In the arrows of sunlight shot through meshing leaves
  And quivering in the moss;
  In the abandoned play of breakers
  Showering their crystals to the moon;
  In the folly of rainbow dolphins.
  I only ask of you
  To be the diver in my deepest pool,
  To bring from out its blue obscurity
  The things my life has moulded unaware,
  Treasures my passion and my hunger fashioned
  In loneliness of prayer unlit by life,
  Created out of nothing save myself
  Within the blind fast silence of the soul.

  1918




  My devotion kneels to you,
  Holding a candle to illumine your face.
  My loneliness is your shadow
  Along the solitary roads.
  My passion is a book between your hands
  Whose leaves are as the leaves of violets,
  A volume of pressed flowers
  Scenting your fingers though you read it not.
  And my white faith
  Is a silken surplice clothing you in peace.

  1919




ISLANDS


  As launched upon the loneliness of time
  We float and dream of what the waves conceal,
  Each like a thought that rolls with rapid zeal
  Succeeded by a breaker of fierce crime,
  Or curling passion, or a rhythm of rhyme,
  Or indolent ripple sighing at the keel--
  Beyond us, though our fretted longings reel,
  The lulled horizon sleeps, the still hours climb--
  So toss our weary ships, till from afar
  Our visioned island rises suddenly,
  Where palaces like cloudy colours are,
  With scented gardens terraced to the sea,
  The silver steps to our appointed star
  Where gleam the spires that pierce eternity.

  1917




  Many things I'd find to charm you,
  Books and scarves and silken socks,
  All the seven rainbow colours
  Black and white with 'broidered clocks.
  Then a stick of polished whalebone
  And a coat of tawny fur,
  And a row of gleaming bottles
  Filled with rose-water and myrrh.
  Rarest brandy of the 'fifties,
  Old liqueurs in leather kegs,
  Golden Sauterne, copper sherry
  And a nest of plover's eggs.
  Toys of tortoise-shell and jasper,
  Little boxes cut in jade;
  Handkerchiefs of finest cambric,
  Damask cloths and dim brocade.
  Six musicians of the Magyar,
  Madness making harmony;
  And a bed austere and narrow
  With a quilt from Barbary.
  You shall have a bath of amber,
  A Venetian looking-glass,
  And a crimson-chested parrot
  On a lawn of terraced grass.
  Then a small Tanagra statue
  Found anew in ruins old,
  Or an azure plate from Persia,
  Or my hair in plaits of gold;
  Or my scalp that like an Indian
  You shall carry for a purse,
  Or my spilt blood in a goblet ...
  Or a volume of my verse.

  1916




LAMPLIGHT AND STARLIGHT

[Illustration]




LAMP-POSTS


  The eternal flame of laughter and desire
  Breaks the long darkness with a little glance,
  Till all the gloom is radiant in a dance
  Of yellow hopefulness, reflecting fire
  That dreams from Heaven's lamps as we aspire
  Sadly toward their jubilance--Romance
  Of faery glitter in the streets of chance--
  Those beacon-trees that blossom from the mire
  Within the fog of our despairing gloom;
  In the glum alleys, down the haunted night
  Through tunnelling of subterranean doom,
  Among the grovelling shadows, kingly bright,
  They bear their coronets of golden bloom
  To front our anguish with their brave delight.

  1917




LONDON


  Richer than fields of corn that fire in summer,
  Strange as the moon on forest rising sudden,
  More fearful and beloved than peace or silence,
  Heart with my heart at pace in throbbing fever,
  Calling towards me with a voice incessant.
  Thou that begot me: From whose streets triumphant
  I, coloured fiercely with thy passion, wakened!
  I sucked red wine, not milk, from thy gaunt bosom,
  My senses in thy fearfulness found beauty,
  And honey in thine oaths and lamentations.
  I played about thy feet that know not resting
  And bathed me in the sweat of thine endeavour.

  When on thy gala-nights the thronged lamps glitter,
  Sparkle like sequins, and the plumes of shadow
  With curling smoke, with rain and rippling gutter
  Are tossed in feathered gaiety about thee--
  Thick grow the crowded streets in coloured pageant,
  Kaleidoscope of people, circling, crossing,
  Till the brain frenzies to a thousand patterns,
  While the ears buzz with noises of their laughter;
  Shouts hoarse and coarse and shrill in one great roaring,
  As of the angry ocean in her travail ...
  They haunt me in the tranquil of the forest,
  Those faces pain has marked and toil has mangled;
  Pangs greater than the lonely Crucifixion
  Here crucified each day with lust and hunger,
  Hung up unlovely in the open market;
  Made gay with paper garlands, covered over
  With tinsel loincloth, painted like a puppet,
  Lest the elect in passing should be startled,
  Lest they should smear the blameless brow of honour!
  With bloody shoes and spinning-wheels of traffic
  Vermilion-splashed, the city rushes onward,
  And thorns of death and lust and fruitless labour
  Lie underneath the feet forever dancing.
  Gay tunes are rasped upon a weary fiddle,
  Or voice of moaning in the tinkling cymbal,
  Offspring of humour from disaster's bowels.
  I love the bitter and the rude, the drunken,
  The tramps and thieves that skulk among the shadows;
  The faces red as fire and dead as ashes,
  A million faces scattered like confetti,
  All changing, whirling, trodden into nothing.
  There Beauty wanders strange, an-hungered, weary,
  Throned on a dust-heap, or triumphant reeling
  In mad disorder from the couch of chaos.

  O ragged Beauty, through the mournful houses,
  How frail the feet that lead the dawn towards us,
  Blushed in the sunrise with a great ambition,
  Spent in the evening like a rose of fever,
  Fainting before us paler than a lily.
  While here each day self-satisfied and placid
  Moves opulent among the groves of summer;
  The larks delight, the laughter of the thrushes,
  The kindly peasants in their ruddy orchard,
  Please for a while until the spirit sickens
  And turns her panting to her ancient lover.

  Oh, well I know the quickening of the pulses,
  Joy bursting through disgust as field and pasture
  Grow fewer, paler, till the eager houses
  Like hungry animals eat up the spaces
  And close upon the miles that God created,
  With triumph of man's greed. As warriors listening
  To the far rhythm in the drums of battle,
  As seamen hear the mighty tide-wave bursting,
  I feel the scamper of your feet approaching
  And your great starving arms and strangling fingers
  That drag me back to my perverted Heaven!

  1914




  Slowly the pale feet of morning
  Tread out the ashes of midnight still burning with feverous
        lamplight,
    Colourless, cold, as the rainclad
  Sleep-drugged river that carries the wreckage of cities out
        sea-ward.
    Slowly the fingers of dawn-light
  Snuff out the candles that yearned to those Gods of delirium,
    Sleep-huge as shadows grimacing
  From niches made black with the smoke of a fire-spangled passion.
    Smoothly the wild hair of darkness
  Is plaited for rest, and the faces of visions are covered with sleep
        veils.
    Patiently, Morning, the priestess
  Drones out a psalm for the souls that we damned in the blackness,
    Gashed with the daggers of street-lights,
  Crushing the poisonous berries of sinister kisses,--
    Morning with healing and kindness
  Folds up the dresses dishevelled with terror and laughter,
    Sweeps up the rags of our shadows
  That danced in a red smoke of dreams on the walls of oblivion.

  1919




  What have I to do with them,
  The red athletes in their snow-white clothes?
  They are sun lovers and moon haters,
  Toiling or playing in the fields
  Whereon no shadows lie,
  Pensively, whispering together--
  They are space lovers and haters of the stars,
  Soundly they sleep by night nor ever see
  The tiaraed brows of darkness.
  I weary of their striving upward and onward,
  Away from the green hush of twilight,
  Where silence drips from the trees,
  Away from the solemn avenues
  Where the ghosts blow by
  Along with a drift of leaves.

  Let us linger awhile
  Far away from the frets and wars of the world,
  From the strong men
  With their strident hymning voices and marching feet--
  Let us walk alone
  For the love of our own shadows
  Stretching their length on lawns of powdered silver,
  With behind us the sky's grey curtain
  Drawn backward from the moon....
  Let us sit by the fireside
  And hear the wind's shrill orchestras,
  Fiddle and fife and flute,
  And omened bagpipe screaming....
  Let us lie abed and dream
  Through the long summer's morning
  Of trivial things, and beautiful....
  Let us dance with Folly when midnight knocks on his golden
        gong;
  Let us run through pools of wine
  And be splashed with purple.
  Let us, being sick, make merry,
  And rejoice when we are weary.
  Let us sit by our grave as at a banquet,
  Drinking to Death.

  What have we to do with them,
  Sons of the sun and the soil,
  Daughters of the hearth and the field?
  They that remake the world
  Melting our idols for silver,
  Our goblets for gold;
  Tearing our temples down
  To build their red brick villages.

  The doomed world faints into mist,
  World of our indolence and dreams,
  And the faces and bodies we love
  Sink through oblivion, and are seen
  Dimly, as divers through the waters.
  Old worlds and new worlds!
  Let us slip between them,
  And float on the stream that floweth nowhither--
  Our red ambitions burn
  To a blue smoke of forgetting;
  Our moonshine faints on the tide that goeth out,
  As the sun leers to the tide that cometh in.

  1918




  Among the crumbling arches of decay
  Where all around the red new buildings crept,
  Where huge machines had rolled the past away,
  And the dead princes lay accursed and slept;

  Among the ruins I beheld a man
  Who heeded not the engines as they neared,
  Painting dead carnivals upon a fan,
  He smiled and trifled with his pointed beard.

  And here and there were flung a mess of things,
  Tokens and fripperies and faded dresses,
  Kept from the courtships of a thousand kings,
  Tossed roses for the tossing of caresses.

  A carven sabre hung upon the wall,
  A toy thing, with no rust of blood upon it,
  A tray of glasses, an embroidered shawl,
  A muff, a bottle and a feathered bonnet.

  And mirrors flashed their argent memories
  Out of the shadows where they laughed and gleamed,
  While ghostly faces of past vanities
  Come back to dream there where they once had dreamed.

  The stranger turned his head and bowed to me
  And waved me vaguely to a gilded chair.
  I spoke: "You are a connoisseur, I see,
  You really have a fine collection there."

  He bowed to me again, and in his hand
  Dangled a string of gems, they caught my eye
  With beckoning lights--I could not understand--
  His fingers seemed to touch them like a sigh

  So much he loved their frail inconsequence.
  I spoke of progress conquering decay,
  And tired the stillness with my common sense
  Loud-spoken in the jargon of the day.

  But I have never met so queer a man,
  "I better love my memories," he said,
  "Look at those painted figures on the fan,
  How delicate and wistful are the dead."

  1917




  As a nun's face from her black draperies
  So full of mystery the moon looks down.
  She dreams of a passion that shall outlive time,
  Of Beauty's face beheld unveiled and close,
  Of God Who blows the worlds like bubbles up,
  Smiling away, to watch them swell and die.
  She dreams of music played among the stars
  When the slow tongues of silence are unloosed.
  Above the city glittering giddily,
  Above the jostling heads of man she moves,
  Strange as a dreamer walking in her sleep.

  1912




  The sun is lord of life and colour,
  Blood of the rose and hyacinth,
  Hair of the sea and forests,
  Crown of the cornfields,
  Body of the hills.
  The moon is the harlot of Death,
  Slaughterer of the Sun,
  Priestess and poisoner she goes
  With all her silver flock of wandering souls,
  Her chant of wailing waters,
  The bed of shimmering dust from which she comes
  Bound all around with bandages of mist....
  The living are as blossoms and fruit on the tree,
  The dead are as lilies and wind on the marshes;
  The living are as cherries that bow to the morning
  Beckoning to the loitering stranger,
  The wind, to sing them his eerie ballads.
  The dead are as frozen skeleton branches
  Whereon the stillness perches like an owl....
  The dead are as snows on the cherry orchard.

  1918




BAHAMA ISLANDS


I

  All down the somnolent street where pale tinged houses dream
  The negroes go, black faces crowding together;
  And between the palm leaves dancing with lethargic gestures,
  The bright long water spreads, green as a parrot's wing--
  We have rest here and a monotony of wheels,
  A peaceful noise like bees that moan in June--
  And the sun rusts not, but his brazen heraldries
  Tarnished with evening are burnished with the dawn.
  Yet pain comes stabbing in the night with silver knife through the
        window,
  A blanched moon full of fear and the burden of desire--
  And nothing rids us utterly of grief,
  We who have pilgrim souls that will not sleep.


II

  Moonlight planting the world with lilies, so hushed it seems and
        scented,
  But in the chapel is a droning where the negroes chant their
        hymns
  And we in aureoled loneliness go down the street contented,
  With hearts that beat for pleasure to the rhythm of our limbs.

  1917




THOUGHTS OF LONDON


  Oh, have I bartered and forgotten thee,
  Selling thy tarnished twilights for gold sun,
  Relinquishing thy dreams that used to run
  A ragged troop along thy streets with me?
  Cast off the glitter of thy jewelry,
  Thy lamp-light, starlight, colours crudely spun,
  The eloquent ugliness, the roofs of dun,
  The fogs that swathe in bands of mystery?
  Mother of dreams and laughter and despair!
  Thy joy my Heaven is, my Hell thy pain,
  Thy labyrinthian streets wind everywhere,
  Thy sins and passions baffle me again;
  And all my hopes thy lamps that flick and glare,
  And all my griefs thy beggars in the rain.

  1918




STREETS


  I am going
  Up and down the roads and alleys
  Through the forests of the city,
  Hunting thoughts, hunting dreams.
  My mind shall wander through the streets
  Whistling to a vague adventure,
  Plucking strange fancies where they lurk and peer
  And casting them away.
  Dusk is creeping through the town
  Lighting the lamps and loitering,
  Leaving smoky clouds of shadow,
  Hovering clouds of peace;
  And behind her race the winds
  Whining to the scent of darkness,
  Scattering the dust
  With their swift hounds' feet....
  I am a hunter in the city's jungle,
  Exploring all her secret mysteries.
  I know her well,
  The moaning highways,
  And whispering alleys,
  The chimney-dishevelled roofs
  Where the moon walks delicately
  As a stray spectral cat;
  The little forlorn squares
  Where one tree stands
  Drooping bedraggled hair and fingers
  Over the benches where the people sit
  And stir not from their sullen postures,
  Staring out where evening passes
  With such a sauntering dreamy step.
  I know her parks that spring had decked with garlands,
  Fluttered with flags and child imaginings,
  Powdered with blossoms exquisite and shy,
  Haunted with lovers and their last year's ghosts.
  Now stripped with autumn, as the ragpicker
  Wrapped in his tattered coat emaciate
  Picks up the littered wreck of holiday
  To mount the dust heap where our memories lie
  Sprawled in a mess of ruins....
  I know her monotone of gloomy mansions,
  Repeating each in each a dull despair,
  Indifferent and dignified;
  Those tarnished prisons lined with white and gold,
  With dismal silences of velvet carpets,
  Where starving souls are kept
  Feeding upon each other's isolations,
  Not daring to escape....
  Some roads seem steep as mountains, weary me
  With their crude temples built in praise of lust,
  Squatting and smiling at some hideous dream
  Of fat bejewelled goddesses, or gods
  Frock-coated, undismayed by prayers and tears,
  Their hats atilt like halos on their heads....

  I love the ribald multi-coloured crowd,
  Its radiant loves, and laughters, all the faces
  That are as songs, as flowers, as hovering stardust....
  I love the memory-crusted taverns
  In which my heart has leapt to a fiddler's tune
  Until the dawn,
  Like a white minstrel stopped to sing
  Fantastic serenades, and called me forth
  Where through the crystal chandeliers of morning
  Dew-prismed shone the sun....
  I love the narrow streets whose crippled houses
  Are bathed in vitriol twilights,
  Spitting smoke,
  Or making oaths and mouths at one another....
  While between
  The flaring tinsel lights of shop and window
  Are gaps of goblin darkness passaging
  Into Cimmerian depths of mystery and sin....
  Wan children stare at me, and in their eyes
  I see the flickering pallor of the lamps,
  Reflective of the solitude of stars....
  And I am thrilled
  With horror and the hope for tragedies....

  But, they surround my heart these weary streets,
  Yea, in my soul they cut their mournful paths,
  And through them pass forever
  Those shadow figures trudging through the grey
  Like penitent souls through haunted corridors....
  Ah, Grief, thou wanderer,
  Thou maker of music, lingering and sweet!
  Here dost thou pause to play thy shrill faint tunes,
  Thy fingers touch the stops to loose our tears,
  And shake our hearts, and fold our hands in prayer.
  Through all the winding mazes of the city
  Thy stooping shoulders and thy pitiful face are seen,
  And thou dost stand before the gate of brass,
  And by the iron door,
  Under the windows where we sit and wait
  For some sweet promise to unfold itself
  From the shut scrolls of sleep,
  And at the dusty curtain that divides
  Glory from Death,
  And lover from the lover....

  Now in my room I sit
  And round me falls the darkness
  In rustling folds of peace.
  But round my heart I know
  No scarves of sleep and silence can be bound
  To shut the city out.
  For I shall feel the rush of streets
  Shooting inquisitive fingers into chaos,
  Piercing the night's remote divinity.
  And I shall never rid me of these scars
  That time and man have cut into my thought,
  Never shake off my shoulders
  The burden of the city's pain.
  Oh, never shall we escape thee,
  Mother of mutiny and want,
  Thou beautiful mistress of Grief....
  Oh, never shall we escape thy insomnial nights
  Beating with ineloquent hands
  The tambourines of time,
  The drums of war;
  Fevering our minds
  With the swollen traffic of thoughts,
  The wheels and rattle of an endless search....

  Tired I am with wandering,
  Pricked with the lights and jostled by the worlds,
  More jaded than the Moon, more hopeless, grey,
  Than that sad pilgrim lost amid the stars!...

  1918




  Laughter and singing come with the morning,
  When Life doth mask his face with a gilded visor,
  And dons his arrogant clothes.
  But in the night,
  When the unsheathed moon stands naked and pale,
  We too put off our opulent disguise
  And stand alone in the baffling darkness,
  Fighting with our sins,
  Weeping for our loneliness,
  That moon-like gropes forever through the desolate air.

  1918




  In the night I hear my loneliness calling
  The long shrill note of the seabird's cry
  Over the fuming spite of breakers,
  Over the brumous, sulky tides.
  All the ocean is craving Heavenward,
  And the wild sky crushes downward toward the sea,
  Where the clouds stoop their passionate bodies,
  And the waves rear their supplicating hands.
  Mine eyes grow tired of looking outward forever,
  Away from the firelight and my sleeping idols,
  To where the darkness is shattered with gusts of white,
  Wings of ship, and bird, and cloud, and wave,
  Flashing their signals of unrest.--
  My longing is a warm thing in a cold street,
  Taking refuge by the chinks of lighted doors--
  My longing is a pale ghost stepping into the sunlight
  That falls in golden curtains sumptuous and hushed--
  My longing is a fiddler making a thin tune through the silence,
  Through the heavy pauses of sleep.--
  Ah! Stop up my ears lest I hear my longing call,
  Lest I hear my loneliness crying!

  1918




SUNDAY


  How beautiful is the world's delight,
  How trivial, yet as sweet as a passing dream
  That makes the harassed sleeper in the night
  Smile, and on waking sigh. Forever the stream
  Of time moves onward; as in coloured boats
  A thousand souls go sailing,
  And stilly down the tide my spirit floats
  Singing or wailing
  To the tune the waters make. Here we forget a space
  The crawling sins of man that sting and gloat,
  The pain and fear that haggers every face,
  But vaguely and remote
  The strident trumpet and the clamorous voices sound--
  Grief doth forget to curse her Gods or pray,
  While pagan follies squander all around
  Their brief gay hours in holiday;
  For all prayers die when laughter is on the lips.--
  How frail the moods of joy, how sweet to see them pass
  Like bubbles on the tide, like coloured ships
  Sailing on glass!

  1918




  The leaves are singing, and the sea,
  And the sand in the wind,
  Blown grass and hurrying people;
  Full of melodious strings and lutes and flutes
  Rustling and whispering forever.
  The sad music of Life is in my ears,
  Never ceasing, never asleep,
  And my heart is strung between chord and chord
  Like a crucifix in a rosary.

  1918




  How soundly sleepeth the fool,
  With profane snore taunting the solemn-pillared night--
  He hath no dreams of restless, subtle forms
  That shift across a feverish vacancy;
  Nor doth he hear the drums of time
  Beating against oblivion tunes of war,
  Goading the crippled hours on their endless march--
  But waketh to yawn in the face of the sun,
  Then turneth back to sleep....

  How soundly the wise man sleepeth,
  Couched royally in the purple of the dark
  With his white mistress, Peace--
  And when the morning stealeth on his rest,
  As a rose he doth pluck her from the spreading tree of days,
  And reviveth his heart
  With the perfume of the world....
  But 'twixt the wise and the foolish
  Many nights shed sorrow and fear,
  And nets are spread for timid feet,
  And the waves beat on the shifting sand....

  1918




  Moonlit lilacs under the window,
  And the pale smell of their falling blossoms,
  And the white floating beams like luminous moths
  Fluttering from bloom to bloom.
  Sprays of lilac flowers
  Frothing at the green verge of midnight waves,
  Frozen to motionless icicles.
  Moonlight flows over me,
  Spreads her bright watery hair over my face,
  Full of illicit, marvellous perfumes
  Wreathed with syringa and plaited with hyacinths;
  Hair of the moonlight falling about me,
  Straight and cool as the drooping tresses of rain.

  1918




  Old woman forever sitting
  Alone in the large hotel under the fans,
  Infinitely alone where around you spin
  So many lives like painted tops,
  Smearing the void a moment with their hues,
  Giddily catching at balance as they pause.
  What crime was yours, old woman,
  What sin against the Earth
  That she should give you now
  A cap of dust and furrows on your cheeks,
  And at the end
  A hole dug in the mould?
  Is death the promise of Fate's last rebound,
  Revenge of Time that waits within the clock
  And laughs awry at life,
  For a kiss, for a dream, for a child that you bore,
  For a fresh rose pinned to your bosom?
  The owl is in your spirit,
  Blinking through the oldest tree of wisdom--
  And now your fingers are weaving
  The cold pale invisible blossoms of death
  Into a waxen wreath,
  And Time
  Sits down beside you knitting with quick hands
  Grey counterpanes to cover up a grave!

  1918




  Loneliness I love,
  And that is why they have called me forth into the streets.
  Loneliness I love,
  But the crowd has clutched at me with fawning hands,...
  My spirit speaks
  In the scented quietness of a divine melancholy
  Murmuring the tunes
  For which my dreams are the delicate instruments.
  The shadowy silences
  Have made me beautiful and dressed me in velvet dignities,
  And that is why
  The noise of tambourines has maddened my soul into dancing,
  And I am clad
  In the lust-lipped whispering of furtive caresses.
  Holiness I love,
  And touching the virginal pierced feet of martyrs,
  The crucified feet
  Nestled among lilies and hallowing candles.
  Holiness I love
  And the melodious absolution falling on my sins.
  But that is why
  Blasphemous priests have forced my hands to tear
  The vesture of secrecy
  Which hides the human nakedness of God.

         *       *       *       *       *

  1918




  I met an Indian underneath a tree, under a ragged tree,
  His face was yellow and wrinkled like some stone whereon a God had
        writ
  And his emaciated fingers drew circles in the dust....
  I bent my mouth to his ear, crying "O father, O Prophet!
  I have wandered far over the earth troubled with doubts that will not
        let me rest,
  Canst thou not tell me with all thy wizardries and meditations
  The purpose of our lives upon this world,
  The secret truth Earth shelters in her womb?"

  But he was listening to the whispering of the mountains,
  To the boom of God's paces on the rocks,
  And the swishing steps of his followers in the rivers.
  Then suddenly he pointed to the arched doorway in between the
        hills,
  And the mysterious purple curtain of the dusk that drooped from cliff
        to cliff.
  I saw in his eyes the vision of highborn ghosts,
  Of divine ivory faces wreathed with the flowers of wisdom--
  And I knew that he had found only the half-spoken promises of
        Heaven....

         *       *       *       *       *

  I saw a drunkard laughing in a tavern,
  His cup was tilted and the wine spilt crimson on the sprawled arms
        and distracted hair of a woman fallen asleep,
  I watched him there and wondered
  If ever the bubbling goblins of wine had whispered him life's
        secret.
  But he raised the cup of his carousals and gazed at emptiness,
  Toasting some wild, irreverent dream,
  Some flame-red salamander pirouetting among the dead waste ashes of
        time--
  And I knew that he had found only the secrets of sleep....

         *       *       *       *       *

  A woman sat within a little house,
  Scolding and singing ballads to her child,
  And all around came the quarrel of children's voices.
  Yet one boy sat apart within the furthest corner of the room
  Painting an animal with coloured chalks.
  I lingered by the fire thinking of life, its vanities and mysteries,
  But the woman did not heed me,
  Nor her pale son that sat so hunched and still,
  Painting his visions with the broken chalks,
  For they had discovered the absorbing painful secrets of giving
        birth....

         *       *       *       *       *

  It was evening as I wandered,
  By a lake two lovers leaned, smiling to see their faces in the
        water,
  For they had found within each other's souls
  An argent flattering mirror wherein to gaze and see their faces
        change with all the moods and shadows of the day....
  Not here should I discover the answer to bring light into my
        darkness,
  Into the dim psychic crystals of my soul opalled with the changing
        colours of unrest--
  So I went away into the loneliness, asking the forests and the
        mountains and the sea
  The knowledge of life's baffling mysteries.
  But they were roaring in a wind of memories,
  Gathering the rain into their bodies to make them fierce and
        strong,
  Heaving their shoulders upward to the morning,
  Crowning their foreheads with sunlight.
  And I knew that they were Life itself,
  The pushing vehemence that rushes from the strangling arms of
        Death,
  Nor could they guess
  The purpose of God's beauty in their joy....

  1918




  From the fathomless depth of my boredom, from the
  last room of its emptiness, an elf has come to play
  with me.

  As comes a little gold spider to a prison cell teasing the
  criminal from his darkness to tear at a thread of sunlight,
  and kiss the mouth of a shy morning whispering through
  the window.

  An elf has come to dance with me, blown like a leaf on
  the path of my autumn lassitude.

  Sprightly one, dervish! You are the living adventure
  born of my dead childhood, you are the small god in the
  temples of my unbelief, you are the bird that nests in ruined
  temples, laying your silver eggs by moonlight and singing
  when the pagan birds are still.

  You are the dream-sower in the fields of sleep, you have
  jingled the star-bells on the hood of darkness, and from the
  knarled, stark tree of time have flung me the apple of
  eternal laughter.

  1919




  Lolling in snow, like kings in ermine coats, the gilt-crowned
  bottles lie.... Our thoughts are dangled in
  a laughter of leaves as bunches of blue and yellow grapes
  for faery beggars, for ragged fancies to pluck and taste.

  Our music shall be the minstrelsy of ghostly ballad-mongers
  that have stolen from the ashen banquets of death to bless
  our revels.

  Our spirits shall flit like those winged faces of cherubs
  that never can alight, but swing forever on the azure ribbons
  of the sky.

  And all our dreams and kisses shall be as the rose-leaves
  falling on ancient festivals, as the shadows of rose-leaves
  falling on phantom lovers in the sleep-pillared temples of
  our first archaic passion.

  1918




  The roots of our longing are probing the heart of night,
  delving and twining together that our ultimate truth
  may grow out of the darkness that bewilders and nourishes.
  Out of the earth, the dust, the crystals of frost that bind
  themselves like a tight crown over our heads.

  Through the mould and the frost our hair and fingers shall
  prick their spears of pallor and flame, and in the green
  ardour of our up-rushing leaves the red goblets of fire
  shall open, and masses of white flowers, milky as the star-sprays
  that droop over Heaven, shall splash their bright
  foam from the darkness, as waves that rise and break into
  a fountain of blossoms.

  1919




VAHDAH


  Sun-aureoled lilies are your priestesses,
  They stand like choirs in silver surplices,
  Melodious streams of silence fill the room,
  And pensive listeners lean within the gloom
  Of purple quietness. A laughter full of holiness--
  Like the wild bells of lilies ringing in the loneliness
  Of star-reflected gardens walled with night,--
  Thrills from your soul which empties its delight
  As rain on lilies, or as sunlight falling slenderly
  To gild their ivory temples, and as moonlight shutting tenderly
  Their alabaster doors.... A white peace grows,
  And love, within your spirit like a lily and a rose.

  1918




  Starlit silences!
  Breeding fears, swarming with sudden deaths,
  With separations, burdens, and despairs,
  Weaving slow eerie fancies in my brain ...
  Forlorn shorn monks go down the cloisters of quietness
  With tortured crucifixes cut in ivory
  Clasped in their praying hands,
  And psalmed with lips renunciate of kisses ...
  Forgotten days are painted on the night
  In parables and symbols of remorse
  That jeer from out the wind-stirred tapestries.
  The hangman's rope coils upward like a snake
  Out of the death-coloured waters,
  While the black barges pass
  Funereal,
  Carrying doom from mist to mist....
  And madmen steal about the wintry parks
  Under the high glum walls of an asylum,
  With eyes lit up in phosphorescent ecstasies,
  With fumbling hands
  That grope for things invisibly obscene.
  Even the clock
  Grown idiot too from keeping madmen's time
  Gibbers the hours away in irrelevant chimes....
  Silence embalms the dead with scented bands
  And is the watchman to deserted houses,
  And draws the violet curtain on the day,
  And fits a mask of silver to the moon.
  Silence brings corpses from the crypts of memory
  And sits them round us in the empty chairs,
  Opens the secret chambers of our hopes
  And shows us there in awful pantomime
  Lust wreathing love with poppies and with ashes,
  And Beauty dressing Sin for carnival,
  And Peace made drunken with a cup of blood.
  It winds as ivy round our listening thoughts
  Shutting all sounds away, enclosing us
  Within its stifled virid twilight....

  Cry out, sing, make noises,
  Bacchantes, revellers, clowns!
  Bring myriad lamps in clusters, likening grapes
  That spill the wine of light into our gloom;
  Pressing against our lips
  The red grape-kisses of pleasure.
  Bring the hounds,
  The garlanded white ones,
  To bay and snarl and tear the flying rags
  Of stillness shadowing away!
  Lean over me, O Life,
  And whisper all thy lying flatteries
  That drag me back from Silence and her dead.
  I have kept vigil on my soul too long
  Within this vast cathedral of dim sleep,
  Languidly gathering
  The cold grey lilies of the stars
  To slip between her passive waxen hands....

  1918




  The mountain is an Emperor.
  The clouds are his beard, and the stars his diadem;
  His bauble is the moon;
  He is dressed in silver forests, and the mist his train;
  His feet are two white rivers.

  1917




  I know what happiness is--
  It is the negation of thought,
  The shutting off
  Of all those brooding phantoms that surround
  As dank trees in a forest
  Cutting the daylight into rags,
  Caging the sun
  In rusted prison bars.
  Happiness loves to lie at a river's edge
  And make no song,
  But listen to the water's murmuring wisdom,
  The kissing touch of leaves wind-bowed together,
  The feathery swish of cloud wings on a hill;
  Opening wide the violet-petalled doors
  Of every shy and cloistered sense,
  That all the scent and music of the world
  May rush into the soul.
  And happiness expands
  The rainbow arch for a procession of dreams,
  For moth-like fancies winged with evening,
  For dove-breasted silences,
  For shadowy reveries
  And starry pilgrims....
  I know what happiness is--
  It is the giving back to Earth
  Of all our furtive thefts,
  The lurid jewels that we stole away
  From passion, sin and pain,
  Because they glittered strangely, luring us
  With their forbidden beauty.
  Because our childish fingers curiously
  Crave the pale secrets of the moon
  And grope for dangerous toys.
  Happiness comes in giving back to Earth
  The things we took from her with violent hands,
  Remembering only
  That her dust is our garment,
  Her fruits our endeavour,
  Her waters our priestess,
  Her leaves our interpreters to God,
  Her hills our infinite patience.

  1918




  Long hath the pen lain idle in my hand,
  Or traced slow sentences without a rhyme,
  Words strung at random to beguile the time
  As children threading beads upon a strand.
  I have strayed far away from fairyland
  Whose little hills grow steep and hard to climb;
  I creep along the valleys in the slime,
  Or hide me like an ostrich in the sand.

  For I have sought a mellow idleness,
  To be forever buried as a fly
  Lies casketed in amber; where the stress
  Of peril, hunger, Death can never cry
  To wake me from my sanguine weariness,
  Or cloud the lucid stillness with a sigh.

  1918




  I laid my heart on a stone
  And stood in the wood to watch.
  Presently a priest came by;
  He hid it in his cowl
  And buried it in the graveyard.
  Now is it grown into a cyclamen tree,
  Clustering over the wall,
  Beckoning far along the twilight road;
  Nodding and singing where the cypress moans,
  Ringing its little bells while the great bell tolls.
  Whiter than ghosts are its flowers,
  And its scent is sweeter than ghostly music--
  All the men and priests that pass
  In the night when the stars lean down,
  Smell the heavy fragrance there
  And feel the gentle touch of dripping dew.
  Then they cross themselves and go
  Hurriedly, warily,
  Dreaming of pale women,
  Under the pale stars.

  1918




  The cold light steals into my soul
  Revealing its emptiness,
  The cold winds batter at my heart
  And make its lonely tenant shake with fear--
  The raindrops slide across the window-glass
  Like sighs that fall from patient weariness;
  And coldly smiling time
  Peers with his clock-face, ticking in my brain
  The pulse of a monotonous remorse.

  1918




  The caravans of spring are in the town,
  Lighting their brilliant torches in the park,
  Dangling their bells, engirdling each stark
  Black tree with coloured rings. The houses frown
  Against the beryl sky, yet wear a crown
  Of hazy dream, or flash a golden spark
  Of sun-fire in their windows glum and dark;
  The people blow like petals up and down.

  But London tires at evening, each grey street
  Mourns as the slow procession passes by,
  Traffic and crowd, and Time on loitering feet.
  Spring droops his lute, the slender echoes sigh,
  And wistfully the jaded revellers meet,
  Their pomp in tatters and their wreaths awry.

  1918




  I dread the beauty of approaching spring
  Now the old month is dead and the young moon
  Has pierced my heart with her sharp silver horns.
  My tired soul is startled out of sleep
  By all the urging joy of bud and leaf,
  And in the barren yard where I have paced
  Content with prison and despair's monotony,
  The trees break into music wild and shrill,
  And flowers come out like stars amid the dust,
  Bewildering my loneliness with beauty....
  For winter with her melancholy face
  Shone back my miseries as in a glass,
  And wept and whined in harmony with me;
  And I could listen by the withering ashes
  To the ill-omened drum of dropping rain,
  And sighing harken sighs and mute feel silence,
  And cold stretch forth my hand into the snows,
  And hating, hear the laughter of the wind
  Whose mad hands tear the sky.
  But now again the promise of the spring
  Shall lift my martyred spirit from the dust,
  To where the lilied altar shines with peace,
  And the white priestess comes
  Crowning each candle with a gold desire
  Engirdling with pallors
  The forehead of a divine ghost.
  Ah, but they die, these gods, the candles dwindle
  And spring is but a radiant beckoning
  To death that follows slowly, silently....

  O flitting swallows, fleeting laugh of wind,
  O flash of silver in the wings of dawn
  That are spread out and closed. O hush of night
  Breathless with love, oh swish of whispering tide
  That swells and shrinks upon the dreaming shore.
  O gentle eyes of children wonder-wide
  That grow too soon to weariness and close;
  O scuttling run of rabbit on the hills,
  And flight of lazy rooks above the elm;
  O birds' eggs frail, tinged faintly, nestled close,
  And mystery of flower in the bud.
  O burning galaxy of buttercups,
  And drone of bees above the pouting rose,--
  O twilit lovers stilled with reverie
  And footprints of them swerving on the sand
  And darkness of them clasped against the sky!
  I see beyond the glory of your days
  The grey days marching one behind the other
  To the bleak tunes of silence.
  When mists shall smear the radiance of the moon
  And the lean thief shall pass,
  Snatching the glittering toys away from love,
  Plucking the feathers from the wings of peace.
  And Life herself, grown old and crooked now,
  Shall go the way that her long shadow points,
  Her long black shadow down the roads of sleep.

  1918




TO MY FATHER


  I cannot think that you have gone away,
  You loved the earth--and life lit up your eyes,
  And flickered in your smile that would surmise
  Death as a song, a poem, or a play.
  You were reborn afresh with every day,
  And baffled fortune in some new disguise.
  Ah! can it perish when the body dies,
  Such youth, such love, such passion to be gay?

  We shall not see you come to us and leave
  A conqueror--nor catch on fairy wing
  Some slender fancy--nor new wonders weave
  Upon the loom of your imagining.
  The world is wearier, grown dark to grieve
  Her child that was a pilgrim and a king.

  1917




TO MY MOTHER


  At evening when the twilight curtains fall,
  Before the lamps are lit within my room,
  My memories hang bright upon the gloom,
  Like ancient frescoes painted on the wall.

  And I can hear the call of birds and bells
  And shadowy sound of waves, and wind through leaves
  And wind that rustles through the burnished sheaves,
  And far off voices whispering farewells.

  I dream again the joy I used to know
  While straying by the sea that hardly sighed
  A sorrow in my singing, as the tide
  Crept up to clasp me, smiled, and let me go.

  And I remember all the glad lost hours,
  The racing of brown rabbits on the hill,
  The winds that prowled around the lonely mill,
  Laburnum laughter, music of the flowers.

  The berries plucked with loitering delight,
  Staining the dusk with purple, till the thought
  Of starry little ghosts behind us caught
  Our hearts and made us fearful of the night.

  The London evenings huddled in the rain
  Whose misty prisms shone with lamplight pale,
  Making our hearts seem sinister and frail,
  Fainting our thoughts with mystery and pain.

  I have a world of memories to dream,
  To touch with loving fingers as a sigh
  Revives a little flame and lets it die.
  Ah, were the days as lovely as they seem

  Now that they look so peaceful lying dead?
  And is it all the hope of Joy we have,
  The broken trophies of the things she gave
  And took away to give us dreams instead?

  The things we love and lose before we find
  The way to love them well enough and keep,
  That now are woven on the looms of sleep
  That now are only music of the wind.

  1918




  London grows sad at evening,
  And we at the windows sit
  To watch her moods,
  Wearying with her.
  Even a noise of laughter from the street
  Sounds in our ears
  Like something dropped and shattered on the stone.
  Then her musician comes,
  A wandering, malicious spirit;
  The organ grinder, playing those old tunes
  We know too well,
  That hurt us with fatigue.
  Till Hope like a harlequin,
  His glitter hidden in a ragged coat,
  The lamplighter, goes by,
  Planting his pale flames in the dusk.

  1918




  Ah! the spring,
  Sudden, surprising,
  Melting the iron scales around the heart
  As the earliest sun
  Melts the cold case of dew on leaves--
  Ah! the streets like odorous rivers
  Chanting the echoes of seas--
  Ah! the flowers in shop-windows
  Beseeching, persuasive,
  Reluctant to let their beauty flow away
  From thoughts that mirror them in passing--
  Beautiful exiles
  Fluttering in their chains,
  Thrilled with the noise of bees,
  The music of meadows
  Still hovering around them--
  Flower fingers, flower-touches,
  Passional, reminiscent,
  Rippling the soul's still waters--
  Flower galaxies,
  Enamelled bridges arching from dream to dream,
  Garlands splashing over the eyes of satyrs,
  The furtive woodland eyes,
  The pointed inquisitive ears--
  Pallid flowers foaming on hill-crests,
  Gushing heavenwards
  From a sea of stormy mountains--
  Opening and shutting exquisite doors,
  As the senses open to music,
  Shut upon silence,
  Open to beauty,
  Close their caskets upon love--
  Ah! the flowers in the windows,
  Amorous of poets
  Making a chaplet of song!

  1919




THE UNDERTONE OF THE VOLGA BOAT SONG


  O God,
  We have nothing to give Thee,
  We are as fog that drifts on the river,
  As the wailing of voices blown through mist--
  We are as those that carry bags of dust
  Heaping them with the dust--
  We are covered with the dust of days,
  We are pale from the dust of dreamless nights
  Shaken before we were rested--
  At dawn we are found by the sun
  Adrift, labouring, thinking of nothing--
  Our wine is bitter, it has made us drunk,
  Our bread is coarse,
  We are always athirst and hungry....
  O God, we have been patient,
  We have grown old in weariness,
  Our lives are as the labouring of the wind--
  We are huddled together in the dawn,
  The sleeping houses pass us,
  The dawn is a field of nettles
  Stinging us from rest....
  O God,
  We have nothing to give Thee but patience,
  We have suffered evil and believed Thee good,
  Thy face is the gentleness of the distance,
  The river is placid with the thought of Thee--
  Our tears have washed us harder than the rocks,
  And like the rocks we wait,
  Grow old with waiting....
  Weariness, the river
  Flowing through banks of sleep....
  O God, we have nothing to give Thee,
  Take our great weariness,
  We that have never lived and never slept,
  Take our long weariness, O God!...

  1919




Transcribers' Notes:


Punctuation, hyphenation, and spelling were not changed.

Ellipses are reproduced as printed in the original book.

Most of the poems' titles appear only in the Table of Contents, not
with the poems themselves.

When the Transcriber could not to determine whether a verse at the top
of a page was a new stanza or part of the stanza on the previous page,
the latter was assumed.

Page 42: "sombring" was printed that way.

Page 89: "Because I can not" was printed with "can" and "not" as
separate words.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Poems, by Iris Tree

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS ***

***** This file should be named 45643.txt or 45643.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/6/4/45643/

Produced by Clarity, Charlie Howard, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
