The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Overland Guide-book, by James Barber

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Overland Guide-book
       A complete vade-mecum for the overland traveller, to India via Egypt.

Author: James Barber

Release Date: May 20, 2014 [EBook #45706]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OVERLAND GUIDE-BOOK ***




Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)










  THE

  OVERLAND GUIDE-BOOK;

  A

  COMPLETE VADE-MECUM

  FOR

  THE OVERLAND TRAVELLER,

  TO INDIA _via_ EGYPT.


  BY

  CAPTAIN JAMES BARBER, H.C.S.


  "GLOSTER--Knowest thou the way?

  EDGAR--Both stile and gate, horseway and footway.
  Poor Tom shall lead thee.--Take my hand."--SHAKSPERE.


  SECOND EDITION.


  LONDON:

  WM. H. ALLEN AND CO.,
  7, LEADENHALL-STREET.

  1850.




LONDON:

LEWIS AND SON, FINCH-LANE, CORNHILL.




  TO THE

  CIVIL AND MILITARY SERVICES

  OF

  BRITISH INDIA,

  THIS WORK IS DEDICATED,

  WITH GRATEFUL RESPECT

  AND

  CORDIAL GOOD WISHES,

  BY

  THEIR OBEDIENT HUMBLE SERVANT,

  THE AUTHOR.




INTRODUCTION.


The purpose of this little volume, which I have now the honour to
submit to the public, is to combine, in a compact and convenient
form, all the information necessary to the prosecution of the journey
Overland to India and _vice versa_.

Scarcely a day passes that I am not asked, either personally or by
letter, to guide some intending traveller in his arrangements for the
trip, and even to advise him as to the preferable routes, the expense,
the manner of the voyage, &c. Ignorance on all these points induces
inapposite and irrelevant questions; and it is not unusual to find, at
the end of correspondence or a prolonged interview, that the querist is
as far from the possession of the knowledge he desired to acquire as he
was when he first preferred his application. No clear and satisfactory
information can possibly be obtained by a desultory conversation or
fragmentary epistles; hence the value of a systematic and comprehensive
arrangement of all the facts and suggestions pertaining to the subject.

There is another reason why I should put forth this Guide,--it
completes, in a measure--as far, at least, as the great Overland
scheme is in itself complete--my humble labours in the mighty cause of
steam-communication between England and India. For the past fourteen
years, I have earnestly and ardently advocated the accomplishment
of this great object; and, though treated as a vain and visionary
enthusiast, when I have presumed to predict the establishment of a
semi-monthly intercourse (which I did in 1836!), my endeavours never
relaxed, nor did my hope in the least degree abate. I may be pardoned,
therefore, some measure of exultation and self-approval, when, looking
back upon the state of the steam question some years ago, and tracing
its rise and progress through a thousand difficulties and obstructions,
I venture to associate my own zeal and exertions with the triumphant
consummation apparent in the scheme now adopted and carried out by
the "Peninsular and Oriental Company," and the "East India Company,"
not only with the Presidencies of India, but also with our Chinese
possessions.

I laboured long and strenuously; for I could not persuade myself that
British enterprise and public spirit would suffer so obvious a means of
extending commerce and civilisation, and of the approximation of our
vast Indian empire to the seat of its supreme rule, to be neglected.
The great cause _has_ triumphed,--some of my wildest dreams have
become sober realities, and, while I feel grateful for the past, I am
hopeful for the future.

Those who take a prominent and active part in promoting great schemes
of public utility, where doubt and timidity, and envy and selfish
interests are to be combated, must expect to meet with rebuffs and
misrepresentations. Of these evils I have had my share, but I have
also, from time to time, been unexpectedly cheered on the way by
receiving voluntary and public testimonials of unspeakable value,
graciously transmitted through various channels. I may be excused
for publishing the following letter from the present excellent and
much esteemed Bishop of Calcutta, for it displays a truly Christian
spirit,--it grapples comprehensively with the question, and
corroborates the view taken by the late Lord William Bentinck, who
expressed his opinion "that steam-communication with India would be
cheaply bought at any price."

  "BISHOPS PALACE, CALCUTTA,
  "_22nd of October, 1838_.

  "DEAR SIR,

 "I should never forgive myself, if I conveyed to you the accompanying
 resolution without, at the same time, assuring you of the sincere
 gratitude I feel in the bottom of my heart to a gentleman who has
 laboured so assiduously, diligently and successfully in one of the
 greatest cause that ever interested humanity.

 "I can truly say, that the consequences, immediate and remote, of
 steam-communication between India and Europe defy calculation. Such a
 wonderful adaptation of science is full of 'the seed of things,' as
 was said of Lord Bacon's philosophical writings and principles two
 centuries since.

 "The invention of printing, and the discovery of the mariners'
 compass, did not more immediately bear upon the happiness of
 mankind. The human family is now indeed approximating, and, by
 inter-communication of knowledge, the times may be expected to draw
 on, when the illumination of the more prostrate nations will be
 borrowed from the most remote and exalted.

 "Allow me, sir, to conclude with saying that, not only as a Chairman,
 but as a man and a Christian, I have sincere pleasure in transmitting
 to you the enclosed resolution, and am

  "Your most obedient,
  "D. CALCUTTA.

  "TO CAPTAIN JAMES BARBER,
  "&c., &c., &c."

The journey to and from India, by way of Egypt, is now one of
comparative ease and pleasure; and, as it is my intention to publish
periodically a revised edition of "The Overland Guide Book," I shall
feel grateful to those persons who, from time to time, will communicate
with me on the subject, in order that the best and fullest information
gained by experience may be made available to the traveller who prefers
this route.

JAMES BARBER.




LIST OF ENGRAVINGS.


                                                                    PAGE

  GIBRALTAR                                                            8

  ROCK OF DITTO, FROM THE NEUTRAL GROUND                               9

  MALTA                                                               10

  MALTESE PEASANT                                                     22

  ALEXANDRIA                                                          24

  BOULAC                                                              28

  ASCENT OF THE PYRAMIDS                                              29

  DESERT CARRIAGE                                                     32

  ADEN                                                                33

  MUSSOOLAH BOAT                                                      45

  NILE BOAT                                                           72




THE OVERLAND GUIDE-BOOK.


The communication with India by means of steam-vessels, _via_
the Mediterranean and the Red Sea, can no longer be viewed as an
experimental project; the great increase that has taken place in the
number of travellers by this route in a few brief years has distanced
all calculation, and we, therefore, place before the public such facts,
details and suggestions, connected with what is popularly called "_The
Overland Route_," as shall facilitate the performance of the voyage,
from the hour when the resolution to proceed to India or to Europe is
taken, down to that which sees the traveller safely deposited at his
destination.

The sea route round the Cape of Good Hope still has its partisans,
in spite of the tedium, extra risk and absence of all objects of
interest, which necessarily distinguish such a voyage. False notions
of economy, groundless apprehensions, peculiar ideas of comfort and
ancient prejudices, cannot be immediately dissipated, especially when
so many encouragements to their continuance exist in the beautiful
trading-vessels, which offer accommodation to the public, commanded
by gentlemen, whose courtesy and _scavoir vivre_ are only equalled by
their nautical experience.

Still in this--the comparative infancy of the steam route--nine-tenths
of those whom fortune may carry to India will prefer the most
expeditious manner of proceeding thither; and it, therefore, becomes
in the highest degree important that they should be supplied with the
fullest information, in furtherance of their purpose.

Under this impression, the following pages have been compiled; and,
as we purpose to confine ourselves to useful and practical detail,
the reader is left to seek, in the numberless volumes that have been
published, a more elaborate account of those objects on his route which
he may desire to mark with special attention.

The following division of our subject appears the most convenient for
the object of this publication:--

INSTRUCTIONS AND HINTS TO PASSENGERS TO ADEN, CEYLON, MADRAS,
CALCUTTA, THE STRAITS AND CHINA.

TO BOMBAY.

ROUTES THROUGH FRANCE AND TRIESTE.

FROM INDIA, _via_ SYRA, MALTA, MARSEILLES, OR DIRECT TO
SOUTHAMPTON.

MISCELLANEOUS.


THE PASSAGE TO ADEN, CEYLON, MADRAS, CALCUTTA, THE STRAITS AND CHINA.

The "Peninsular and Oriental Company" having contracted with Her
Majesty's government to carry a mail monthly to the above places, also
secure to passengers accommodation along the whole route, at a specific
charge, and, by the same opportunity, drop at Malta or Alexandria
those persons who do not contemplate proceeding any farther.

The steamers remain at Gibraltar six, and at Malta twelve, hours.

The charge for a passage varies according to the accommodation occupied
and the distance to be travelled. On reference to Appendix A, the
reader will find the fullest information, with a list of the Company's
ships and the lines on which they are at present stationed.

As berths in all these steamers vary in comfort as well as price,
persons who have determined to proceed to India or the intermediate
ports, at a particular date, cannot be too early in their application
and choice. On these points every information is most readily and
courteously given at the office of the "Peninsular and Oriental
Company." But if the party going be, from his absence from town
or inexperience in business, under the necessity of employing an
intermediate agent to secure a passage for him, he would do well to
select one thoroughly acquainted not only with the vessels themselves,
but with all that appertains to them.

As a general rule, we may remark that these steamers are liberally
provided with all that passengers can possibly desire. A good table
is kept, and the cabins are comfortably and conveniently fitted, and
sheets, pillow-cases and towels are supplied. It may, however, be as
well to give some precise information as to the possible requirements
of a passenger; for a simple statement of what the steamers _do_
provide scarcely involves a specification of the articles _not_
to be found on board. Let it be stated, then, that there is no
sort of occasion for bed or table-linen, a sofa, wash-hand-stand,
looking-glass, boot-hooks, jugs, tumblers, blacking and brushes, or
those "overland bedsteads" which we see continually advertised; but it
will be prudent to be provided with a large rug, an air pillow, and a
counterpane or _resai_ (wadded coverlet); for it is very probable that,
on getting into a warm latitude, the traveller will prefer sleeping on
deck, and the steamer's bedding is not allowed to be carried from its
place for such purposes.

The steamers leave Southampton on the 20th of each month--provided the
luggage be sent down in due time.[1] Passengers need not leave London
till an early morning train on the day of embarkation. Those who intend
sleeping at Southampton the previous night should bespeak beds. The
vessels are moored alongside the quay in the docks, and the hire of a
truck from the railway to the steamer is one shilling. Flies also are
in constant attendance; in fine weather, however, the distance is an
agreeable ten-minutes' walk or less.

[Footnote 1: _Vide_ James Barber and Co.'s Circular.]

 Railway trains from the Waterloo Bridge station to Southampton, in
 the morning, at 7.15 o'clock, 10.30 o'clock (mail); afternoon, 1,
 3.45, 5 o'clock (express); evening, 30 minutes past 8 o'clock. Mail
 Sunday trains, morning, at 9 o'clock; afternoon, 5 o'clock; evening,
 30 minutes past 8 o'clock. Mail passengers should be at the station at
 least a quarter of an hour before the trains start.

 Passengers should embark at Southampton not later than 12.30
 P.M.

The trunks in which clothes for the voyage may be packed, should
be regulated by the calling or capacity of the traveller. If he be
a military or medical man, and, therefore, liable to much marching
about in India, bullock-trunks, specially made at the outfitters,
are preferable, as they are permanently useful. Passengers are
strongly recommended to adopt trunks or portmanteaus of the following
dimensions, _viz._:--length, 2 feet 3 inches, breadth, 1 foot 2 inches,
depth, 1 foot 2 inches, and to have _their names and the port of
debarkation distinctly painted on each package_. No package or baggage
should exceed 80 lbs. in weight, otherwise it may be delayed in Egypt.
The portmanteaus should be of leather, or material not liable to injury
or breakage in handling.[2]

[Footnote 2: Ladies will find Messrs. Thresher and Glenny's air-tight
cases very useful, even in India. This firm, as general outfitters
for the Overland Route, deservedly stand high, and merit every
encouragement.]

The following are the leading points of the "Peninsular and Oriental
Company's" regulations:--

 Passengers not proceeding, after taking berths, will forfeit half the
 passage-money. In case, however, of a passenger being unavoidably
 prevented from availing himself of a passage at the period for which
 it is taken, a transfer of the passage can be effected to a subsequent
 steamer, on due notice being given, without forfeiture of any portion
 of the deposit paid, and accommodation will be allotted as similar as
 circumstances will permit.

 On either side of the Isthmus, three cwt. of personal baggage is
 allowed to each first-class passenger; but 16s. per cwt. is charged
 by the "Egyptian Transit Company" for conveyance through Egypt on all
 baggage exceeding two cwt.

 In the steamers, children, servants and second-class passengers are
 allowed one cwt. and a half each; 16s. per cwt. being charged by the
 "Egyptian Transit Company" on all beyond one cwt.

 A passenger engaging a whole cabin for the entire voyage, is entitled
 to take in the steamer four and a half cwt. of luggage; but is subject
 to the charge in Egypt as above stated.

 Excess of three cwt. of baggage in the steamer pays freight at the
 rate of L1 per cwt., in the Alexandria steamers, and L2 per cwt. in
 the India vessels.

 Any luggage beyond that allowed _free_ must be put on board and paid
 for three days previous to the vessel's departure. Carpet-bags and
 hat-boxes only will be received on the day of sailing. The Company
 give notice that, all luggage (save as aforesaid) that shall be
 shipped on the day of departure will be considered as extra, and
 charged for accordingly.

 Passengers taking articles of merchandise in their baggage will incur
 the risk of seizure by the customs' authorities in Egypt.

 The Company do not hold themselves responsible for detention, damage,
 or loss of baggage.

 As the allowance of baggage is on a liberal scale, and the freight of
 parcels moderate, it is hoped that passengers will not convey parcels
 or packages belonging to other persons, to the prejudice of the
 Company's interests. A contrary course will involve risk, delay and
 difficulty at the Egyptian custom-house.

 Passengers will be expected to comply strictly with the regulations
 established on board the Company's steamers for the general comfort.

 In the first instance, a passenger booking from England to Alexandria
 only, but who _afterwards_ proceeds from Suez to India in this
 Company's steamers, will be required to pay such an additional amount
 only as will make up the sum, supposing he had taken his passage right
 through from his embarkation in England.

 Lights to be put out at half-past ten o'clock, after which, no wines,
 spirits, &c., will be supplied, except in cases of illness, when
 application is to be made to the purser through the surgeon.

 No wines, spirits, or beer, are to be supplied elsewhere than in the
 saloons, except in case of illness.

 It is to be understood, that a passenger occupying a cabin of two or
 more berths, on the departure of the vessel, is not (unless he shall
 have paid an additional sum for its exclusive occupation) to object
 to the vacant berth being filled up at the intermediate ports, if
 required.

 If there be any negligence, inattention, or impropriety, on the part
 of any of the servants, or any other ground for dissatisfaction,
 passengers are particularly requested to give notice immediately to
 the commander, who has full authority to act under such circumstances;
 and the Company would also wish to receive intimation of the same by
 letter, addressed to the secretary.

Although there is positively no restriction as to the quantity of a
passenger's luggage, the excess of that allowed being paid for, still
it is obvious that when a hundred persons are travelling with the speed
of a mail through Egypt, every extra-package becomes an incumbrance,
if not a positive nuisance; for it renders the timely arrival of those
_absolutely required_ very doubtful. It is, therefore, advisable that
passengers should confine themselves strictly to the quantity of
luggage necessary for the trip, sending so much as they may wish to
have in India by the long sea route a month or two previous to their
departure. The adoption of this course will spare them much annoyance
and expense on the journey.

As by the Company's regulation no trunks, boxes or portmanteaus are
allowed in the cabins of their steamers, passengers should provide
themselves with a good-sized leather or carpet-bag, in which should be
packed all the clothes, &c., required for immediate use; and this bag
may be kept in the cabin and replenished from time to time from the
trunks, to which the passengers have access every other day. This bag
should be taken on board with the passenger; but the trunks and other
baggage should be put on board two or three days before sailing.

We have now fairly started with our passengers from Southampton. The
steamer boils and bubbles on her course, and in five days runs to
Gibraltar, sighting the Spanish and Portuguese coasts. The passengers
soon conquer the annoyance of sea-sickness; new acquaintanceships are
rapidly formed; employments and pastimes arranged, and, by the time
"the rock" is reached, the real pleasures of the trip begin to be
fairly appreciated.

GIBRALTAR.--From the title so often given to this pleasant
little port and garrison--"the Rock of Gibraltar,"--the traveller
expects to find a barren, inoccupable mass, as inhospitable to its
friendly visitors as it was unapproachable to our foes; instead of
this, the eye, after entering the bay, is greeted with the sight
of a luxuriant vegetation, distributed into gardens, groves and
plantations. After the visit of the _pratique_ officer, boats approach
the newly-arrived vessel, to take on shore any passenger who may be
disposed to land for a few hours. The club-house and Griffith's Hotel
offer temporary accommodations, and to one or the other the traveller
may betake himself. He soon, however, is tempted, by the brilliancy
of the sky and the warmth of the temperature, to wander abroad, and
inspect the new scene that presents itself. The Commercial Square,
formerly the Grand Parade, offers the first object of attraction.
The sales by auction carried on here all day, draw together a motley
population, whose costumes and physiognomy alone are a study for
the stranger. Greeks, Turks, Jews, Arabs, &c., mingle together in
picturesque confusion. The streets of Gibraltar are narrow, the houses
low, irregular and ill-fashioned; yet are there a few public buildings
worthy of a passing notice. The Exchange, erected during the government
of Sir George Don, the Catholic church of St. Mary, the court-house,
the Moorish castle, within which are some remarkable excavations,
the residence of the governor (which was formerly a convent), the
Protestant church, the garrison and library, are the principal edifices.

[Illustration: GIBRALTAR.]

Gibraltar being but five miles long, the whole place may be seen, on
horseback or in carriages, easily obtainable, in a very brief space.
Proceeding southward, the visitor stops for a moment at South Port,
where, over the gate, he sees the arms of the Emperor Charles V. richly
emblazoned, supported by those of Philip II. Not far from this,
are the Alameda, public walks and grounds tastefully laid out. In the
centre of the gardens is a statue harpooning a fish, which was formerly
the figure-head of a Spanish vessel taken at Trafalgar, and near this,
a column bearing a bronze bust of the Duke of Wellington.

[Illustration: THE ROCK, FROM THE NEUTRAL GROUND.]

Leaving the walks, the next object of interest is San Michael's Cave,
a great natural curiosity. The whole rock (Calpe) is hollowed out and
perforated by caves. The fantastic forms assumed by the stalactites
give these recesses the appearance of work done by ingenious human
hands. Martin's Cave, not far from San Michael's, corresponds in
character with, but is smaller in dimensions than, the latter. The
wild monkeys that inhabit the place afford much entertainment by their
freaks. Extending the ride to Windmill Hill, we reach the Governor's
cottage, built by General Fox as a summer residence. It is pleasantly
situated close to the sea. From this the ride may be extended to
Europa Point, Rosia, in the vicinity of which is the Naval Hospital,
capable of holding 400 patients. From Rosia along the whole range of
the western side to Sand Port is a continuation of works, batteries and
bastions.

As the period of the steamer's detention (six hours) will scarcely
enable the visitor to see more than the above, we do not think it
necessary to extend our description. We will merely add, as a guide to
those who are inclined to make purchases on shore, that accounts are
kept in dollars, reals, &c., but English weights and measures are in
use.

After quitting Gibraltar, steaming along the coast of Algiers, you soon
reach the famed island of Malta, where the outward-bound coming free
from the imputations of plague, which cover the homeward passenger, are
at liberty at once to go on shore and see the "lions" of the place.

If the period chosen by the traveller for his voyage should admit of
his reaching Malta between November and April, he will be enabled to
regale on oranges, for which fruit the island is much celebrated. Other
fruits, such as strawberries, figs, pomegranates, grapes, apples,
pears, peaches, nectarines, apricots, plums, melons and prickly pears,
are likewise to be had then. The climate of Malta is agreeable enough
to tempt the visitor to prolong his stay, and, indeed, in the instance
of pulmonary and other complaints, the atmosphere has often been found
most serviceable. Its salubrity may be judged of from the fact of the
range of the thermometer being remarkably equable; seldom falling below
50 deg. in the month of January, or rising above 88 deg. during the summer
months.

[Illustration: MALTA.]

The most remarkable edifices in Malta are the churches and the
Albergas; which latter are now converted into public offices or
other establishments of a useful nature. Their exterior denotes the end
of their construction and the various sections of Knights of St. John,
under whose auspices and for whose purposes they were raised.

These Albergas are now appropriated to government offices; one is
occupied by the Malta Union Club, two others as courts of law, a fourth
as the Civil Arsenal and Government Printing Office. The Auberge
(or Alberga) de Castile is occupied by the officers of the English
garrison; the Commissary-General tenants the Auberge de France--and so
on.

The church of St. John holds the first rank among the numerous churches
and convents of Malta. The interior is of an oblong form; the uppermost
part, which forms the choir, is ornamented with an admirable piece
of sculpture in white marble, on a raised base, representing the
baptism of Christ by St. John, in two figures as large as life. The
semicircular roof which covers the nave is adorned with paintings
illustrative of the life of the above-mentioned apostle. The pavement
is composed of sepulchral slabs worked in mosaic with various-coloured
marble; many of them contain jasper, agate, and other precious stones,
the cost of which must have been very great. These cover chiefly the
graves of the knights and other servants of the order. The grand altar,
which stands at the uppermost part of the nave, is very sumptuous,
and deserves notice, on account of the various-coloured marble and
other valuable stones of which it is constructed. The chapels of the
different languages of the order, which run parallel with the nave,
form the two aisles, and are very splendidly decorated. The roofs are
constructed in the shape of a dome in the interior, and are profusely
carved with different ornaments in alto-relievo, as also are the
walls. The whole was gilded during the reigns of Rafael and Nicolas
Cotoner, as appears from an inscription over the entrance on the west
side of the building. The arches of these chapels correspond on both
sides, and leave their interior quite exposed to view, as you pass down
the nave. The second arch covers the chapel of the Portuguese knights.
Over the altar is a drawing of St. James; and on the side-walls are two
other paintings, representing some traditionary scenes in the life of
that apostle.

Besides the church already mentioned, there are three others in the
city, which belong to the Government: viz., the Church of the Jesuits
in Strada Mercanti, Di Liesse on the Marina, and St. Rocco in Strada
St. Ursola. The church of Di Liesse belonged to the Knights of France.
The walls of this building are adorned with gifts devoted to the
Virgin; the fulfilment of vows made in time of affliction, in order
to obtain her commiseration. The boatmen hold this church in peculiar
veneration.

The two parish churches of the city are those of St. Domenico and St.
Paolo; the former is connected with a monastery of Dominican friars;
the latter is a collegiate church, situated in the street of the
same name. The other monkish orders are those of the Augustinians,
Carmelites, Franciscans, and the _Minori Osservanti_, or Reformed
Franciscans, all of which have churches connected with their respective
convents. Besides these, there are two large nunneries, one of Ursoline
and the other of Sta. Catarina nuns; but the rage for this species of
seclusion has very much subsided in Valetta. The former establishment
is nearly empty, and the latter is receiving but very few additions.
Two other churches in the city, one dedicated to Sta. Lucia and the
other called Delle Anime (of the Souls in Purgatory), belong to the
public. The Greek Catholics have also a small chapel, dedicated to
Sta. Maria, in Strada Vescovo. By far the finest specimen of modern
architecture is the Protestant church, built at the charge of Queen
Adelaide, who sojourned for a short time at Malta.

Next to the churches are the Military Hospital, the Monte di Pieta, the
Government University, the public and garrison libraries (the building
containing these being one of the finest specimens of architecture
in the whole town), the Castellaria, the theatre and the Banco dei
Guirati. There are several antiquities in the public library, together
with periodicals and newspapers. The Indian files received at this
library will enable the outward-bound passenger to obtain later
information of the state of affairs abroad, than he might have had when
leaving England.

The traveller who sojourns a few hours only in Malta, after walking
in the streets of Valetta, or looking through the imposing defences
which surround it on every side, over the apparently arid or sun-burnt
undulations of the island, frequently abandons all further interest
in the spot--singular by nature and art--and reposes quietly on the
information of some writer possessing little more actual knowledge
of the island, but who may have furnished his readers with some
highly-coloured descriptions of its early history, or dilated on the
chivalrous bearing of its late masters, the Knights of St. John of
Jerusalem. Without wading through these literary labours to discover "a
grain of millet in a bushel of chaff," we merely desire to introduce
to the sojourner an agreeable mode of spending a few leisure hours in
visiting other portions of the island. By reference to a map, he will
find little difficulty in wending his way to any part of it; he may
pass from one extremity to the other without a chance of molestation
or interruption, other than the occasional application for alms; for
Malta has professional and other beggars in abundance, the result of
an overwhelming population in proportion to the size and resources of
the island and the thoughtlessness of marriages, contracted frequently
without a prospect of supporting a family.

Passing out at Porte Reale--the gateway at the top of the principal
street of Valetta--and crossing the draw-bridge, the stupendous
defences of the city become apparent--deep ditches--every approach
enfiladed, or covered by bastions surmounted with bristling cannon.
From this portion of the works the road opens on the front of the
public garden;[3] a narrow promenade, of considerable extent, confined
between stone walls, on the esplanade between Valetta and the extensive
suburb of Floriana, around which are thrown the outer defences of the
city, extended like the former, from the great harbour on the east to
the quarantine harbour on the west. Holding on the main road, to the
left of the garden gate, we pass through Floriana, the gate of St. Anna
(the inner gate of this line of defence), and by Porte des Bombes,
reach the glacis of the works, and here commences the country of the
island of Malta.

[Footnote 3: During the governorship of Sir Alex. Ball, public gardens
for the accommodation or pleasure of the inhabitants of the various
"casals" were formed, but fell into disuse, and remain a trifling
memorial of a desire to inculcate good and friendly feelings in all
classes, and has been responded to by these places being totally
neglected for public use.]

Three main roads conduct to the different villages or casals, some
twenty-three in number, besides the hamlets of Pieta, Sliema, San
Guiliana and Casal Paola. The road to the right (leading to the
western end of the island), keeping the foot of the glacis, opens on
the Pieta, one of the most imposing spots in Malta, with a pretty
extensive row of houses, generally good, extending for about a mile
on the bank of the quarantine harbour. At about a mile farther on is
the populous and large casal of Bircharcara, containing some five or
six thousand inhabitants. From the immediate extremity of the Pieta
(without proceeding on to Bircharcara), a road to the right, over a
small stream, leads to Sliema and San Guiliana, the resort of those
who pursue sea-bathing and seek a summer residence in the country,
and containing many good houses. Passing through the last-mentioned
hamlet, a road (inclining to the left) leads down to Casal Bircharcara,
and a carriage may go over the whole ground safely. From the eastern
or extreme end from the church of Bircharcara, there are two roads,
that to the west, of some two miles extent, to Nasciar, and hence
to the right to Casal Gargur, but a casal of no particular interest
and road indifferent; after passing by the front of the church, or
rather round the greater portion of it, a road to the left conducts
to San Pauls Bay, where St. Paul is said to have been ship-wrecked.
The view from the high ground, after passing Nasciar, and overlooking
a line of defence against the approach of an enemy, on this otherwise
apparently natural barrier, is, perhaps, one of the best and most
striking in the island, embracing the western extremity even to the
island of Gozo, with St. Paul's Bay and its tower quietly reposing
in the valley. The distance to St. Paul's Bay from Valetta is about
eight miles, and the road good even for carriages.[4] About four miles
farther on from St. Paul's Bay, and presenting more hill and dale
than may be found in the general features of the island, you arrive
at Melleha, where the devotees of both sexes resort. There is nothing
particularly interesting in this spot, encircled by deep ravines
and sterile rock; but, with some gardens in its vicinity, stands a
small church (pretty liberally stored with votive offerings), with a
court-yard, surrounded by small cells or chambers, to which the devout
repair, and occupy, as choice, occasion or their vow may dictate.
Beyond this point, some four miles leads to Mafra, the usual ferry
to Gozo; but the only carriage that could undertake this portion of
the road must be a calesse--deep sand from the Bay of Melleha and a
road intersected by rock being the means of approach. Returning back
to Nasciar, and coming in front of the church, a street leads on to
the right to the casal of Musta, having nothing remarkable in it but
a colossal church (encircling the old village church), which has been
some years in the course of building, and, in respect to the progress
had in its construction, may never be finished.[5] Passing through this
casal (but avoiding the turning to the right over a well-constructed
bridge, crossing one of the numerous ravines in the island, for that
would only lead to an uninteresting part of the island, that in olden
times was designated on the maps "desert," and is now almost without
population), along a narrow road or lane, of trifling extent, across
a rivulet, and on a road leading directly to the western point of the
Binzamma, the most elevated and conspicuous portion of the island,
the road is again covered by a line of defence; beyond this, it winds
round the Binzamma, and, taking the turn to the left, one of the
natural curiosities of the island, as it is pointed out, will be found
in a nest of caves called "Ancient Tombs," now inhabited by some poor
families employed in agriculture in the vicinity.[6] An indifferent
road from this point leads to Citta Vecchia; but, as it possesses no
interest, and can be traversed only by the equestrian, we turn back to
Casal Musta; immediately, therefore, in front of the new church, is the
street or road leading, on the left, to Casal Sia (San Antonio, with
its gardens, of which we will speak hereafter), through this casal and
Casal Bazan, between which the line of demarkation is scarcely apparent
to the stranger, we come back to Bircharcara at the point where the
road turned off to Nasciar, and, either by ascending to the main road,
between Valetta and Citta Vecchia, diverging to the right, or passing
through Bircharcara and the Pieta, we return to Valetta. On the other
hand, leaving Musta, as before directed, and inclining to the right,
a road leads to Citta Vecchia, the great point of attraction to the
generality of travellers who visit Malta. But of that hereafter.

[Footnote 4: A calesse, the common carriage of Malta, a sort of
Brobdingnag imitation of a Dutch toy, can travel anywhere; but
those who wish to see the country must adopt some other conveyance.
Fortunately, under the government of Lieut.-General Sir F. Bouverie,
such attention was paid the roads in the island--a source of advantage
to the population, in every point of view, and the public in
general--that where, some twenty years ago or less, only two or three
carriages on four wheels, the property of private individuals, could be
found, they are now in pretty general use, and may be had on hire.]

[Footnote 5: Casal Musta was singularly enough selected, by the
commissioners of inquiry sent out to Malta in 1837, in reporting on the
liberty of the press and the adoption of a newspaper--that it contained
upwards of 5,000 inhabitants, of whom not more than 50 could read!]

[Footnote 6: This sketch is intended simply as a guide to the
superficial observer, on a few hours' detention in the island, and
in no way with a view to geological disquisition. However, without
any speculative theories, regarding the origin and present state of
Malta--whether it arose by some convulsive throe from the ocean which
surrounds it, or that the Mediterranean Sea, from remote causes, has
lost its former elevation, being now found considerably below the level
of the Red Sea, it may be mentioned, without dread of refutation, that
these caverns, like numerous others in the island, show the water
line at the period of their formation, as those under the black rock
and the southern face especially. A recent writer on the statistics,
&c., of the island of Malta and its dependencies, who visited Valetta,
and knew little of Malta, informs his readers, that Malta is furrowed
with what he designates valleys from S.W. to N.E.--following out the
assertions of another and former resident in Malta--that the course of
the various ravines was from west to east, as if to render subservient
to geological theories, the mode or order in which Malta must have been
formed; yet the slightest observation (which neither had exercised)
proves these ravines to embrace each of the cardinal, and, perhaps,
not less the subsidiary, points of the compass. In like manner, this
writer on the statistics states very boldly that the island of Gozo
has villages but _no town_; Rubatto has its cathedral, numerous
churches, religious establishments, with its imposing citadel for
defence, occupying considerable extent of ground, and with a population
exceeding 7,000 souls, and to which the late governor, Sir F. Bouverie,
added an aqueduct, for a more certain supply of water. Mr. Martin never
visited Gozo, and this, like other portions of his work, is merely
gathered from report.]

The centre and principal road in Malta, proceeding as before from
Porte des Bombes, between Valetta and Citta Vecchia, is a spacious and
well-kept road (like all others in the island), without turnpike trusts
or imposts on the traveller. To the archway of the aqueduct, a distance
of two miles, it may be considered the great suburb of a rich city.
Here are various houses of noble aspect on the road, near the archway
of the aqueduct-one called "the Lions"--from two effigies in stone of
that sovereign of the forest, placed over the entrance; this the late
governor, Sir F. Bouverie, selected as his country-house, in preference
to the more imposing and regal residence of St. Antonio.

From the archway of the aqueduct (under which passes the main road
to Citta Vecchia) the view now on either side, excepting only some
casals in the distance, presents barren and uninteresting fields, so
surrounded and intersected by stone walls, that it appears difficult
to determine to what end these enclosures were erected, except before
the opening of spring, when the lucerne with its dark green leaves and
beautiful red flower over-topping the walls, convinces the passenger
of the fertility of the soil. At about the fourth or fifth mile from
Valetta, a road to the right leads to Santa Louisa and the gardens,
unlike any other place in Malta. In the style and taste of the day,
in which it was formed by the Grand Master, here are well-paved
walks, terraces and flights of steps, with ponds or reservoirs, and
water-works, on a small scale--art subduing nature, but apparently
appropriately designed for its position. This has ever been accessible
to strangers, either by a ticket of admission from the military
secretary or aide-de-camp; and, under some governorships, even without
that precaution. Leaving San Antonia and regaining the main road, you
pass through Casal Attard,--a small casal with some good houses in it,
but of gloomy appearance as compared with other casals.

From hence all is barren to the eye, until in the immediate
neighbourhood of Citta Vecchia, where the fields appear more natural
and to greater advantage. As you ascend the hill, you will find more
guides from the idlers of the place, probably, than guests, who insist
on giving their assistance where it is little required. Within the
citadel is the cathedral, a very handsome church; without, is the
suburb, properly _Rabbato_; you are shown the cave where St. Paul is
said to have resided, a poor compliment to the hospitality of the
inhabitants, for a more wretched place can scarcely be conceived. The
church over this cave is like most of the churches of the island.
Here also you are shown the catacombs, as these caverns are called;
you descend by a flight of rude steps, but, were they well explored,
an outlet on the level would, doubtless, be found, to determine their
origin, like others of a similar character. Tradition offers many tales
concerning them; but it may be left to conjecture, whether they were
the habitation of saints, or the retreat of the peaceful inhabitants of
the island, from the predatory visits of their Arab neighbours.

To the right of Citta Vecchia, an indifferent road of three or four
miles leads to some gardens. Imtaklip is of no other particular
interest than an occasional resort of parties from Valetta for a
_pic-nic_. To the left, however, a good road, after passing a large
convent, and still inclining to the left, is the Castle or Palace
Verdali, of imposing appearance, but tenantless, and going to decay;
below, in the valley, is the Boschetta, covered with pretty extensive
groves of orange trees, the only truly agreeable retreat in the island,
and almost daily resorted to by pleasure parties. There is a very small
but uninteresting casal to the right of the road to the Boschetta.

The return to Valetta, in the most direct way, may be made by the
same road; otherwise, after ascending the hill from the Boschetta,
as far on the road as the Palace Verdali, a road branches off to the
right, leading through the Casal Seggui; hence to Zettug, one of the
largest and most populous in the island; and, descending the hill by
a good road on the way to Casal Curmi, you have an extensive view
of the surrounding country, embracing Valetta, the harbour, &c., in
the distance. Casal Curmi, a large casal situated in the valley, has
nothing particular to recommend it to the notice of the traveller;
passing to the left through it, you ascend the hill to the arch of the
aqueduct, and by the main road enter Valetta.

Starting as before from Porte des Bombes, at a short distance on the
main road, a road branches off to the left, and winds round the head
of the great harbour; hold the road to the right; after passing the
fishermen's huts, the road leads through the Marsa--a tract, to the
superficial observer, the most cultivated in Malta; _ascend the hill_
and Casal Luca, and about a mile after passing through the casal, at
a small chapel, two roads branch off, the one to the right to Casal
Michabiba; hence to Casal Creude, in the immediate neighbourhood of
which is to be seen Macluba, the landslip, or, in whatever other way
it may be designated; and, ascending the hill from the chapel close
by, and bearing away to the right, you arrive at some mile and a half
distance, at the rude remains of a Phoenician temple, recently
explored. Returning back to Crendi, and at about the middle of the
casal, a road to the right leads to Casal Zurrico, standing out rather
conspicuously, from its site and size (the road to the left from
the small chapel, on the road from Casal Luca, mentioned before, is
the direct road from Valetta to Casal Chercof, a small village, and
Casal Zurrico); passing out of Casal Zurrico, close by the eastern
side of the church (the road to the left, in front of the church,
leads to Casal Luca, mentioned before), you arrive at Casal Gudia; at
the end nearest Valetta is a substantial mansion, with well-walled
grounds, a fanciful tower, &c. During the blockade, when the French
were in possession of Valetta, this was the head-quarters of General
Graham, afterwards Lord Lynedock, commanding the British Forces. A
windmill at the corner of the mansion marks two roads; that to the
right leading through Casal Ascheach to Casal Zeitun: the latter one
of the best casals in the island. The procession of St. Gregorico, on
Easter Wednesday, at which the greater portion of the population of
the island attends, terminates at this casal: one other casal in this
direction, Casal Zalbar, a short distance from the Cottonnera lines,
which encircle or cover the three cities, is somewhat out of the line
of march, and had better be visited in connection with the Government
works on the opposite side of the great harbour, including the three
cities, and the Cottonnera lines, from which this casal is a trifling
distance. We, therefore, turn down the street immediately facing the
grand entrance to the Church of Zeitun, containing numerous excellent
houses, and, following a good road of brief extent, arrive at Casal
Tarscien, from thence onwards to the hamlet of Casal Bala, denominated
by the English the "Deserted Village;" turning to the left, at the end
nearest Valetta, and passing by the _front_ of the new prison, a good
road leads down and communicates with the road first taken, on the way
to Casal Luca; here the traveller may either enter Valetta by Porte des
Bombes, or, holding on the great harbour, pass along the Marina, and
so enter Valetta by the ordinary road on landing at Malta.

[Illustration: A MALTESE PEASANT.]

The traveller may refer to the GUIDE BOOK at Malta for other
places considered of importance; but as they are remote, like the
Cave of Ben Isan, &c., their route is omitted here. There has been no
attempt to describe places, or, indeed, distances, accurately; but,
with the exception of the first route to Matra, the most remote casals
are not more than six or seven miles at the utmost from Valetta, and
a reference to the map at Malta will show the position and bearing of
others less remote.

As a hint to travellers, especially those on horseback, who may
consider this brief sketch a sufficient guide for an excursion, we
may mention that they will find in every casal some idlers, who will
insist on knowing where they are going better than themselves, and will
mislead accordingly, by directing strangers to the only two points
within the sphere of their knowledge or comprehension--Valetta or Citta
Vecchia.

Between Malta and Alexandria there is no point of interest worthy of
any notice; in fact, land is seldom sighted during the four days' trip.

ALEXANDRIA.--We now arrive at this port.

[Illustration: ALEXANDRIA.]

For the guidance of the traveller in Egypt, we cannot give better
directions than are supplied in the annexed letter from Mr. Davidson,
the representative of the "Peninsular and Oriental Company," a
gentleman, whose courtesy, kindness and attention to all travellers
passing through that country are universally admitted. Mr. Davidson
repairs on board immediately the vessel arrives at Alexandria, and
superintends all the arrangements for the whole journey thence to Suez.
He writes thus:--

 "The carpet-bag, containing the traveller's necessaries for three
 days in Egypt, he should keep charge of, and take to the hotel on
 arrival in the omnibus, or, if he ride, make the donkey-boy carry it
 with him, and the same on leaving the hotel for the boat. The other
 luggage he must leave, after seeing it on the steamer's deck, to be
 landed and transported in the luggage-lighter alongside, in charge of
 the transit-clerk, to whom he should hand a list of the same. These
 he will, perhaps, hear or see nothing of until he reaches Cairo, where
 they are exposed, before dispatched to Suez, for recognition, in the
 British Hotel yard. It is understood that the passenger sees to his
 carpet-bag, on changing boats at Atfeh and on arrival at Cairo, where
 it is given up and sent on camels, with the other luggage, after
 he has taken out the necessary articles[7] for use in crossing the
 desert, which are expected not to exceed five pounds' weight to each
 passenger in the carriage.

 [Footnote 7: We recommend ladies to provide themselves with a basket
 having a cross handle and two flaps, as the most convenient to hold
 their desert requirements.]

 "Landing at Alexandria, the passenger will find three good hotels,
 situated in the grand square, about two miles from Mahoram Bey's,
 that part of the Mahmoudie canal where the passengers embark on board
 commodious boats, to be towed up to Atfeh (a distance of forty-eight
 miles) by powerful steam-tugs. The names of the hotels are "Hotel de
 l'Europe," "d'Orient" and "de Suisse." The rates of charges at all are
 piastres forty, or 8s. per diem, for board and lodging, exclusive
 of wines, beer and spirits. Those who prefer living _a la Francaise_,
 will give a preference to the Hotel d'Orient. At the other hotels the
 style of entertainment is more English.

 "The extra charge, at 16s. the 112 lbs., for over-weight luggage
 (two cwt. being allowed to first and one cwt. to second-class
 passengers) is collected at the transit-office at Cairo, on exchanging
 tickets, and takes place there, in order to check the passengers
 proceeding beyond or remaining at this station.

 "At Suez the luggage is embarked in the boat which takes the passenger
 off; and here he should see it again."

As the transition from heat to cold in crossing the desert is great,
the range of the temperature varying from 94 deg. in the shade at noonday
to 72 deg. at night, in the summer months, it is indispensable that
travellers should be provided with warm clothing; and too great
precaution cannot be taken to avoid exposure to the night air.

Taking this matter into consideration, we subjoin a thermometrical
register recently kept in Egypt, which may be of service alike to the
passing traveller and those who purpose sojourning for awhile in that
country.

As the passage through Egypt _en route_ to India differs but little,
whether the traveller be hound to Calcutta or Bombay, we add to this
division of our subject a short account of the only portion of the
journey which can truly be called "Overland."

STAY AT ALEXANDRIA.--A delay of about three to four hours
occurs at Alexandria, in examining the luggage at the custom-house
and loading the boats with it. During this time the traveller may, if
so disposed, pay a visit to Cleopatra's Needle, Pompey's Pillar, and
the Pacha's palace and arsenal; all of which may easily be reached on
donkeys or in carriages in less than two hours, and at a very trifling
cost.

The boats being ready, the whole party again assemble, and, embarking
at the Mahmoudie canal, reach Atfeh in about ten hours, where the
passengers are trans-shipped to the Nile steamers, and perform the
trip to Cairo, 120 miles, in 16 or 20 hours, according to the depth of
water in the Nile. The boat stops at Boulac, two miles distant from
Cairo, to which place some walk, whilst others ride; carriages, horses
and donkeys being prepared, and in waiting. There are several hotels
in Cairo, the "British," "Oriental," and "English," the character and
accommodation of each of which will be most accurately learned on
reference to Mr. Davidson, to whom we have previously alluded.

[Illustration: BOULAC.]

ABSTRACT _of a Thermometrical Register, kept at Alexandria, in
N. lat. 31 deg. 13', outdoor temperature, in the shade, for one whole year_.

  Table Headings:
  Col M1: Mean temperature.
  Col M2: Mean daily variation.
  Col M3: Mean maximum.
  Col M4: Mean minimum.
  Col M5: Mean temperature at 8 A.M.
  Col M6: Mean temperature at noon.
  Col M7: Difference of mean temperature of each successive month.

  Col E1: Extreme daily variation.
  Col E2: Extreme monthly variation.
  Col E3: Extreme maximum.
  Col E4: Extreme minimum.

  +------------+----------------------------------+-------------------+
  |            |              MEANS.              |     EXTREMES.     |
  |            +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
  |   MONTHS   | M1 | M2 | M3 | M4 | M5 | M6 | M7 | E1 | E2 | E3 | E4 |
  +------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
  |January     |59.5| 8.0|63.5|55.5|57.6|61.0| 3.0|  8 | 13 | 66 | 53 |
  |February    |59.5| 6.0|62.5|56.5|57.4|60.6| 0.0|  9 | 10 | 66 | 56 |
  |March       |64.7|10.5|70.0|59.5|61.1|63.6| 5.2|  5 | 13 | 72 | 59 |
  |April       |69.0|12.0|75.0|63.0|66.4|69.2| 4.3| 12 | 15 | 77 | 62 |
  |May         |74.7|16.5|83.0|66.5|71.7|74.6| 5.7| 13 | 22 | 88 | 66 |
  |June        |77.0| 9.0|81.5|72.5|74.6|77.3| 2.3|  5 | 14 | 85 | 71 |
  |July        |82.5| 4.5|82.5|78.0|78.5|80.7| 5.5|  5 |  8 | 85 | 77 |
  |August      |81.2| 7.5|85.0|77.5|79.5|80.6| 1.3|  6 | 10 | 87 | 77 |
  |September   |79.7| 6.5|83.0|76.5|78.4|80.1| 1.5|  8 |  9 | 84 | 75 |
  |October     |76.7| 7.5|80.5|73.0|76.1|77.8| 3.0|  8 |  9 | 81 | 72 |
  |November    |68.7|12.5|75.0|62.5|66.3|71.6| 8.0| 12 | 18 | 76 | 58 |
  |December    |60.7|17.5|69.5|52.0|58.5|64.3| 8.0| 20 | 25 | 71 | 46 |
  +------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
  |Annual Means|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |and Extremes|71.1| 9.8|75.9|66.0|68.8|71.7| 3.9| 20 | 25 | 88 | 46 |
  +------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+

 The seasons of the year to which the foregoing Table refers, it may be
 well to explain, were peculiarly moderate, the Thermometrical range
 varying less than in ordinary seasons.

 The average heat at Cairo will exceed that at Alexandria by about 10
 degrees all the year round. This is accounted for by the prevailing
 sea-breeze at Alexandria. The atmosphere at the latter is peculiarly
 humid; at the former peculiarly dry and elastic. Rains prevail in
 December and January; they are very rare at Cairo.

The luggage is conveyed to Suez on dromedaries, and, as these animals
travel slowly, those who do not desire to proceed to Suez by the first
division of carriages across the desert, will have sufficient time to
visit the lions of Cairo, which consist of the citadel, the palace, the
mint, the petrified forest, the Rhoda garden (chiefly botanical), the
Pyramids of Gizeh, and the Pacha's palace and gardens at Shubra; or
they may indulge in a bath, a luxury thus described in an article in
the _Asiatic Journal_, by Mr. Stocqueler:--

 "A bath at Cairo, after a voyage, is an _agremen_ which few will deny
 themselves. It is neither as elaborate nor as effective an affair
 as a Persian bath, but, like Mercutio's wound, 'it will _do_.' The
 soft coir, or fibrous matter, which is used instead of flannel or
 the hair-glove, is not by any means as efficacious as the latter in
 removing the sodden matter, or _papier mache_, which covers the human
 cuticle. Then there is neither shampooing, nor joint-cracking, nor
 mustachio-dyeing; nevertheless, it is pleasant to _get into hot water_
 after a month's exclusion from the indulgence, even though some of the
 accessories to the hummaum be wanting."

Of the manner in which the ascent of the Pyramids is made, the
following sketch furnishes an accurate description:--

[Illustration: THE ASCENT OF THE PYRAMIDS.]

A recent writer, describing this laborious operation, speaks of
it thus:--"It is advisable, if bent on mounting to the summit,
to disencumber yourself of all but your shirt and a pair of loose
trousers; for the journey upwards must be taken rapidly, and cannot
easily be accomplished with warm and tight clothing. A couple of Arabs
leap on to the stones immediately above you, and offer you each a hand,
while a third follows, to give you an impetus from behind, and catch
you, in case of a slip. Up you go, panting and toiling, step after step
(each three feet in height) and stopping occasionally to take breath,
and receive the cheering congratulations of your rude guide--_good,
good, Inglese, berry good!_ and then, with an impatient grin and
extended hand, '_Baksheesh!_'"

We now come to the Overland part of the journey; viz., from


CAIRO TO SUEZ.[8]

[Footnote 8: The following extract from the last report of the
Peninsular and Oriental Company, may not be without interest to our
readers--showing, as it does, that efforts have recently been made to
improve the desert-transit. We should premise, that Sir John Pirie
proceeded to Egypt as the bearer of an address to the new Viceroy.

"His Highness the Pacha received Sir John with marked distinction and
courtesy, and readily acquiesced in every suggestion made to him for
the improvement of the transit; and His Highness was moreover pleased
to declare, that the increased expense consequent thereupon would be
of secondary consideration to the perfecting the transit through his
country.

"His Highness has authorised the directors to order for his account
one additional steam-vessel for the Nile, to be fitted with all the
improved accommodation which experience suggests; also two paddle-wheel
steamers for the Mahmoudie Canal. These canal boats will be devoted to
the conveyance of passengers only, and the baggage will be conveyed
in future by track-boats. These two steamers will be a most important
addition and improvement to the canal transit, which has hitherto been
considered the most inconvenient part of the journey; and they will
accordingly be fitted in the most commodious manner, and sent out with
the utmost dispatch.

"A small steamer, now building at Boulac, will shortly be placed at
Suez, for the embarkation and landing of passengers and baggage from
the India steamers, which will be productive of great comfort and
convenience.

"A considerable improvement has already been effected in the landing
and embarkation of passengers and baggage at Alexandria; and commodious
storehouses have also been erected there, and at the Mahmoudie Canal.

"The occasional difficulties and delays at Atfeh will, in future, be
avoided, by the intended erection of a jetty and landing-place there;
but, in most cases, the new canal steamers will pass through the locks,
and go alongside the Nile steamers, and the change from one to the
other will thus be easily and conveniently effected. The navigation
of the canal is to be improved by deepening, for which object, three
dredging machines are now in operation."]

The distance (ordinarily accomplished in about twenty hours, including
stoppages) from Cairo to Suez is eightyfour miles, and along the route
through the desert there are seven station-houses. These station-houses
are numbered from 1 to 7, and contain the following accommodation:--

No. 1. Nine miles from Cairo, stabling and a resting-room.

No. 2. Twenty miles from Cairo, contains two public rooms (one for
ladies, and the other for gentlemen), two private rooms, and a
servants' room.

No. 3. Thirty miles from Cairo, stabling for relays of horses, with one
resting-room.

No. 4. Forty-one miles from Cairo, the centre station, contains a
large saloon, a ladies' room, servants' room, kitchen, a number of
commodious bed-chambers, large water-tank, stabling, &c. Here, also,
will be found, liberally provided, those "creature comforts," which
so essentially cheer and sustain the traveller on his way. Ladies,
however, would do well to take in their basket, on leaving the steamer,
a bottle of good water.

No. 5. Thirty miles from Suez, stabling and a resting room.

No. 6. Twenty miles from Suez, two public rooms, private rooms, and
servants' rooms. The same as No. 2.

No. 7. Nine miles from Suez, stabling and resting-room.

[Illustration: DESERT CARRIAGE.]

[Illustration: ADEN.]

The whole distance is traversed without inconvenience, in carriages,
on horseback, on chairs, or on donkeys; the latter a very superior
animal to those in this country. The Egyptian ass is easy in his pace,
capable of great fatigue, and, it is said, will perform the whole
distance with but little provender.

Travellers now embark on board the Peninsular and Oriental Company's
steamer, and, as soon as the luggage has been shipped, and every other
arrangement made, the anchor is weighed, and the steamer starts for
Aden. Beyond certain historical associations, the Red Sea presents
little that can interest the traveller in his brief and expeditious
trip. The shores are dreary and barren, and are only agreeable
to the eye of the landsman, because they present a somewhat less
monotonous scene than the expanse of "blue above and blue below," which
distinguishes the ocean in parts remote from land.

ADEN, which was formerly called "Portus Romanicus," is a town
of the Yemen, which, from its position, and now, on account of its
recent occupation by the English, promises to become a commercial and
military station of great importance. The town is built on the crater
of an exhausted volcano, and is situate at the extremity of a small
peninsula, formed of volcanic matter, and attached to the continent
solely by a low neck of land from 500 to 600 yards wide, and which
might be easily isolated by a canal. The harbour is a magnificent
basin, capable of containing an immense fleet; and is entered by a
narrow passage between two other craters. It would be easy to establish
defensive works on the rocks, which would place the fort in safety
against any attack. One redoubt has been already raised, as a security
against the Arabs, ever ready to attack the English. From this point
to the gate of the town has been traced a road of about a league in
length, by which the defile is reached that forms the entrance to
Aden. This defile is being fortified with a gate, evidently constructed
to resist other attacks than those of the Arabs, and is about 100 yards
long, and four or five wide; it is cut out of a rock which stands 150
yards above the level of the sea. A formidable battery, commanding the
entrance, is in process of being erected above the rock on the left
of the defile. A covered way, with an arch thrown from one rock to
another, unites the system of defence which the batteries on the summit
of the rocks on the left will complete.

In despite of sickness and desolation, the population of Aden has
greatly augmented in a short space of time. When first occupied, the
population did not exceed 4,000; it is now upwards of 30,000; and
every morning at daybreak 50 to 200 camels may be seen coming into the
town, laden with the produce of the interior, provisions, vegetables,
&c., to console and comfort the otherwise benighted occupants of this
extinguished crater. The fact is, the security to property afforded
by a residence within the limits of British possession and influence,
has contributed, in no inconsiderable degree, to this outward sign of
prosperity.

An hotel on the sea-shore, kept by some enterprising Parsees from
Bombay, and a great number of donkeys, attended by their drivers or
proprietors (little woollyheaded urchins), offer to the passenger who
may go ashore, the _contrast_ of a dinner of fish and a ride to the
town and cantonment of Aden. Beyond these, the attractions of the place
may be represented by a cipher.

At Aden the steamer takes in a supply of coal, and then starts for
Ceylon; which island she reaches in ten days, and where she remains but
for a few hours. Here will be found a branch steamer ready to start
for China; and, to the traveller thenceward, we can promise that this
portion of the journey, touching at Penang and Singapore, _en route_,
will surpass in picturesque and romantic scenery all that his eye has
hitherto beheld--we do not mean to say that, in many parts of Europe or
America, there are not isolated spots equally beautiful and sublime;
but, whether, for a continuous sea-journey of so many miles, for the
most part, in water as smooth as a "milk pan," it can be equalled?
certainly, it cannot be surpassed. The voyage from Ceylon to Penang
is commonly made in six days,--the steamer stopping there six hours;
that to Singapore in three days, with a stay of twenty-four hours;
and, finally, to Hong Kong, in another six days. Four days under steam
from Ceylon carry us to Madras, where, after another supply of fuel,
we proceed to Calcutta, occupying four days in the trip; and there
terminates our interesting journey. We have given a brief description
of the three last-named places in the section appropriated to the
details of the homeward trip, and therefore consider it unnecessary to
offer any remarks here.




TO BOMBAY.


The responsibility of this journey is divided, being firstly in the
hands of the Peninsular and Oriental Company; secondly, of the Egyptian
Oriental Transit Company; and, lastly, of the East India Company.
Forethought and precaution are therefore recommended in making the
arrangements necessary to secure the passage to Bombay throughout, with
as little inconvenience and as much comfort as can be experienced under
the circumstances above stated.

The Peninsular and Oriental Company allow a limited number of
passengers to book for Aden, on the 20th of each month, and, when
this can be effected, it is decidedly the most comfortable and least
expensive mode of reaching Bombay. The East India Company's frigates,
that convey the mid-monthly mail from Aden to Bombay, afford good
accommodation for a few persons; and the run is only one of ten days'
endurance.

The Peninsular and Oriental Company, under no circumstances, book
the whole way to Bombay. Passengers wishing to adopt that course,
and having fixed the date of their departure, should make immediate
application to JAMES BARBER and Co., whose circular will be
found at the end of this book, and whose advice and assistance will
always be found useful to the Overland traveller.

Passengers who cannot adopt the first part of this route, so far as
Aden, in the Peninsular and Oriental Company's steamers, will find the
following directions serve them in the time of need.

The Company's steamers for Malta and Constantinople start from
Southampton on the 29th of every month, at 1.30 P.M. (when
the 29th falls on a Sunday, the steamer leaves at nine o'clock on the
morning of the 30th), arriving at Malta about the 10th of the month.

Passengers for Alexandria and Bombay are conveyed from Malta to
Alexandria by one of Her Majesty's steamers, leaving Malta, on the
arrival there, from Marseilles, of the London mail of the 7th of the
month.

On their arrival at Alexandria, the same means of travelling are
provided for passengers, as described in a previous part of this work;
but the passenger, in this case, having only hitherto paid for his
sea-journey to Malta L27 10s.--a further sum of L12 10s. has to be
paid for passage from Malta to Alexandria, and then he has to make his
arrangement with the Egyptian Transit Company, in order that he may
reach Suez in time to embark in the East India Company's steamer at
that port, which conveys the mail to Bombay.

The Transit Company have established the following rates:--

                                  From Alexandria to Suez,
                                      and vice versa.
  A lady                                {         }   L12
  A gentleman                           {         }    12
  A child above ten years               {   In    }    12
      "   of five years and under ten   {  vans   }     8
      "   of two      "     "     five  { across  }     6
      "   under two years               {   the   }  free
  A European female servant             { desert. }    10
  A European man-servant or mechanic    {         }     8
  A native female servant               {         }     8

Two cwt. of baggage is allowed at the L12 rate, and one cwt. for all
below it, and 16s. per cwt. is charged for any excess on that weight.

Provisions are liberally supplied on the journey; but hotel expenses at
Alexandria, Cairo and Suez, as well as wines, beer and spirits, are not
included in the sum charged by the Transit Company. The following may
be considered a fair estimate of the cost of the trip:--

                                                    L s.
  Transit                                          12  0
  One cwt. of extra luggage                         0 16
  One day's board at Alexandria                     0  8
  Wine and beer                                     0  7
  Ditto on journey to Cairo                         0  7
  One day at Cairo                                  0  8
  Wine and beer                                     0  7
  Ditto in the desert                               0  7
  Half a day at Suez                                0  5
  One bottle of beer                                0  2
  Boat-hire on landing, and, probably, donkey-hire
    for sight-seeing                                0 10
                                                   -----
                                                  L15 17
                                                   -----

This amount will vary, of course, according to the mode of living and
views of the passenger, but 15s. per day may be taken as a fair
average for living, and 5s. additional, well managed, will pay the
expense of seeing the sights of interest in or about Cairo, if a
prolonged stay be contemplated or practicable.

Arrived at Suez, the passenger will have to secure his accommodation to
Bombay, according to the regulations in the following pages.


 _East India Company's rules for the engagement of passages and
 accommodation of passengers in the Government steam-packets between
 Bombay and Suez._

 Application for passage is to be made at the office of the
 master-attendant in Bombay, and at other ports to the commander.

 Passengers are to be divided into two classes, viz.:--

 First class, who sit at the commander's table and are entitled to all
 the privileges of the quarter-deck.

 Second-class, who are not entitled to walk aft of the paddle-boxes,
 who berth forward, and either arrange for their own provision, or mess
 with the warrant-officers or engineers.

 Every passenger of the first class shall pay the following sum, as
 table-money, for the voyage from Bombay to Suez, or from Suez to
 Bombay, viz.:--

  A lady or gentleman                                  Rs. 200
  A child ten years of age, and above five years           100
  A child five years and above one                          80
  A child one year and under                                50
  A child under one year and with the mother              Free

 It is to be understood that, for the above sums, the passengers are to
 be provided with a plain, substantial table; but no person is entitled
 to more than one pint of wine and one bottle of beer per diem. Cabin
 passengers have the first choice of seats at the table, and, after
 them, the saloon passengers, in preference to those on the deck,
 whose priority will be arranged according to their standing on the
 passage-list. The seats will be arranged by the commander, and, once
 taken, they cannot be changed without his permission during the voyage.

 In addition to the table-money, the following sums will be charged for
 the accommodation engaged by first-class passengers, viz.:--

  A treble cabin                            Rs. 1000
  A double cabin                                 800
  A single cabin                                 500
  A saloon berth                                 350
  A deck passage                                 300

 Every second class passenger shall pay Rs. 150.

 For each European servant 50 Rs. must be paid as subsistence-money,
 and 50 Rs. as passage-money; for native servants the charge will be
 one-half the rate for a European; but none are to be considered and
 taken as servants unless they actually accompany their masters or
 mistresses.

 A passenger who has engaged a cabin may make what arrangement he likes
 for its occupation; he may either keep it entirely to himself, or
 admit to share it with any one that he pleases, provided only that the
 name of the person so admitted (if an adult) have been previously on
 one of the lists, and subject to the following restrictions, viz.:--

 A treble cabin cannot be appropriated to the accommodation of more
 than--

  Four ladies.
  Three gentlemen.
  Six children.
  One lady and four children.
  Two ladies and three children.
  Three ladies and two children.
  One gentlemen and three children.
  Two gentlemen and two children.
  A lady and her husband, with two children.

 A double cabin cannot be appropriated to more than--

  Three ladies.
  Two gentlemen.
  Four children.
  A lady and three children.
  Two ladies and two children.
  A gentleman with two children.
  A lady and her husband, with one child.

 A single cabin cannot be appropriated to more than--

  Two ladies.
  One gentleman.
  Three children.
  One lady and two children.

 Passengers in a steamer that may from accident or other cause be
 obliged to return to port, will be entitled to the refund of the
 amount that has been paid, deducting therefrom a sum for the table
 allowance of the commander, according to the number of days that the
 vessel may have been at sea, calculating the average time occupied in
 a voyage to or from Suez to be eighteen days, and Aden ten days.

 For the convenience of passengers from the Red Sea to India, the
 commanders of the Honourable Company's packets are authorised to
 receive payment of passage-money at Suez, or any port between Suez
 and Bombay, in sovereigns, Spanish dollars or German crowns, at the
 following rates of exchange, viz.:--

  Sovereigns at            Rs. 11 each.
  Spanish dollars at        "   2 and 3 annas each.
  German crowns at          "   2 and 2 annas each.

 Each cabin-passenger may, if he pleases, put all his baggage into his
 cabin. The saloon and deck-passengers will be allowed to keep one box
 or bag above. The rest of the baggage is to be in the baggage-room,
 and passengers will be allowed access to it twice a week, on a day and
 hour fixed by the commander, who will appoint a person to have charge
 of the baggage.

 Any applicant may be refused a passage without any cause being
 assigned, either by the authorities at Bombay or by the commander of
 the vessel when away from Bombay; but a report of the rejection is to
 be communicated to Government.

 All persons who take passage, either themselves or through their
 agents, will be considered as thereby binding themselves to comply
 with these rules, which will be shown by the master-attendant or by
 the commander of the vessel to parties who engage a passage.




ROUTE VIA FRANCE, GERMANY OR ITALY.


An impression is abroad that parties leaving England for India may
travel through France, Germany or Italy, embarking for Alexandria
at either Marseilles, Trieste, or Naples, at as reasonable a cost,
and with as little trouble as if they had taken their passage in the
Peninsular and Oriental Company's steamers from Southampton.[9] That
such routes have their advantages, in the information and experience
which travelling on the continent imparts to the intelligent, no one
can deny; but that they are, in other respects, less troublesome or
more economical than the sea-trip cannot by experience be maintained.
In truth, no person can even compute with accuracy the actual expense
of a land-journey; for, though the charges for posting by diligence,
eil-wagon, vetturino, or rail, may be easily ascertained, it is
impossible to estimate probable hotel charges, the extortions of
_gendarmerie_, custom-house officers, passport employes, &c., or
to foretell what detentions may take place _en route_; detentions
which, if for only one hour beyond the time for the departure of the
steamer, involve a prolonged stay of another month. We, therefore, feel
justified in discarding all minute particulars respecting the routes
we have indicated, simply mentioning that parties who do not seek the
accommodation of the Peninsular and Oriental Company's boats until they
reach Malta or Alexandria, will have to pay (rateably) a higher sum
for their passage to Ceylon, Madras or Calcutta, than would be charged
them, were they to embark, in the first instance, at Southampton.
We may add, however, that should any parties, in the face of the
difficulties and objections, still prefer proceeding by the continental
route, they will do well to limit their luggage to the least possible
supply, and always refer, before deciding on the trip, to parties in
London, who can give them the latest and fullest information on the
subject.

[Footnote 9: There have been instances of passengers being detained at
Trieste, in consequence of there being only _three_ or _four_ wishing
to proceed;--the steamer did not start.]




THE HOMEWARD PASSAGE.


To the "homeward bound" who engages his passage in the Peninsular
Company's steamer right through to England, we may address the
following information:--

We will suppose him to be at Calcutta, or the provinces under the
Bengal Presidency. Having made up his mind to proceed to England,
and settled the period of his departure, he addresses _the Agent of
the Company in Calcutta_, requesting him to secure a passage in the
steamer appointed to proceed to Suez in the month he may have selected.
The advertisements published in the Calcutta papers will indicate
the arrangements made for the departure of the steamers, and the
plans which the Company's agents can supply will assist the intending
passenger to select a cabin. The prices of accommodation which we have
given in pounds sterling do not vary in India. The conversion of pounds
sterling into rupees at the current exchange of the day will at once
give the amount.

If the party be bent upon making a prolonged stay in Egypt, it will
only be necessary to engage a passage to Suez, taking a certificate
from the captain that the voyage _has_ been made in one of the
Peninsular and Oriental Company's vessels, in order to ensure a passage
from Alexandria to Southampton, at some future period, in one of the
vessels of the same establishment, by paying the amount (exclusive of
desert transit) that would have been exacted in Calcutta for the entire
passage. If, however, the traveller, after remaining in Egypt, purpose
visiting the Continent of Europe prior to his return to England, he
need not trouble himself about the certificate.

Having engaged his passage, the homeward-bound will next think of his
equipment for the trip. What we have said on this subject, in the
instructions to outward-bound passengers, will equally apply to him.
No cabin furniture whatever is required, nor will anything be needed
in addition to the ample wardrobe which a resident in India generally
possesses, beyond a couple of blouses, or light jean shooting-coats,
and a sola hat.

Should the traveller be resident at Madras, or under the Fort St.
George government, he should address his application to the Oriental
Company's agent at the Presidency, who will give him all necessary
information as to the time when the steamer may be expected at Madras.
He will be required to be perfectly ready to start, as the stay of the
vessel in the Madras roads seldom exceeds the few hours requisite in
coaling.

Officers on the Bombay establishment will, it is presumed, for the most
part, leave their own Presidency in the East-India Company's steamers,
the regulations regarding which will be found in a preceding page.

The accommodation of the government boats terminating at Suez, the
Bombay officer will be thrown upon his own resources for the remainder
of his trip. He will accordingly do wisely, if he wish to get rapidly
to England, to address himself a month before-hand to the agent of the
Peninsular and Oriental Company in Egypt, to book him a passage thence
to Southampton, and to arrange for his transit across the desert.[10]

[Footnote 10: See Appendix A.]

Officers on sick-leave or furlough very frequently arrive without
certain necessary documents, and are consequently subject to great
inconvenience and expense. They should be provided with--

  Certificate of length of service.
      "       of being allowed a furlough.
      "       of date to which pay has been issued.

If from Bengal, a certificate from the pilot in duplicate of the
date of the ships leaving the Sandheads; and, if it be intended to
claim income-allowance from the military fund, a certificate from the
secretary to the fund of being entitled to such an allowance.

[Illustration: MUSSOOLAH BOAT.]

The voyage from India to Suez, as far as the attractions of the
intermediate ports are concerned, presents very few charms for the
traveller; and, even if they were numerous, the stay at each place is
so brief, that there is scarcely any opportunity of enjoying them; but
every change is acceptable to the landsman confined for several days
on shipboard, more particularly if the scenes he beholds have a dash
of novelty in them. Arrived at Madras, therefore (we speak now to the
Bengal officer), he will pull ashore in one of the Mussoolah boats,
whose peculiar construction and safe navigation through the surf that
perpetually rolls upon the shore at that port has always been a subject
of surprise to the novice. If he have a friend at the Presidency, he
will probably get the use of a carriage for the day, if not, he will be
able to hire a "shigram" (palanquin carriage), or a "a bandy" (gig),
and drive to all the most striking parts in the town. The Mount-road,
with its numerous European shops, and monument to Sir Thomas Munro, the
fort and the arsenal, the college, the public stables, the government
house, the Athenaeum library, the Black town, &c., will furnish subjects
of inspection enough to occupy a few hours very pleasantly.

       *       *       *       *       *

CEYLON.--The next point on the route has its attractions for
the Madras, as well as the Bengal, officer. An idea of these may be
gathered from the following lively and intelligent description of a
visit to Point de Galle, the coaling port, derived from "_The Monthly
Times_," and written by a gentleman who had touched there in the
"_Hindostan_," on his way to England:--

"On the seventh day, including our twenty-four hours' detention at
Madras, after leaving the Sandheads, we found ourselves, in the
morning, approaching the beautiful Island of Ceylon, and anchored about
noon in Point de Galle harbour. The entrance to the harbour was pretty
enough--low rocks, over which the waves were beating and bounding,
extended to the left, and a point of land seemed to jut out prominently
to them, on which is built the Dutch fort of olden days, and which
still retains its characteristic look of Dutch solidity and unavailing
massiveness. There is no appearance of town from the ship; and very
few habitations visible, or indications of much cultivation. The old
Dutch church forms the principal object in the fort. You know I had
letters from a family long resident at Galle. I proposed to see them
on the following morning, but they would not hear of my remaining on
board; so I landed in the afternoon, and soon found all was kindness
and hospitality on the part of my new Cingalese acquaintances. The
residence was formerly the old Government House, in the days of the
Dutch. It was a large, roomy, substantial building; the doors were
lofty, and the walls panelled in stucco, and painted with white and
ochre; the fittings-up and furniture were plain, but substantially
made, of carved ebony and satin-wood.

"On the following day, after a most gloriously comfortable night's
rest in a very clean bed and cool, capacious room, we started, after
breakfast, in a small palkee-garree and pony, always easily obtainable
on hire, to visit a country-house on a hill about three miles from the
fort. The drive was through a beautiful and open, well-shaded road,
with frequent interspersings of small cleared patches of rice and
other cultivation. The road itself was narrow, with ditches on either
side, but well metalled with broken granite. The comfortable houses
of the burghers rose occasionally by the road side, on little shady
eminences, here and there, and seemed neat and peculiarly _cozy_.
They were chiefly oblong, tiled buildings, with a verandah to the
front. These burghers are descendants either from the former Dutch or
Portuguese possessors of this coast; and many that I saw were not a
little darkened in their descent. On reaching the hill, which we had to
walk up, I found the sun sadly oppressive; but we were amply repaid for
the ascent, for the view from it was superb. The sea was visible, and
almost everywhere open to us along the horizon, through the different
hills; and every here and there, in our vicinity and below us, were
beautiful valleys and richly cleared spots, with well-defined roads
running through them, and occasionally cottages and huts dotted in
every direction; the grand distant mountains forming afar a tall and
varied background.

"I returned to the ship, after dinner, in the evening, much gratified
with my visit. The mode of living at Ceylon is more English, in all
respects, than at Calcutta; the table more simple--the servants
fewer--and the whole character of domestic economy less Oriental than
we are accustomed to on the Indian Continent; but the scenery of the
island itself is far from partaking of this un-Oriental appearance; it
realises, in everything, all we fancy and read of in descriptions of
tropical islands. The closeness and abundance of the vegetation, the
variety of Eastern jungle trees, the palm-like characteristic towering
of the cocoa and beetle-nut tree, everywhere prominent in the luxuriant
woods around you, all tend to give to Ceylon a picturesque and Eastern
style of beauty, very different from the low plains and unvaried
flatness of the country in Bengal.

"The dresses of the natives are different from Bengal; men wear combs
like the women of other countries, and have a loose cloth round their
legs, vastly resembling a petticoat. Their language is the Cingalese;
an open and gentle sort of well-vowelled dialect, which sounds prettily
and euphoniously enough, like the Malayan language.

"Trade altogether is not very extensive in Ceylon. At Galle there are
but three or four merchants, forming the entire mercantile community
of the place. At Columbo there are, perhaps, twenty merchants and
agents, and there is a Ceylon bank. The local trade is confined to
three articles, viz., coffee, cocoa-nut oil, and cinnamon, though a
few folks are beginning to turn their attention to sugar. Coffee is
reared in plantations on the higher lands, and in chosen spots in
the interior. Some of the plantations have done well, and, after the
third year, are described as having paid more with the one season's
produce than all the preceding and preliminary outlay and price of
block put together. Several concerns, however, are losing, the soil
being unsuitable; the present low prices for Ceylon coffee, in England,
must utterly ruin them. It has been proved, that the only chance of
success is with clearances on the forest and large tree lands: the
plant thrives in these, though it takes three years to bear, and
attains maturity only after the fifth year; it is expected to last ten
years. Like all other concerns, those under proprietors themselves fare
the best, and are easily distinguishable from those superintended by
agents; but all managers live very uncomfortably. The superintendents
get about 150 rupees per month, which is little enough, for supplies
of the commonest necessity reach only from Kandy, or from a distance,
and they are frequently without supplies at all, subsisting then on
rice and the poorest produce of the villages around them. The Ceylon
coffee itself ranks next to Mocha in the English markets; but recent
prices must be insufficient to meet the charges of production. It is
planted much in the same manner as with tea in Assam. After clearance,
they set the plants at certain distances, when they grow to about the
same height as the tea-tree. After blossoming and ripening, and before
falling, the fruit is gathered; when there is a simple process, by some
wheels and cheap machinery, to clear the berry from the pulp and skin.

"There are cinnamon gardens, near Galle, but they are not pleasing to
look at, and assuredly there is no spicy and aromatic odour on the
breeze, as the poets would fain establish in reference to this island,
the famed Taprobane of old! When you bruise a twig or shoot of the
cinnamon-tree and break off a small bit of the bark, the scent of the
cinnamon is powerful and pleasant. The cocoa-nut oil is expressed much
in the same manner as in Bengal, but it surprised me that, for domestic
use at Galle, it was so expensive; they asked sixpence for two quart
bottles of it, or, at this rate, about five rupees and more per maund.
I should have expected it to be cheaper in Ceylon.

"The Rifle corps seemed to be a fine, well-disciplined body of men,
chiefly Malays or their descendants. The regiment is officered like the
line, and the dress, appointments, setting up and look of the soldiers
were excellent.

"The salaries and receipts of the public functionaries and others in
Ceylon are not quite so good as under the Company, but the habits of
living, as I have before remarked, are more economical, and, I dare
say, there is more money comparatively saved in Ceylon, than in the
Company's wider and more imperial territories."

The new arrival at Ceylon is sorely beset by pedlars, who tempt him
to invest a small portion of his capital in ivory snuff-boxes and
knife-handles, tortoise-shell combs, card-racks, &c. A very few of
these articles, purchased at a third of the price asked for them, may
prove acceptable to friends in England, but we would recommend the
Ceylon visitor to abstain from too large an indulgence in his generous
inclinations, for ivory pays a heavy duty in England, and, after all,
the articles brought home may be procured in England at as cheap a rate.

After leaving Ceylon and passing through the Maldive islands, which,
though very low and level, are green and picturesque, no object of
interest presents itself until the port of Aden is reached.

Quitting Aden, the shores of the Red Sea are frequently seen, but
rarely approached during the upward voyage. In six days Suez is
reached, and, as soon as boats can come off to the steamer, the
passengers are landed and almost immediately conveyed by van (see
previous details on this head) across the desert.

The town of Suez offers no kind of inducement to prolong one's stay.
Small, dirty and destitute of any architectural beauties or antique
remains, it exhibits the worst specimen of a Mahomedan city in the
whole Ottoman empire.

Arrived at Suez, it will be for the passenger who has not contracted
for the entire trip home, to select his own method of getting to
Cairo. The vans of the Transit Company offer unquestionably the most
convenient and expeditious mode of carrying the traveller across the
desert; but there are not wanting persons who prefer the romance and
independence of a tedious trip on the back of a horse, donkey or camel.
If there were any objects of interest worthy of an occasional halt in
the desert, the inconvenience of this slow progress would have its
counterpoise; but when we assure the traveller that there is not one
single fragment of antique remains, one solitary picturesque spot, nay,
_nothing_, beyond _one_ tree, seven station-houses, and a multitude of
rat-holes and camel-skeletons, to diversify the broad, glaring, sandy
waste, he will not hesitate about the prudence of paying his L12--the
whole cost of transit to Alexandria--or L9 to Cairo only, and joining
the bulk of his fellow-travellers in the omnibuses.

From Cairo a freer choice is left to the traveller. If he prefer
lingering in Egypt, he will find in a visit to the cataracts, the
temples of Luxor, Carnac, &c., enough to engage his attention for an
indefinite number of weeks. On these points, however, we have supplied
information among the "Miscellaneous" matter at the close of this
volume.

The route from Cairo to Alexandria, merely reversing the order of the
trip, is described in a foregoing part of this volume. Arrived at
Alexandria--provided the passenger has not booked himself in India
for the entire transit to Southampton--it often becomes a question
which route shall be taken to accomplish the remainder of the journey.
The taste, inclinations or curiosity of some will lead them to
Constantinople, to Syria, the Holy Land, the Grecian Archipelago;
others may feel disposed to embark for Trieste, in order to visit
Venice, northern Italy and Germany. Many chalk out for themselves a
trip to Naples, Rome, Florence, Switzerland, &c., previously purifying
themselves of the bugbear plague at Malta; and some few embark in
the French steamer and make their way to Marseilles, there to serve
quarantine, preparatory to a tour through France.

If it were as much our province to advise as it is our purpose to
inform, we would suggest, as the result of the information imparted to
us by many travellers, that it is, on many accounts, most desirable
that persons from India should come straight to England, _in the first
instance_, thence betaking themselves to the continent of Europe, if
so inclined. The chief reasons for this proceeding are--the entire
avoidance of the quarantines, which are often irksome and always
expensive; the gratification of the natural affections by the earliest
possible meeting with relatives and friends; the facility of obtaining
information respecting the most attractive routes, and introductions
to families on the Continent; the opportunity of selecting a companion
from old fellow-soldiers, fellow-officials or Indian friends similarly
bent upon a pleasurable excursion.

But these arguments may weigh as a feather against the determination to
visit the interesting portions of Europe and Asia we have indicated,
preparatory to placing foot in England. It is difficult to eradicate
from any Anglo-Indians the notion that it is better to arrive cleansed
of Indian rust and polished by a tour through civilised lands, or
more prudent "to see the world" while you are in it, than to trust to
the chance of quitting England when you have just tasted its infinite
pleasures.

For the consideration of such reasoners, therefore, we submit some
information respecting quarantines, the rules of which, however, are
very changeable.

A passage to Malta from Alexandria may be procured in the "Peninsular
and Oriental Company's" boats for L12 10s. The French steamers charge
L10, but this does not include the table, wines, &c., which are paid
for separately to the _restaurateur_ on board. The trip in the English
steamer occupies _four_ days. The French vessel goes first to Syra, to
meet the Constantinople boat, and this occupies _seven_ days. Arrived
at Malta, intimation is given by the captain of the number of persons
who meditate remaining there, and accommodation is accordingly provided
for them in the lazaretto. Their stay will depend upon the nature of
the bill of health carried by the vessel; it is not, however, at any
time, less than twelve days, and may extend to twenty.

The regulations to be observed in the lazaretto are given on the
following page.


GENERAL REGULATIONS.

_To be observed by all Persons performing Quarantine in the Lazaretto
of Malta._

 I.

 All passengers, on landing, are to give their names to the captain of
 the lazaretto, which are to be entered in the registry of the office.

 II.

 The captain of the lazaretto will assign apartments for passengers,
 and each passenger will be provided with two chairs, a table, and a
 wooden bedstead, for which no charges are made; but any damage done by
 the passengers to the apartments or furniture is to be made good by
 them before _pratique_.

 III.

 Passengers are not to be permitted to enter other apartments; nor can
 they be allowed to receive visitors, except at the _parlatorio_ of the
 lazaretto, and that only during office-hours; nor are they to trespass
 the limits assigned to them by the captain of the lazaretto.

 IV.

 Passengers must pay a strict attention to all the instructions they
 may receive from the captain of the lazaretto and from the health
 guardians, and particularly in every point that regards their baggage,
 clothes, &c., being properly aired and handled during the period of
 their quarantine; and their quarantine will only commence to reckon
 from the day on which all their baggage, clothes, &c., have been duly
 opened and handled.

 V.

 All letters and parcels, or other effects brought by passengers,
 must be given up, in order that they may be fumigated or depurated
 separately from them, as the occasion may require.

 VI.

 All cases of sickness must be reported immediately to the captain of
 the lazaretto, and all persons sick are to be visited immediately by
 the physician to the lazaretto, after which official visit, passengers
 are at liberty to avail themselves of any medical attendance they
 think proper.

 VII.

 Passengers are to pay the Government fee for the guardians employed
 to attend them, for the number of days of their quarantine, at the
 following rates, viz.:--at 1s. 3d. per day for the guardian who
 attends one passenger, and at 2s. 6d. per day for each guardian
 who attends more than one passenger. They are to victual the guardian
 or guardians during their quarantine, or to pay to each guardian
 an allowance of 7d. per day in lieu thereof. It is to be clearly
 understood that the guardians are employed solely for quarantine
 purposes, and they are strictly prohibited to interfere in any other
 service whilst they attend passengers.

 VIII.

 The office hours at the lazaretto are from 8 A.M. to 12,
 and from 2 P.M. to 5 daily; and all letters sent to the
 fumigating-room before 9 A.M. daily, will be delivered in
 Valetta at 10, and those sent before 3 will be delivered in Valetta at
 4 P.M. by the letter messenger, who is entitled to receive
 from the passengers a penny for each note, parcel, or letter, as a
 remuneration for his trouble and boat-hire.

 IX.

 A daily report of all circumstances is to be made by the captain of
 the lazaretto to the superintendent of quarantine and marine police.

 N.B. A _trattoria_ has been established at the lazaretto for the
 convenience of passengers who wish to avail themselves of it, from
 whence they can be supplied with dinners, wines, &c., &c., in their
 own apartments.

 Beds complete and other articles of furniture, if required, can also
 be hired from a person appointed to provide them.

 A note of charges for the _trattoria_, and for the hire of furniture,
 will be furnished to the passengers, on their applying for it.

Of the manner in which the time may be passed in a lazaretto, the
following graphic sketch by Mr. Stocqueler, which appeared some time
since in the "_Asiatic Journal_," will convey no imperfect idea:--

"Upwards of 140 passengers left Alexandria in the _Oriental_, at
the end of May, for some fifty had joined it from Bombay; amongst
the latter were several heroes of Meanee and Hyderabad--fine young
soldiers, who were covered with honourable scars received in the
desperate engagements between Sir C. Napier and the Belochees. Never,
perhaps, was a vessel freighted with so many who had distinguished
themselves in conflict with the enemies of their country. Not less than
twenty-six officers, who had seen service in Afghanistan, China and
Scinde, paced the deck every day, and described the scenes which their
own prowess and that of their comrades had, for the previous three or
four years, rendered memorable in the history of British India. But
of this large number of homeward-bound passengers, only three (one
having two ladies in his family), quitted the _Oriental_ at Malta.
Those who _wished_ to prosecute the rest of their journey by land had
either failed to make the necessary provision,[11] or shuddered at
the prospect of twenty days' imprisonment in the lazaretto. Moreover,
they flattered themselves with the belief, that they would be enabled
to make the tour of the Continent when they had exhausted the various
pleasures of glorious England. And so they steamed away to Southampton,
leaving the few above alluded to--the writer of this among them--in the
lazaretto, under suspicion of the crime of being afflicted with the
plague.

[Footnote 11: Eighty pounds will carry a man through Italy,
Switzerland, and France, with comfort, allowing for several days' stay
at each place of interest.]

"Meanwhile, let me assure the traveller from India, that even a three
weeks' incarceration in the Malta lazaretto is not intolerable, if,
which is generally the case with the imprisoned, he is lucky enough to
have one or two pleasant and intelligent companions. I have before me,
at this moment, a memorandum, written after twelve days' of captivity,
and, as it may serve to re-assure future prisoners, by conveying some
idea of the scenes, impressions, and occupations which diversify
existence in the durance they are compelled to support, I here
transcribe it:--

"'Let me survey my prison, and its _agremens_. I am lodged in two
commodious apartments, overlooking the quarantine bay. I look out
of the southern window of my verandah, and have the waters of the
Mediterranean forty feet only below me. Opposite, at the distance
of about 300 yards, and divided from me by these waters and the
quarantine harbour, are the ramparts of the fortifications, surmounted
by windmills, flag-staves, and a small Roman Catholic chapel. To the
right is the termination of the bay, where a dozen of Greek, Austrian,
and English brigs and barques lie in quarantine, sufficiently near to
allow me to observe the operations on board. Behind all these, a little
more to the south-eastward, is part of the suburbs of La Valetta, the
evening promenade, gardens, hills, &c. To my left, is the entrance to
the bay, overlooked on one side by part of the city of La Valetta, and
on the other side by Fort Manvel, now used as a part of the lazaretto.
This view greets me whenever I stand in the verandah, a recreation to
which one is often tempted by the clearness, coolness, and crispness
of the air, the beauty of the sky, and the rich blue of the water.
Well, this of itself is something. Then, for moving sights, we have
occasionally the arrival or departure of a steamer from Alexandria, or
Greece, or the coast of Spain; of vessels from Tripoli, and Smyrna,
and Syra; of speronaros from Sicily or the Italian coast; or we see a
vessel released from quarantine, working her way out of the harbour.
Early in the morning, four times in the week, the bell of the little
chapel, on the summit of a rock opposite the lazaretto, tolls to
prayers. The chapel is not more than twenty feet in breadth, and the
same in depth. The altar occupies the back or southern side, and
exactly faces us. The bell ceases, the priest dons his canonicals,
and the matin mass commences, the responses being audibly chanted or
muttered by the crews of Maltese and Italian vessels, who are either
quartered in apartments beneath us, or employed on board the vessels.
The door of the chapel closes, and the work or pastime of the day
commences.

"'Ha! there's a splash!--a sailor in quarantine has stripped himself,
and plunged into the water beneath his prison-door. Another and another
follow him! How admirably they swim! the ease of the water-fowl, and
the rapidity of the fish. See! one of them dives! How long he remains
under water! Will he drown?--will he not be suffocated? not a bit of
it; he rises to the surface, bearing in his hands some of the black,
starry, thorny members of the crustaceous tribe. He has a knife in his
right hand, which I did not observe before, and which he evidently took
with him to dislodge the fish from their location in the rocky depths.
Splash! and the strong swimmer is again twenty feet below the surface.
Again, he rises--and again descends--and behold! he has accumulated
a perfect breakfast of shell-fish! Meanwhile, the others breast the
waves, diving, floating, playing, and rejoicing in all the muscular
strength which the noble, healthful, and refreshing science calls into
action. Well, a walk will do no harm--the verandah is sixty paces long,
and forty or fifty turns will give one an appetite for breakfast. A.
and B. have abundance of conversation for the promenade, and when we
have exhausted the pleasures of memory, we can turn to the pleasures
of hope, and debate the possibility of an abatement of the quarantine
or, at any rate, discuss the respective advantages and pleasures of
going to Syra, to Naples, or Marseilles. We are tired now, and it is
time to dress. Breakfast is ready--can anything be more satisfactory,
or anything more tempting and wholesome? There are coffee and tea,
and three times as many rolls as we can eat! The eggs are as large
as the finest production of the English barn-door hen, and boiled to
the _exact_ point--half a minute less, and the albumen would not have
coagulated; half a minute more, and they would have been as hard as a
stone. And _there's_ a delicious dish of strawberries, brought only
yesterday from the coast of Sicily, and plucked but an hour before
their embarkation! And flowers too:--

  'The captive soothers of a captive's hours.

"'Carlo, best of servitors, knows my _penchant_, and decks the table
with the rose, the pink, the carnation, and the fragrant thyme.

"'Breakfast over, Mr. Cassolani is announced. He is the captain of the
lazaretto; a courteous, intelligent old gentleman, of very correct
notions and kind disposition. He is come to give us a list of the
passengers who have just arrived at Marseilles, and to ask us to
subscribe a trifle for a poor widow, whose husband, a guardiano of the
lazaretto, died of apoplexy the day of our arrival. We have dropped
our mites for the widow's benefit, and Cassolani condescends to pick
them up, though he will not receive them from our hands. This painfully
reminds us that we are prisoners on the suspicion of the crime of
plague--_gens suspects_. People 'in _pratique_,' as freedom from the
lazaretto is called, will 'walk with us, talk with us, buy with us,
sell with us--but they will not eat with us, drink with us,' nor
pollute themselves by touching our persons or our clothes. Cassolani
carries a stick, to keep us at a respectful distance, and there is a
soldier of the 42nd Highlanders on the opposite ramparts, prepared
to send a bullet through us, if we attempt to go abroad until we are
fairly cleansed of the foul imputation.

"'Cassolani departs, and S. and I go to chess. From chess we fly to
books. It is three o'clock, and dinner is announced. For economy and
society's sake, we have made a _table d'hote_, and the whole party dine
together. It is true that B. looks suspiciously at one dish, and C.
distrusts another; but, nevertheless, the whole style of the thing is
good and clean, comprising the English and French _modes de cuisine_ as
well as could be desired. There is, for example, soup _a la Julienne_,
and a dish of mackerel; roast beef _a l'Anglais_ (the beef comes to
Malta from Tunis, and, after serving quarantine, is fattened for the
table); a _fricandeau_ of sweetbread in a well-flavoured sauce; a
stewed breast of mutton, mashed potatoes, a maccaroni, peas or French
beans, or artichokes, an apricot tart, cheese, and a salad. Oranges,
cherries, and strawberries compose our dessert, and we drink a pint of
Marsala. What more would a man have?

"'The sun declines, and the Maltese world emerges from its confinement.
The telescopes now come into play, and we direct our views to the part
of the town where the sempstresses congregate, and gaze out of the
balcony windows, to catch the evening breeze, or anything else that may
be passing. The fall of night brings with it tea and candles, and then
books, draughts, chess, and--to bed!'

"Of the other _agremens_ of the lazaretto there remains nothing to
notice, if I except the numerous boats which are continually coming and
going across the harbour, often laden with females, who, in their black
mantillas, with sparkling black eyes, and hair _a la Madonna_, resemble
Spanish women.

"The expense of living in the Malta lazaretto is about eleven shillings
_per diem_, as thus:--

                                             s.  d.
  Breakfast                                    1     8
  Dinner                                       3     0
  A bottle of Marsala                          1     3
  Hire of Furniture                            0     8
  Servants' Wages (including diet)             2     3
  The Guardian (ditto)                         1    10
                                              --------
                                              10     8

"This can be increased, if necessary, by a more abundant dinner, tea,
or coffee in the evening, spirituous liquors, and a greater quantity
of furniture; but it cannot be diminished. Washing costs about one
shilling per dozen pieces, and sevenpence _per diem_ for the diet of
the _blanchisseuse_, who must come into the lazaretto to perform her
functions. A capital circulating library keeps the incarcerated well
supplied with books (at one penny per volume per day), and _Galignani's
Messenger_, and the Maltese papers can also be had on application to
Mr. Mure's establishment."

Emerging from the lazaretto, the traveller is recommended to pass a few
days in inspecting the town and the surrounding country (_vide_ page
11), and then to repack his luggage, dispatching such as he may not
require on his homeward trip direct from Malta, consigned to the care
of his agent in London, with instructions as to the disposal of the
same.

Those travellers who prefer visiting France _via_ Marseilles, will find
the lazaretto there, comparatively speaking, a sort of purgatory. We
subjoin the regulations as published by the French authorities:--


WITH UNCLEAN BILL OF HEALTH.

 ART. 1. French Post-office Packets.--19 days after debarking
 effects and passengers.

 Passengers by these boats and their baggage.--17 days after landing at
 the lazaret; 14 days only when the baggage shall have been _plombe_
 at the consulate of France at the port of embarking, and that this
 operation be legally certified.

 ART. 2. French or foreign men-of-war.--17 days after the
 landing of passengers and their baggage.

 Passengers on board these vessels.--17 days without _spoglio_, 14 days
 with _spoglio_.

 ART. 3. Vessels with pilgrims.--25 days.

 Pilgrims.--25 days after landing.

 ART. 4. Every other description of sailing-vessel or
 steam-boat.--21 days after landing suspected articles.

 Passengers by these vessels.--17 days without _spoglio_, 14 days with
 _spoglio_. Merchandise.--21 days after landing at the lazaret.


WITH DOUBTFUL BILLS OF HEALTH.

 ART. 1. French post-office packets.--15 days after debarking
 effects and passengers.

 Passengers by these boats and their baggage.--14 days after landing;
 12 days only when the baggage shall have been _plombe_ at the
 consulate of France at the point of embarking, and that this operation
 be legally certified.

 ART. 2.--French or foreign men-of-war.--14 days after the
 landing of passengers and their baggage. Without passengers, 12 days.

 Passengers on board these vessels.--14 days after landing without
 _spoglio_, and 12 days with _spoglio_.

 ART. 3. Vessels with pilgrims.--20 days.

 Pilgrims.--20 days after landing at the lazaret.

 ART. 4. Every other description of sailing vessel or
 steam-boat.--15 days after landing suspected articles.

 Passengers by these vessels.--14 days without _spoglio_, after landing
 at the lazaret; 12 days with _spoglio_.

 Suspected goods.--15 days after landing at the lazaret.


WITH CLEAN BILLS OF HEALTH.

 ART. 1. French post-office packets.--12 days after debarking
 effects at the lazaret.

 Passengers by these boats and their baggage.--9 days after landing,
 and their baggage exposed to the air.

 ART. 2. French or foreign men-of-war.--9 days, with or
 without passengers.

 Passengers on board these vessels.--9 days after landing, and their
 baggage exposed to the air.

 ART. 3. Every other description of vessel or steam-boat.--12
 days after landing suspected goods.

 Passengers by these vessels.--9 days.

 Suspected merchandise.--12 days after landing at the lazaret.

Of the Syra (Athens) quarantine, it is enough to say that it is more
commodious and agreeable than the same establishment at Marseilles, and
not so convenient as the one at Malta.

The Syra lazaretto is, according to the report of the latest visitors,
exceedingly commodious and clean, and facing, as it does, the sea,
where there are continual breezes, it is infinitely cooler than the
city of Athens. The charges of the Trattoria are not greater than
those at Malta (about eleven shillings per diem), and the detention
in quarantine never exceeds seventeen days, and when a clean bill of
health is brought by the French steamer from Alexandria, the duration
of the imprisonment is very much less.


THE VOYAGE TO SOUTHAMPTON.

Quarantine, on arrival in England, being done away with (unless some
special cause arise on the voyage home to render precaution necessary),
the direct route is greatly to be preferred; and the ease and comfort
which it offers as contrasted with the annoyances of continental
travelling needs no comment.

On reaching Southampton, the steamer goes into dock; the whole of
the luggage is forthwith conveyed to the dock warehouse, and the
examination commences with that of the first person on the list.

Passengers are not required to attend in person when their luggage
is examined. Those who desire to leave Southampton _by train
immediately upon arrival_, or who do not wish to subject themselves
to the annoyance of being kept in the docks waiting their turn, are
recommended to deposit their keys (including name and address) with Mr.
Hill's clerk,[12] giving him, at the same time, a list of the packages,
distinguishing such as contain articles subject to duty. For want of
proper arrangement on the part of the passenger, we have known three
hours pass in the examination of one gentleman's baggage, with upwards
of eighty of his fellow-travellers anxiously waiting for their turn.
This arises, in the first place, from the large quantity of luggage
which many bring; and, in the second, from the want of system in
packing, distinguishing that which is immediately requisite from that
which is unnecessary.

[Footnote 12: Mr. Hill is the Southampton Custom-house agent of the
"Peninsular and Oriental Company."]

As passengers will be required to keep pace with the mails in either
route, unless they arrange for a fortnight's stay in Egypt, the system
of having a larger quantity of luggage than is actually necessary
cannot be too much deprecated.

The traveller is also apt to mix "duty goods" with personal luggage,
in anticipation of their escaping notice. This is a "forlorn hope,"
and leads invariably to the most rigid scrutiny of every package,
thereby causing great delay. If the goods be such as trinkets, Bombay
work-boxes, Dacca or Cuttack silver, China or India filligree packed
in cotton, a still greater commotion arises at the custom-house, and
we are not quite sure whether the circumstance does not render the
articles liable to seizure and confiscation, under the quarantine laws.

The better plan by far, whether the traveller attend the examination
of his luggage or not, is to separate all goods liable to duty, and
put them in a case or trunk, with an inventory of its contents, and
the value of each article separately stated,[13] and then leave them
in charge of Mr. Hill, with instructions to forward them without
delay. They can, of course, be examined at once; but we think it
unfair to subject others to the inconvenience and loss of time that
must consequently ensue. If the plan here recommended be followed, we
venture to submit that it would be satisfactory to all parties.

[Footnote 13: Government have the option of accepting your valuation.
If they disapprove the estimate of the proprietor, they are empowered
to seize the goods, but, in that case, must pay ten per cent. advance
on your valuation.]

A general tariff of East India fabrics will be found in the Appendix
but it is not generally known that all British manufactures
that have been exported, and purchased out of Great Britain, are
subject to a duty if re-imported. Being private property, however,
they are generally released on petition to the Board of Customs, the
petition being accompanied by a solemn declaration made by the owner
before a magistrate, that the claim set forth in the petition is true.
The reason assigned for this law is, that it protects and promotes
English manufacture, by preventing a return of goods to the country
that have once been exported for sale.

Parties who, from necessity or choice, bring servants from India,
have too frequently so indefinite an agreement, that disputes and
unpleasantnesses in settling with them frequently arise. We, therefore,
earnestly recommend passengers to endeavour to do without personal
servants, if possible; but if it be impracticable to dispense with
them, we would suggest that the engagement should specify whether
services cease on arrival,--if the servants are to be returned to India
at the expense of the employer and--whether it shall be _via_ the Cape
or Overland. The agreement should likewise state the allowance that
will be made for board-wages. Sixteen shillings per week is the sum
charged at the lodging-houses for this class.

Persons arriving from India, particularly families, incur great
expense by proceeding, on their arrival, direct to hotels or to
furnished lodgings. In most cases they would do better by resorting
to a boarding-house. There are many suitable establishments of this
nature throughout England, where comfortable accommodation is afforded
at a moderate charge. A letter of inquiry, written on the passage
from Alexandria to Malta, and dispatched _via_ Marseilles, would be
answered, and wait the writer's arrival at Southampton.


EXPENSE.

We must not omit to advert to the total expense of an Overland journey,
for it is an important question to all who _must_ go to India. We think
it will be found, on a fair calculation, that this is, by no means, so
much in excess of the cost round the Cape of Good Hope as people are
led to imagine.

Independently of the cost, there are other important points worthy
of consideration, which are frequently forgotten by those who suffer
themselves to be engrossed by the mere pecuniary view of the question.
For example, there is an amazing difference in the _time_ consumed in
the two routes. Proceeding Overland, there will be two months gained
which may be either passed at home, or, if the attractions of England
have ceased, can be employed in anticipating the stipulated period of
a return to, or arrival in India. In the latter case--for we presume
the traveller to be in the East India Company's service--the Indian pay
will be received two months sooner, and what is of greater moment, by
far, two months' time is gained in "actual service," a consideration
which, at some future day, may be of the last importance to the civil
or military officer.

If to these advantages we add the difference in the cost of the
equipment for a six weeks' and a four months' trip; the knowledge
acquired by witnessing variety of scenery and diversity of manners;
the effect on the health and spirits of perpetual change; the slight
risk of delays from accidental want of water and provisions, damage in
gales of wind, and other casualties which often drive sailing vessels
into intermediate ports and prolong their voyage, there can, we should
think, be no difference of opinion as to the superior claims of the
Overland Route.

As the nature of the currency with which the traveller should supply
himself is a question of great importance, we consider it within our
province to remark, that sovereigns are, by far, the best coin that
can be carried, for purposes of general supply. Letters of credit may
be obtained, however, to be used in the event of accident rendering
additional funds necessary; but it is prudent to endeavour to avoid a
resort to them, for the exchange and commission on advances made upon
such letters of credit, subject the drawer to considerable loss, an
observation that applies particularly to Egypt. At Ceylon the sovereign
is at a premium, frequently fetching twenty-one shillings.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS.

For the information of such travellers as purpose varying their
journey, by visiting the various places which occur _en route_, we
subjoin the following particulars:--

_England to Gibraltar, by the Peninsular Steamers, calling at Vigo,
Oporto, Lisbon and Cadiz._--These steamers start from Southampton
on the 7th, 17th, and 27th of every month, at 3 o'clock in the
afternoon. They proceed, in the first instance, to Vigo, to land the
mails for that part of Spain, affording to the traveller a view of
the magnificent scenery of Vigo Bay and the Bayona Islands. Thence
the steamer proceeds close along the coast, which presents a splendid
panoramic view of "mount and dale," with numerous towns and villages
interspersed, until she arrives off Oporto, where she stops to land
mails and passengers, but does not enter the port. The passengers,
however, will have a good view of the Fortress of San Joa da Foz, the
Convent of the Sierra at Villa Nova, &c., so celebrated in the war
between Don Pedro and Don Miguel; also the city of Oporto, which looks
very picturesque from the sea. Leaving Oporto, she holds her course on
for Lisbon, and, passing the Burlings Rocks, and Rock of Lisbon, will
enter the Tagus generally on the fourth day from leaving Southampton.

_Lisbon, &c._--The view of Lisbon, on entering the Tagus, is beautiful
beyond description. The steamer usually remains here a day, before
starting again on her passage southward for Cadiz and Gibraltar, and
this will enable travellers to take a cursory view of the Lusitanian
capital; but it is recommended that they should, if time permits,
stop ten days here, proceeding to Cadiz or Gibraltar by the following
steamer.

There are very good hotels now at Lisbon, and the town is greatly
improved in cleanliness, no longer deserving the character for filth,
&c., bestowed upon it by Lord Byron and others. Among the various
interesting excursions which may be made in the neighbourhood of
Lisbon, of course the spot where

  "Cintra's glorious Eden intervenes,
  In variegated maze of mount and glen,"

will not be forgotten, and will amply repay the trouble of a visit.

From Lisbon to Cadiz the passage is made, in ordinary circumstances, in
about twenty-six to thirty hours, and from Cadiz to Gibraltar in about
eight hours.

_Cadiz, Seville, &c._--The steamer remains at Cadiz only from three
to four hours; but even this will enable the passenger to see the
principal part of the town, which is exceedingly clean and handsome;
and its appearance in approaching the bay of Cadiz singularly beautiful
and striking. If the traveller can afford to stop for the next steamer,
he may make an excursion to Seville, between which and Cadiz steamers
run almost daily. Xerez de la Frontera, and Puerto de Santa Maria, with
the extensive _Bodejas_ of the wine merchants, are also well worthy of
a visit.

At Gibraltar, the steamer on the Indian line will receive the traveller
and convey him to Malta. In forming a calculation, it will be prudent
to reckon on having not less than seven or more than nine days' stay
at each place, provided it be intended to go forward by the next
steamer. Again, should a party desire to remain a fortnight in Egypt,
previous to joining the steamer at Suez, he can be accommodated by the
Peninsular and Oriental Company, who will convey him to Alexandria, and
cause him to be taken up by the vessel on the Indian side at any later
period.

The additional cost of a stoppage at any of the intermediate places
would depend upon the tastes, habits and means of the traveller; it
need not be much, and, to a party of friends proceeding thus, the
journey, at the proper season, would be instructive and delightful.

From Malta the traveller can diverge to Constantinople; or a few
hours will take him to any of the chief points of interest, either in
Italy or Greece. It would far exceed our limits to give details of
all the various trips that _might_ be made from so central a point as
Malta; luckily, however, there is no want of guide-books to classic
ground--indeed, from the nature of the subject, any such guide, to be
really useful, must in itself be much larger than the present volume.

Correct information as to the means of locomotion will be furnished by
Mr. Holton, the Peninsular Company's Agent at Malta, who can advise the
traveller how to save much valuable time, and also how to avoid trouble
and expense.

       *       *       *       *       *

A FORTNIGHT IN EGYPT.

In a previous page we have pointed out the principal objects of
interest in the vicinity of Cairo and Alexandria, which are accessible
in the ordinary transit through Egypt. In the event, however, of a
prolonged residence in that country, either from necessity or choice,
the list of _videnda_ may manifestly be much extended.

Supposing the traveller, then, to start from Cairo, after inspecting
the pyramids and other sights near that city, he can, by application to
an agent on the spot, procure a boat, well supplied with provisions,
&c., and proceed a considerable distance up the Nile. We have stated
elsewhere that there is little besides the Pacha's palace, Pompey's
pillar, and Cleopatra's needle, to be seen at and in the neighbourhood
of Alexandria, and therefore call the attention of the sojourner in
Egypt to the interesting antiquities he will have an opportunity of
examining on the borders of the Nile. Should he purpose limiting his
trip to a fortnight, in order to be in time for the packet from Suez
or Alexandria, it must be borne in mind that he can only visit a few
of the places mentioned below, and must make arrangements accordingly;
but, in case he should desire to extend his travels, we subjoin some
notes from the best authorities, of the manifold wonders to be seen on
the banks of the mighty Nile, and, if the reader require even further
information, we commend to his perusal the admirable work on Egypt by
Sir Gardiner Wilkinson.

[Illustration: THE NILE BOAT.]

The great pyramid of Sacarah contains a small chamber with a few
hieroglyphics, differing in this respect from all others. The arched
tombs (now nearly destroyed) proving the pre-Augustan existence of the
masonic arch, is of the time of Psammeticus II., about B.C.
604.

Mit Raheny, a large colossus of Rameses II., the supposed Sesostris.
Mounds and indistinct remains of Memphis. On the right bank are the
quarries from which a portion of the stones for the pyramids were
drawn. In one part, oxen are represented drawing a block placed on a
sledge. A little to the south of the modern village is an inclined
plane, leading from the quarries to the river.

Thirty miles farther to the south, at Atfeh, mounds of Aphroditopolis,
but without ruins.

Left bank, false pyramid (Meidoum), difficult of access, on account of
the canal.

Three miles beyond Feohm, and on the opposite side (right bank),
remains of crude brick walls, with hieroglyphics on the bricks.

Right bank, eight miles N. of Meneijeh, is Fehnah, the ancient Acoris.
Greek Ptolemaic inscription. Tombs cut in the rock with inscriptions.
Roman figures in high relief. Quarries on top of mountain, with a tank
for water.

Right bank, seven miles beyond Meneijeh, is Rohn Ahman, some grottoes
and ruins of an old town.

Nine miles farther (right bank) Beni Hassan; remarkably interesting
grottoes of the time of Osortixen (about B.C. 1740), in
whose reign it is calculated that Joseph arrived in Egypt. The plans,
explanatory of the trades, amusements, domestic arrangements, &c., of
the ancient Egyptians, merit particular attention. In the columns of
the best grotto we recognise the _Doric Order_. In the entablature over
the doorway, observe that the ends of rafters are sculptured, instead
of mutules and tryglyphs.

About a mile and a half S. is another grotto, a temple of Pasht,
Bubastis, or Diana, the _Speos Artemidos_ (date Thotmeh III., 15th
century B.C.) The Speos is known by the name of _Stable
Antar_. Near it are deposited cat mummies.

Right bank, at Shekh Abadeh, are a few remains of _Antinoee_, built by
Adrian. The principal streets may be traced, as well as the hippodrome,
towards the east, out of the walls. Grottoes in rock, &c.

This whole district has been famous for thieves, from the time of Bruce
to the present day.

Right bank. El Rasheth, grotto in the mountain, with a statue
represented on a sledge.

The ruins of Hermopolis, at Ashmonnoyn, have been destroyed.

The Pacha's sugar-factory at E'Roamoon merits a visit.

Left bank. Ibayda, at the corner of the mountain, crude brick walls,
and some grottoes not very remarkable.

After Shekh Said, the mountains go off to the E., leaving the river. A
little beyond is Til el Amama, to the S. of which are the ruins of an
ancient town, of which only the brick houses remain.

To the S. are grottoes in the mountain, with curious sculpture, and
upon the mountain is an alabaster quarry. The sculptures represent a
king and queen offering and praying to the sun, which shoots forth rays
terminating in human hands, one of which gives the emblem of life to
the king.

Six miles before Maufalouat, at El Hareib, are ruins of an old town in
a ravine, in which are dog and cat mummies.

Near Maabdeh, opposite Maufalouat, are crocodile mummy-pits, difficult
of access and dangerous.

E'Siout, the capital of the Said, and standing on the site of
Lycopolis, merits a visit. The gardens are celebrated. Visit the
grottoes in the mountain, if it be only to enjoy the beautiful view,
which is, perhaps, unequalled in Egypt. The mummies of the wolf are
occasionally found.

The remains of the splendid temple of Antaopolis have been sapped and
carried away by the stream. A few stones only serve to point out its
site at Gau (right bank).

Right bank. Shekh Eredi, where a Moslem saint, transformed into the
form of a serpent, still performs very wonderful cures upon those who
can pay. Some small grottoes on the left bank. To the west, Loohag,
near the corner of the mountain, are remains of Athribi. Inscription in
stone, in a ruined temple. Grottoes in the mountain.

To the west of this is the white monastery, Deira-bow Sehwoodee. It has
very much the appearance of an Egyptian temple, having a cornice and
tomb, and is supposed to have been founded by the Empress Helena. Like
the other Deirs, it is inhabited by Christian peasants.

Right bank. At Ekhmin, nearly opposite Loohag, are remains of
Panopolis. A large mass of stone contains a Greek inscription of the
temple of Pan.

Left bank. Menshie, eight miles beyond Ekhmin, remains of a stone
quarry. Ptolemais Hermii.

Left bank. Abydus, three hours' ride from Girgeh, and two hours from
Bellianeh. Take donkeys at Girgeh and send the boat on to Bellianeh.
When last at Abydus, I was entertained for the night at the "Deir," to
the north or north-west of the village. The most remarkable monument is
what Strabo has described as a "Memnonium," a very singular building,
consisting of several parallel arches or arcades, leading, he says, to
a tank, now concealed. The arches are _not_ masonic, but cut out of
large masses of stone and it is this circumstance which has, in a great
measure, given rise to the error, as to the arch not having existed
previous to the Augustan era. The building was begun by Osirien, the
father of Sesostris, and finished by his son.

To the north of the Memnonium, is the small temple of Osiris, built, or
at least finished, by Ramses II., and remarkable for having a sanctuary
made of alabaster, for the reception of the famous tablet of the kings,
which, next to the Rosetta stone, has been of the greatest assistance
to the students of hieroglyphics. The Necropolis has been robbed to
form the collections of Salt, Drouetti, and others.

Right bank. How (Diospolis parva)--few remains--vestiges of a temple of
late date, and about a mile and a half to the S., of other mounds.

Left bank. Dendera (Tentyris) opposite Genneh. The principal temple
was consecrated to Hathor, the Egyptian Venus, and not to Isis. The
most interesting, as well as most ancient sculptures, are outside, at
the western extremity, where we see Cleopatra and her son Casasion.
The sculptures above are of the time of Augustus, as are those of the
lateral walls of the Naos. The pronaos presents the portraits and
names of Caius, Claudius, and Nero, as well as Tiberius, by whom it
was constructed. The pylon, leading to the temple, is of the time
of Domitian and Trajan. The Peripteral temple to the right, is the
Typhonium, and immediately behind the great temple is a small one
consecrated to Isis. The pylon towards the south is connected with the
latter, and was raised in the reign of Augustus. The walls of the town,
and a second wall for the sacred edifices, may be traced, and there
are, I believe, some tombs in the mountain behind the town, that have
not been properly explored.

Right bank. Quoph, the ancient Coptas--ruins of town and temple--small
Roman-Egyptian temple, in the village of El Qalah, towards the N.,
forming once a part of Coptas, (Qoos, Apollinopolis parva). No more
remains left, but a monolith converted into a tank, and to the north of
the town is a well.

Thebes (_Diospolis magna_), on the eastern side, consisting of Karnak
and Luxor: the _Lybian Suburb_ on the west bank, consisting of Gormah,
Medinet Haboo, the tombs of the kings, queens, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

KARNAK.--At least fifteen centuries combined to raise the
great temple, the different ages of the various portions of the edifice
being distinctly traceable, from the time of Osortiren I. (B.
C. 1740) to the Ptolemies. On approaching the great western
propylon, observe the holes (almost like windows, and by some described
as such) for fixing the _flag-masts_, as well as the recesses below, in
which they were planted. After looking at the great hall of columns,
and the obelisks, &c., notice particularly the granite sanctuary, which
is a restoration of one destroyed by the Persians. It was raised by
Alexander, in compliance with a vow of Philip. On the _sandstone_
wall that encloses and protects this sanctuary, observe (north wall)
a very curious and rich offering, in which a Pharaoh presents to the
temple, obelisks, flag-masts, gold, silver, &c. The sculptures deserve
particular attention. Those on the outside of the southern wall relate
to the conquests of Shishah, who plundered the temple of Jerusalem.
The name of the place (Joudamallah) is legible on a cartouche,--one of
thirty led captives before the god of Thebes.

The whole north wall is covered with historical sculptures, all of
which were originally painted, representing the conquests of Osirien,
the father of Sesostris. Some little attention is required to see them
well. One group is more curious than the rest: the king has caught
his adversary with the bow-string, and is decapitating him. Notice
the triumphal return to Thebes, and remark the Nile (distinguished by
crocodiles) with a bridge thrown across it.

To the south of the great temple is a _tank_, then come several immense
propyla, part of an avenue of sphinxes, and lastly some remains of a
considerable temple which was surrounded by a lake.

To the north are other remains, with a handsome propylon of Ptolemaic
date, and an avenue of sphinxes.

The temple, second in importance at Karnak, is of the Pharaonic period,
but approached by a pylon of Ptolemaic date, at the extremity of the
great avenue of sphinxes leading to Luxor. On the right of the first
or hypoetheral court, notice a sculpture illustrating the manner
in which the _flag masts_ were raised before the temples. Adjoining
this temple, and on its west side, is a small temple of Oph, in which
travellers sometimes lodge.

From Karnak to Luxor, it is easy to trace the line of sphinxes, which
connected the palace of the latter with the temples of the former.

_Luxor_, with the exception of the sanctuary, is entirely Pharaonic,
having been founded by Amanoph III., and finished by Rameses II., in
the 15th century B.C. The granite sanctuary, like that of
Karnak, is a restoration, and of the same age. In one of the halls,
approachable from the river side, observe a curious set of sculptures,
relative to the birth of the founder of the palace. His mother, the
queen, is seated on the stool of accouchement, surrounded by midwives
and genii. The latter present him the emblem of life. A little farther
on, the infant is presented to and caressed by Amunre; and Thoth, the
god of letters, is choosing for him his prenomen, "Sun, Lord of Justice
and of Truth."

To see the interesting sculptures on the great propylon, it is
necessary to visit the palace at an early hour. They relate to the
conquests of Rameses II., but much attention is required to make out
their details. In the midst of the fortified camp is a lion, the
companion of Sesostris in war.

_Lybian Suburb._--To see the tomb of the kings, one night should be
passed in the valley of Biban el Melook; but the entrance of one of
the excavations affords sufficient accommodation. That of Belzoni is
usually preferred.

Belzoni's tomb (that of Osirien, whose conquests are depicted on the
north side of the great temple of Karnak) is the most magnificent; next
to that, the tomb of Rameses III. is the most interesting. It is near
an angle of the rock, and will be readily distinguished by the recesses
on either side of the principal shaft. These little cabinets contain
some exceedingly curious sculptures or paintings, and it is from one of
them that Bruce drew his harp scene.

The tombs of the queens are in a separate valley, to the west _of
Mehdenet Habor_.

At Goorneh (old Goorneh) is the palace of Osirien. In the Aposiet are
some remains of a very ancient temple, of which a portion is cut in the
rock,--an arch (not masonic) very similar to those of Abydus. Between
the Aposiet and the Memnonium are many tombs deserving attention.

The Memnonium (now perhaps more properly called the Rameseion, _i.e._,
"Rameseseion," the "house of Rameses") is the most uniform and elegant
of Egyptian structures. Pay particular attention to all the battle
scenes, to the immense statue of Rameses II., supposed to have weighed
nearly a thousand tons, to the circumstance of the bases of the columns
of the hepastyle being made seats--to a very remarkable sculpture at
the western extremity of the hall--to the private apartments which
follow--the Pharaoh seated in the sacred Persia--the next apartment,
supposed to be the library--traces of gilding on the doorways, &c.

_The Colossi in the Plain._--Of these the northern one is the vocal
statue of the ancients. It is of Amunoph III., the founder of Luxor,
who reigned in the 15th century, B.C. Wilkinson discovered
the means of deception; a stone, which, when struck, produces a sound
similar to that described by Strabo or Pausanias, is still to be found
in the lap. The other statue bears the same cartouches, and both are
supposed by Wilkinson to have stood at the commencement of a dromio or
avenue of the sphinxes running nearly twelve hundred feet towards an
indistinct mass of buildings now called Kom el Hattan. Champollion and
some architects suppose that they stood before a propylon.

_Mehdenet Habor._--A temple-palace, a private palace or harem, and
a temple. The harem is very interesting, but partly destroyed. It
consists principally of a pavilion in advance of the palace, and in
it are some curious sculptures, among which the king is represented
playing chess with his ladies. A ladder is necessary.

The great temple-palace is remarkable not only for its architecture,
but for the sculptures representing the conquests of Rameses III.
(about the 13th century, B.C.) These are particularly
remarkable in the hypoetheral court, where there is exhibited, in the
northern side, a magnificent pageant, the coronation of the Pharaoh.
The whole exterior of the northern side of the building is covered with
battle scenes. Among the heaps of hands poured out before the conqueror
are _lions' paws_. There are also heaps of phalia.

The great lake, for the ceremonies of the dead (the hippodrome of
the French _savans_), will be best distinguished from the top of the
pavilion. There are several other remains, and tombs without number.

There is no trace, whatever, of a wall of circumvallation, though the
crude brick enclosures of the temples still remain.


We add to the foregoing, the observations of other writers upon the
subject of some of the most interesting of these wondrous antiquities.

       *       *       *       *       *

LUXOR.--In approaching this temple from the north, the first
object is a magnificent propylon, or gateway, which is two hundred feet
in length, and the top of it fifty-seven feet above the present level
of the soil. In front of the entrance are the two most perfect obelisks
in the world, each of a single block of red granite, from the quarries
of Elephantine; they are between seven and eight feet square at the
base, and above eighty feet high; many of the hieroglyphical figures
with which they are covered are an inch and three quarters deep, cut
with the greatest precision. Between these obelisks and the propylon
are two colossal statues, also of red granite; though buried in the
ground to the chest, they still measure twenty-one and twenty-two
feet from thence to the top of their mitres. The attention of the
traveller is soon diverted from these masses to the sculptures which
cover the eastern wing of the north front of the propylon, on which is
a very animated description of a remarkable event in the campaigns of
Osymandrias or Sesostris. The ruined portico, which is entered from the
gateway, is of very large dimensions; from this a double row of seven
columns, with lotus capitals, two-and-thirty feet in circumference,
conducts you into a court, one hundred and sixty feet long, and one
hundred and forty wide, terminating at each side by a row of columns,
beyond which is another portico of thirty-two columns, and the adytum,
or interior apartments of the building.

The temple of Luxor was probably built on the banks of the Nile, for
the convenience of sailors and wayfaring men; where, without much loss
of time, they might stop, say their prayers, present their offerings,
&c. Great and magnificent as it is, it only serves to show us the way
to a much greater, to which it is hardly more in comparison than a kind
of porter's lodge; I mean the splendid ruin of the temple at Karnak.
The distance from Luxor to Karnak is about a mile and a half, or two
miles. The whole road was formerly lined with a row of sphinxes on each
side. At present these are entirely covered up for about two-thirds of
the way, on the end nearest to Luxor. On the latter part of the road,
near Karnak, a row of criosphinxes (that is, with a ram's head and a
lion's body), still exist on each side of the way.

       *       *       *       *       *

KARNAK.--The name of Diospolis is sufficient to entitle us
to call the grand temple at Karnak the temple of Jupiter. This temple
has twelve principal entrances, each of which is composed of several
propyla and colossal gateways, or _moles_, besides other buildings
attached to them, in themselves larger than most other temples. One
of the propyla is entirely of granite, adorned with the most finished
hieroglyphics. On each side of many of them have been colossal statues
of basalt, breccia and granite; some sitting, some erect, from twenty
to thirty feet in height.

The body of the temple, which is preceded by a large court, at the
sides of which are colonnades of thirty columns in length, and
through the middle of which are two rows of columns fifty feet high,
consisting, first of a prodigious hall, or portico, the roof of which
is sustained by one hundred and thirty-four columns, some of which are
twenty-six feet in circumference, and others thirty-four; there are
four beautiful obelisks marking the entrance by the adytum, near which
the monarch is represented as embraced by the arms of Isis.

The adytum itself consists of three apartments, entirely of granite.
The principal room, which is in the centre, is twenty feet long,
sixteen wide, and thirteen feet high. Three blocks of granite form the
roof, which is painted with clusters of gilt stars on a blue ground.
Beyond are other porticoes and galleries, which have been continued to
another propylon, at the distance of two thousand feet from that at the
western extremity of the temple.

It may not be uninteresting to add a few particulars relative to this
temple, the largest, perhaps, and certainly one of the most ancient, in
the world.

Two of the porticoes within it appear to have consisted of pillars in
the form of human figures, in the character of Hermes, that is, the
lower part of the body hidden, and unshapen, with his arms folded, and
in his hand the insignia of divinity; perhaps the real origin of the
Grecian Caryatides.

Exclusive of these columnar statues, which have been thirty-eight in
number, and the least of them thirty feet high, there are fragments,
more or less mutilated, of twenty-three other statues, in granite,
breccia and basalt; seventeen of which are colossal, and have been
placed in front of the several entrances. They are in general from
twenty-five to thirty feet in height, and executed in the best Egyptian
style.

       *       *       *       *       *

BIBAN-OOL-MOOLK, OR, THE TOMBS OF THE KINGS, is a most
dismal-looking spot, a valley of rubbish, without a drop of water or
blade of grass. The entrance to the tombs looks out from the rock like
the entrance to so many mines; and, were it not for the recollections
with which it is peopled, and the beautiful remains of ancient art
which lie hid in the bosom of the mountain, would hardly ever be
visited by man or beast. The heat is excessive, from the confined
dimensions of the valley and the reflection of the sun from the rock
and sand. The whole valley is filled with rubbish that has been washed
down from the rock or carried out in the making of the tombs, with
merely a narrow road up the centre.

Diodorus Siculus states, on the authority of the Egyptian priests, that
forty-seven of these tombs were entered in their sacred registers, only
seventeen of which remained in the time of Ptolemy Lagus. And in the
180th Olympiad, about 60 years B.C., when Diodorus Siculus was
in Egypt, many of these were greatly defaced. Before Mr. Belzoni began
his operations in Thebes, only eleven of these tombs were known to the
public. From the great success that crowned his exertions, the number
of them is nearly double. The general appearance of these tombs is that
of a continued shaft, or corridor, cut in the rock, in some places
spreading out into large chambers; in other places, small chambers pass
off by a door from the shafts, &c. In some places, where the rock is
low and disintegrated, a broad excavation is formed on the surface,
till it reaches a sufficient depth of solid stones, when it narrows,
and enters by a door of about six or eight feet wide, and about ten
feet high.

The passage then proceeds with a gradual descent for about a hundred
feet, widening or narrowing, according to the plan or object of the
architect, sometimes with side chambers, but more frequently not.
The beautiful ornament of the globe, with the serpent in its wings,
is sculptured over the entrance. The ceiling is black, with silver
stars, and the vulture, with outspread wings, holding a ring and a
broad-feathered sceptre by each of his feet, is frequently repeated on
it, with numerous hieroglyphics, which are white or variously-coloured.
The walls on each side are covered with hieroglyphics, and large
sculptured figures of the deities of Egypt, and of the hero for whom
the tomb was excavated. Sometimes both the hieroglyphics and the
figures are wrought in intaglio; at other times they are in relief;
but throughout the same tomb they are generally all of one kind.
The colours are green, blue, red, black and yellow, and, in many
instances, are as fresh and vivid as if they had not been laid on a
month. Intermixed with the figures, we frequently meet with curious
devices, representing tribunals where people are upon their trials,
sometimes undergoing punishment; the preparation of mummies, and
people bearing them in procession on their shoulders; animals tied
for sacrifice, and partly cut up; and occasionally the more agreeable
pictures of entertainments, with music and dancing, and well-dressed
people listening to the sound of the harp played by a priest, with his
head shaved, and dressed in a loose, flowing white robe, shot with red
stripes.

Two other colossal statues, called also by some the statues of Memnon,
are in the plain, about half-way between the desert and the river. They
are about fifty feet high, and seated each on a pedestal six feet in
height, eighteen long, and fourteen broad. The stone of which they are
formed is of a reddish grey.

These two statues are by the Arabs familiarly called Shamy and Damy.

       *       *       *       *       *

MEDINET HABOO.--One outward inclosure, or brick wall, seems to
have contained three distinct, though connected, buildings, to which
we may arbitrarily assign the names of the chapel, the palace and the
temple. The principal entrance to the palace from the plain being
blocked up, it is only to be approached now by a side doorway from the
pronaos of the chapel. Of this building, which may once have been the
residence of the sovereigns of Egypt, one tower only is remaining. This
was divided into three stories, in each of which are two apartments.
The stone pavement of the lower rooms is still perfect, but the
upper floors and the wooden beams which supported them have entirely
disappeared. The interior walls have not such a profusion of sculptures
as those without. At each side of one of the windows is an Isis, with
the hawk's wing, kneeling, and wearing the lunar crescent on her head.
At another window are four projecting sphinxes; and in a corner of one
of the rooms are two females, with baskets of lotuses on their heads,
carrying a plate of cakes to the king, who is sitting; before him
stands another female, with the same head-dress, stretching out her
arm, while he puts some of the delicacies into his mouth.

Ebek, the most northern of all the Theban monuments, is only remarkable
because the plan on which it is constructed is very different from
that of all other temples in Egypt. It has a single row of columns in
front, and the rest of the building is distributed into a variety of
comparatively small apartments.

       *       *       *       *       *

MEMNONIUM.--The term Memnonium is used by Strabo to designate
that part of ancient Thebes which lies on the western side of the
river. The French _savans_, however, without sufficient reason, have
restricted it to the magnificent ruin which we are going to describe.
This beautiful relic of antiquity looks to the east, and is fronted
by a stupendous propylon, of which two hundred and thirty-four feet
in length are still remaining. The propylon stands on the edge of the
soil; but the area cultivable, or space for the dromos behind it, is
floored by the solid rock, on which the rest of the temple is erected.
The eastern wall is much fallen down, and both ends are greatly
dilapidated. Every stone in the propylon appears to have been shaken
and loosened in its place, as if from the concussion of an earthquake,
for no human violence seems adequate to produce such an effect in such
an immense mass of building as that under consideration. A stair enters
from each end, by which to ascend to the top of the propylon, from
which passages go off in a number of chambers, as in the temples of
Phylae Edifore, &c.

This colossus measures six feet ten inches over the foot, and sixty-two
or sixty-three feet round the shoulders. It has been broken off at the
waist, and the upper part is laid prostrate on the back; the face is
entirely obliterated, and, next to the wonder excited at the boldness
of the sculptor who made it, and the extraordinary powers of those who
erected it, the labour and exertions that must have been used for its
destruction, are most astonishing. It could only have been brought
about with the help of military engines, and must then have been the
work of time. Its fall has carried along with it the whole of the wall
of the temple which stood within its reach. It was not without great
difficulty and danger that we could climb on its shoulder and neck, and
in going from thence upon its chest, assisted by Arab servants.

       *       *       *       *       *

DENDERA.--The centuries that this great temple of Venus has
seen have scarcely affected it in any important part; and have given
it no greater appearance of age and ruin than what serves to render
it more venerable and imposing. After seeing innumerable monuments
of the same kind throughout the Thebaid, it seemed as if we were now
arrived at the highest pitch of architectural excellence that was ever
attained on the borders of the Nile. Here we found concentrated the
united labour of ages, and the last effort of human art and industry
in that regular uniform line of construction, which had been adopted
in the earliest times. After admiring the general effect of the
whole mass, its elegance, solidity, correct proportions and graceful
outlines, it was difficult to decide what particular objects were to
be first examined. Whether its sculptures or paintings, typical and
ornamental, the distribution of the interior apartments, the details
of the capitals and columns, the mystical meaning of particular
representations here seen for the first time; the zodiacs,[14] or the
other celestial phenomena, sculptured on the ceilings, all seemed
objects of high interest and importance, all invited a nearer and
closer inspection. The portico consists of twenty-four columns in three
rows, each above twenty-two feet in circumference, thirty-two high, and
covered with hieroglyphics. The peculiar form of the square capital,
with a front face of the goddess on each side, particularly attracted
our attention. We were at first struck by the singularity of an idea
so foreign to the common notions of Greek architecture; but the eye
is soon reconciled to it; and the solemn and mild monotony of these
faces impresses the spectator with a silent, reverential awe, a willing
conviction of the immediate presence of the deity of the place in her
most gracious character; and, indeed, the Greeks, in their Caryatides,
seem in some degree to have added their sanction to the principle.

[Footnote 14: The principal zodiac has since been removed.]

The sekos, or the interior of the temple, consists of several
apartments, all the walls and ceilings of which are in the same way
covered with religious and astronomical representations. The roofs are,
like the rest in Egypt, flat; the oblong masses of stone resting on
the side walls; and, when the distance of these is too great, one or
two rows of the columns are carried down the middle of the apartment,
by which the roof is supported. The capitals of these columns are very
richly ornamented with the budding lotus, the stalks of which being
carried down some way below the capital, give the shaft the appearance
of being fluted, or rather scolloped.

The following, gleaned from other sources, will, perhaps, be also
acceptable as a guide to the sight-seer.

No person ought to leave Egypt without visiting Assowan and Philoe,
particularly if he go up as high as Thebes; for he can form no correct
judgment of Egypt and her wonderful and gigantic works, unless he sees
the temples and shrubberies at Esireh Fdjou, Koon, Ombes, Assowan, and
Philoe, as well as those in the Thebaid and at Tentyra. By traversing
Egypt from Alexandria to Assowan, you can with ease inspect all those
wonderful remains of labour and art, unequalled in the world for extent
or size as architectural works, and which, to the mind of the observer,
place beyond doubt the wealth, the power, the science, and great
population of ancient Egypt. To attempt to convey to a person who has
not seen structures of the kind, any idea of what these ruins are, is
out of the question. In the granite quarries at Assowan, from whence
these immense monuments were taken, are two unfinished sarcophagi and
an obelisk cut and formed, but still attached to the native rock. The
obelisk is shaped out and cut round on all sides except its under one,
a bed which still attaches it to the rock. It measures 76 feet in
length, and 12 feet broad, and in depth to the drift-sand in which it
has imbedded itself 6 feet thick. The marks of the workman's chisel and
wedge, with which instruments, it appears, these immense masses have
been disjoined from the native rock, are as fresh as if they had been
applied but yesterday. It is inconceivable how such entire masses could
have been taken from their bed to the Nile, a distance of at least a
mile and a half, and from thence transported to where we see them still
standing, seventy, eighty, and ninety feet in height, and eight, ten
and twelve feet square at the base, as at Luxor, Karnak, Helipolis,
Frorun, and at Alexandria, covered with deeply engraved figures and
hieroglyphics, in some places still bearing a glossy and fresh polish.
In the island of Philoe there are some beautiful and extensive
remains of Egyptian, as also one of Grecian, architecture. Leaving
Luxor in the night of the third of May, we arrived at Khenneh the
following day, and, after visiting the temple of Hentyra or of Isis, on
the opposite bank of the Nile, and remaining an hour or two at Khenneh,
we left that place for Cairo, where we arrived on the sixteenth of the
same month.

Passing through the palm-tree grove which covers the high ridge, or
mound, formed by the ruins of the ancient Memphis, the traveller
approaches a small open circular plain, which is supposed to have
been the Archerusian Lake of the city; on the south side of this, the
large colossal statue of Sesostris is to be seen. It was discovered
and laid open by Mr. Sloane and M. Coriglier, and is the most perfect
statue in Egypt, and the most beautifully formed. It lies with its face
downwards. It is broken off below the ankle, and the entire length of
the block now remaining is thirty-six feet six inches. The ruins of
the edifice before which it had stood are apparent under the rubbish
which surrounds the place. The ancient Necropolis of Paccachia, or,
as some writers suppose, of the city of Memphis, extends for miles
round the pyramids. Indeed, from the pyramids of Dashores to those of
Cheops and Copprieves, is one continued burying-ground. The pyramids
of Dashores, as well as those of Saccachara, and the excavations and
tombs in the rocks, may be inspected in one day. We landed at Goza, and
took donkeys, and passed the day in visiting the large pyramids. The
following morning we passed the island of Rhode, visited the Nilometer,
and, after sailing down about half a mile, and passing the aqueducts
of Lubuddia, about one-hundred yards, landed again on the island, and
entered the gardens of Ibrahim Pacha.

Another writer gives the following outline of the interesting sights to
be seen on the Nile.

On the eastern bank, eight miles to the south of Cairo, quarries of
Maasara, from which the stone used for part of the casing of the
pyramids was taken. Some hieroglyphic tablets, in one of which oxen
are represented drawing a stone placed on a sledge. A little beyond
the modern village is an inclined road, which leads from the quarries
to the river. Thirty miles further to the south, on the same bank, is
Atfeeh, mounds of Aphroditopolis, no ruins. False pyramid on opposite
bank, three miles beyond El Feshu, and on eastern bank, remains of
crude brick, the walls of an ancient village, called El Heebee and some
hieroglyphics.

From Beuisooef is the road to the Fyoom, which, when the Nile is low,
may be visited conveniently. A brick pyramid at Illahoon, another at
El Howara, and vestiges of the labyrinth, obelisk at Biggig, ruins on
and near the lake Moeris, and at Qasr Kharoon. From Aboogirgeh is the
shortest road to Bahnasa (Oxyriuchus) mounds, no ruins, Gebel e Tayr,
north-end, grotto or rock temple, called Babyn, convent further to the
south; eight miles below Minyeh is Tehneh (Acoris) on eastern bank,
a Greek Ptolemaic inscription on the face of the cliff, tombs hewn
in the rock, with small inscriptions at the doors, Roman figures in
high relief, on the upper part of the rock, some hieroglyphic tablets,
quarries on the top of the mountain, a tank, &c.

Same (eastern bank) seven miles above Minyeh, Komahmar, some grottoes,
and ruins of an old town; nine miles farther (eastern hank), Beni
Hassan, very fine grottoes, with curious paintings; and about a mile
and a half farther, a grotto, or rock temple, of Pasht (Bubastis, or
Diana), the Speos Artemidos, cat mummies in the ravine.

Antinoee, now Shekh Abadeh, few remains of the town, a theatre, the
principal streets, baths, &c., outside the town, on the east, is the
hippodrome. The grottoes in the mountain are unsculptured, and have
some Christian inscriptions. A little to the north of Antinoee are the
remains, apparently, of Besa, scarcely worthy of a visit.

At El Bersheh, a grotto on the mountain, in which a colossus is
represented on a sledge. At Oshmoonayn (western bank) no remains of
Hermopolis Magna. At Gebel Toona, a mountain, skirting the desert to
the west are mummy-pits, a tablet of hieroglyphics, and statues in
high relief. At Mellawee, and at Tamoof Tanis, superior mounds, but no
ruins. At Shayda, at corner of mountains, on eastern bank, crude brick
walls, and some grottoes.

At Shekh Said, the mountains recede to the eastward, leaving the river,
and a little beyond is the village of Tel el Armarnar, to the north of
which are the remains of a small town, and to the south the ruins of a
city, which I suppose to be Alabastron: all the stone buildings have
been quite destroyed, but some of the brick houses remain; near the
crude brick towers of the temple are the largest houses. To the east
are several fine grottoes in the face of the mountain, with curious
sculptures, and on the summit of it is an ancient alabaster quarry.
Six miles below Maufaloot, at El Haryib, ruins of an old town, in a
ravine of the Gebel Aboolfaydee; numerous dog and cat mummies, near El
Maabdeh, opposite Maufaloot; crocodile mummies in chambers of great
extent in the mountain.

At E'Sioot (Lycopolis), the capital of Upper Egypt, grottoes, wolf
mummies; the modern cemetery is prettily laid out. Gow (Antoepolis)
a few stones of the temple, close to the river; some grottoes at the
corner of the mountain, to the north, below Gow, but not containing
good sculptures. Shekh Hereedee, small grottoes; Roman statue at the
base of the mountain, cut out of a piece of a rock. The snake of Shekh
Hereedee is still supposed to perform cures.

To the west of Soohag, near the corner of mountains, old town of
Athribes, a Greek inscription in the ruined temple, grottoes in
the mountain; and to the north is the white monastery, or Dayr
Amba Shuoodee, nearly opposite Soohag is E'Khmim (Panopolis) Greek
inscription of the temple of Pan, and some remains of other stone
buildings.

Mensheeh (Ptolemais Hermii), western bank, eight miles above E'Khmim,
remains of a stone quay. From Girgh go to Abydos, three hours ride,
and send on the boat to Bellianeh, returning to it in the evening, two
hours ride; or, coming down the river, stop at Bellianeh, and send on
the boat to Girgeh. At Abydos two temples and many tombs.

How (Diospolis parva) has very few remains of Ptolemaic or Roman time.
In mounds at the ridge of the desert, a mile and a half south of How,
some tombs; one of Dionysius, son of Ptolemy, has some sculpture.

Qasr e Syad (Chenoboscion), remains of a quay; about one mile beyond
the eastern mouth of the canal of this village, are some very ancient
grottoes, with kings' names. Dendera (Teutyris) opposite Qeneh, two
temples, inscriptions, zodiac, &c. Qeneh is famous for its manufacture
of porous jars; from it, roads lead to Kossayr on the Red Sea.

Qoft (Coptos), ruins of the old town, and of a temple, a Christian
church, canals, &c.; at the village of El Qala, to the north, is a
small Roman Egyptian temple.

Qoos (Apollinopolis parva), no more ruins left; at a well on the north
of the town is a Ptolemaic monolith, with hieroglyphics, converted into
a tank, and a few stone remains of early time in the plain to the west,
near a Shekh's tomb. Thebes (Diospolis magna), on the eastern bank,
Karnac and Lugsor; on the west, the tombs of the kings, private tombs,
several temples, colossi of the plain, &c.

Erment (Hermonthis), west bank, temple and early Christian church.
Tuot, or E`Selemeeh (Tuphium) on eastern bank, Ptolemy temple, much
ruined, and concealed by the hovels of the peasant. Gebelaun, _i.e._,
"the two hills," a small ancient town in ruins, and grottoes, not
worthy of a visit. At Tofnees and Assfoon, mounds of ancient towns, no
ruins.

Esneh (Latopolis), fine portico, zodiac and quay. At Edayr, three miles
to the north of Esneh, remains of a small temple of the Ptolemies and
Caesars, lately destroyed. Thirteen miles from Esneh, near El Qenan,
ruins of a quay; on west bank and three miles farther, a small stone
pyramid, opposite the quay, is the junction of the limestone and
sandstone. Four miles beyond, on eastern bank, is El Kab (Eilethyas),
ruins of a very ancient town, the temples lately destroyed, curious
grottoes in the mountain, and a short distance up the valley are three
small temples. In the bed of the ravine are ponds encrusted with natron.

Edfoo (Apollinopolis magna) two temples. Eleven miles above Edfoo, and
on the eastern bank, remains of an old town, on face of hill, fortified
with towers of Arab construction. Silsilis (now Hagar Silsili),
quarries of sandstone, used for building the temples of Upper Egypt,
tables and grottoes. Komombo (Ombos), two temples; ancient stone
gateway, in a crude brickwall on the eastern side of the enclosure of
the temples; houses burnt.

At E'Sooan (Syene), ruins of a small temple of Roman date, some
columns, Saracen wall, and Cufic tombstones; granite quarries, in one
of which is a broken obelisk; Latin inscription of Caracalla near
another quarry; road to Philae, and wall; numerous hieroglyphic tables
on the rocks. Island of Elephantine; opposite the projecting rocks of
E'Sooan is the Nilometer, which is a staircase, with Greek inscriptions
relating to the rise of the Nile. Granite gateway, bearing the name of
Alexander, the son of Alexander the Great.

At the northern end of the cataract, in the island of Sehayl, few
vestiges of a temple; hieroglyphic tablets on the rocks. Go from
E'Sooan to Sehayl in a boat, and ride to Philae. At Philae, temples and
ruins. Islands of Biggeh, opposite Philae, to the west, ruined temple,
tablets, &c., &c.




NUBIA.


Dabode (Parembole), temple, west bank. Kerdassy, ruins and quarries.
Tafa (Taphis), two small ruins, and stone enclosures. Kalabshee
(Talmis), large temple, quarries, and, on hill behind it, to the
northward, a small, but interesting temple, called Bayt el Wellee, cut
in the rock. Dandoor, temple. Gerf Hossayn (Tutzis), temple, cut in the
rock, of the time of Rameses II.

Dakkeh (Pselcis), temple of Ptolemaic and Roman date; It has also
the names of two Ethiopian princes, Ergamun, or Ergamenes (mentioned
by Diodorus, iii. 6, as a contemporary of Ptolemy Philadelphus), and
Ataramun; many Greek inscriptions. Opposite Dakkeh, ruins of Contra
Pselcis, or of Metacompso.

Corte (Corti), few remains. Maharraka, or Oofideena, ruins of
Hierasycamenon, style bad, and all of late date. Isis is represented
under the fig-tree. Taboaa, temple of the time of Rameses II., with
avenue of sphinxes; the adytum is cut in the rock, the rest built.
Hassain, or Amada, a temple of Thothmes, ancient, nearly opposite to
it in Dayr or Derr, on east bank, the capital of Nubia, which has a
temple cut in the rock, of the time of Rameses II.

Ibreem (Primis parva), part of the ancient wall on south side of town;
remains of a stone building amidst the houses; some small grottoes
below the town near the river. Aboosimbel, two temples cut in the rock,
the finest Egyptian monuments out of Thebes; they are of the time of
Rameses II.

At Ferayg, nearly opposite, on east bank, a small temple in the rock.
Farras, on west bank, few remains; grottoes with Coptic inscriptions,
some distance from the river. Wadee Alfeh, remains of three buildings
on west bank; fine view of the second cataract from a rock on the same
bank, a short walk to the south of Wadee Halfeh.

A day and a half beyond Wadee Halfeh are the two small temples of
Samneh and the third cataract.

The distances from the Mediterranean to the second cataract are as
follow:--

  From Rosetta to Cairo         about 110 miles.
       Cairo      Benisoef             83
       Benisoef   Minyeh               85
       Minyeh     E'Sivot             106
       E'Sivot    Girgeh               97
       Girgeh     Qeneh                79
       Qeneh      Thebes               49
       Thebes     Esneh                38
       Esneh      Esooan              100
       Esooan     Wadee Halfeh        219
                                     ----
  Total from Rosetta to Wadee Halfeh  960 miles.
                                     ----

It may be interesting to the sportsman to know that, in the course
of his river trip, he will occasionally find "food for powder." Game
is by no means abundant, but here and there a random shot may be had
at a gazelle; coveys of partridges _have_ been seen; rock-pigeons are
numerous; and the rifle may afford some sport in the land of crocodiles.

The gazelle, ibex, _kebsh_ (or wild sheep), hare, fox, jackal, wolf,
and hyaena, are still found in the valley of the Nile, or in the desert.

The "kebsh" frequents the eastern desert, principally in the ranges of
primitive mountains, which, commencing about latitude 28 deg. 40' at the
back of the limestone hills of the valley of the Nile, extend thence
into Ethiopia and Abyssinia.

The Egyptian hare is a native of the valley of the Nile, as well as the
two deserts. It is remarkable for the length of its ears, which the
Egyptians have not failed to indicate in their sculptures; but it is
much smaller than those of Europe.

The intelligent Denon has made a just remark on the comparative size of
animals common to Egypt and Europe, that the former are always smaller
than our own species, and this is exemplified by none more strongly
than the hare and wolf.

In enumerating the wild beasts of the desert, it may not be irrelevant
to observe, that the hyaena and wolf are seldom met with in unfrequented
districts, or any great distance from the Nile, where they would suffer
from want of food, and are therefore principally confined to the
mountains lying a few miles from the edge of the cultivated land. The
wolf is very rarely seen on the coast of the Red Sea, and few even of
the watering-places of the interior of the desert are infested by it,
or the hyaena.

The hippopotamus was always rare in Lower Egypt, but in Upper Ethiopia
this amphibious animal is common in the Nile.

The crocodile, formerly an inhabitant of Lower Egypt and the Delta,
now limits the extent of its visits northward to the districts about
Inanfaloot.




APPENDIX (A).


As a guide to the cost of a berth, or cabin, it is only necessary to
mention the rates at which passengers can be accommodated, according to
the berth or cabin they occupy.

  Key:
  A-Aden.
  B-Ceylon.
  C-Madras.
  D-Calcutta.
  E-Penang.
  F-Singapore.
  G-Hong Kong.

  +------------------------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
  |  FROM ENGLAND TO             | A  | B  | C  | D  | E  | F  | G  |
  +------------------------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
  |                              | L  | L  | L  | L  | L  | L  | L  |
  |_For a Gentleman_, occupying }|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |       a berth in one of the }|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |       general gentlemen's   }| 77 |113 |118 |127 |134 |142 |165 |
  |       cabins                }|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |                              |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |_For a Lady_, occupying a    }|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |       berth in one of the   }| 82 |122 |127 |136 |143 |152 |175 |
  |       general ladies' cabins}|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |                              |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |_For a Gentleman and his     }|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |       Wife._ A whole cabin  }|214 |290 |299 |317 |332 |350 |396 |
  |       throughout            }|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |                              |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |     Occupying one of        }|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |       the best reserved     }|259 |335 |344 |362 |377 |395 |441 |
  |       cabins throughout.    }|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |                              |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |_For a Child with the Parent_,|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |       5 years and under 10   | 50 | 65 | 70 | 80 | 70 | 75 | 85 |
  |       2 years and under 5    | 35 | 45 | 50 | 60 | 50 | 55 | 65 |
  |       Not exceeding 2 years  |Free|Free|Free|Free|Free|Free|Free|
  |_For Servants_--European--    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |                        Female| 37 | 46 | 52 | 62 | 52 | 57 | 67 |
  |                          Male| 35 | 44 | 50 | 60 | 50 | 55 | 65 |
  |                Native--Female| 30 | 32 | 38 | 44 | 39 | 44 | 49 |
  |                          Male| 26 | 28 | 34 | 40 | 35 | 40 | 45 |
  +------------------------------+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+

The above charges include every expense, except hotel expenses in
Egypt, and wines, beer, and spirits, while passing between Alexandria
and Suez. (See p. 38.)

For an estimate of the expense of proceeding from Suez to Bombay, the
reader is referred to the East India Company's Regulations, p. 39; see
also James Barber and Co.'s Circular.




APPENDIX (B.)


TARIFF

OF DUTIES WHICH ARE LEVIED ON THE IMPORTATION OF THE FOLLOWING
ARTICLES:--

Notwithstanding the advice already given in this little volume, we
repeat that passengers would always save themselves much trouble, and,
by facilitating the examination of luggage, their fellow-travellers
great delay, if they would take the precaution to pack goods liable to
duty in a separate case, marked "duty goods," and leave it in charge of
Mr. Hill, the "Peninsular and Oriental Company's" custom-house agent
at Southampton, who always goes on board the steamer on its arrival,
and who will punctually forward it as directed. They should, at the
same time, deliver to Mr. Hill a list of the contents and the value of
each article, bearing in mind that duty is chargeable on the value of
the article in England, without reference to its cost price, and that,
provided the revenue officer does not approve of the declared value
made by the owner of the goods, he can seize the same, in which case,
the declared value, with an additional ten per cent., is paid to the
owner.

As a general guide, it is recommended that the _cost price_ be given
to Mr. Hill, and that he be left to estimate the duty, his great
experience qualifying him to do so.

Cotton must not be used for packing goods of any description by the
Overland Route; it occasions great difficulty, and subjects them to
seizure, under the quarantine laws.


                                              Ad valorem duty.
                                                      L s.  d.
  MUSLINS, embroidered                     per cent. 15  0  0
  BOMBAY MANUFACTURE, cases or boxes, of
    similar description                    per cent. 10  0  0
  BROCADE, of gold and silver                  "     10  0  0
  ARTICLES OF WOOL manufactured, made up       "     10  0  0
  WOOLLEN MANUFACTURES, broad stuffs                   free
  IVORY MANUFACTURES, or tortoise-shell and
    furniture                              per cent. 10  0  0
  CONDIMENTS, CURRY, &c.                       "     10  0  0
  GRASS-CLOTH                                  "     10  0  0
  MANUFACTURED SKINS                    L10 and B. P.  5  0  0
  UNMANUFACTURED SKINS                                 free
  SHAWLS, Cachmere                     L10 and B. P.  5  0  0
  MUSLIN, plain                                        free
  SKINS, tiger, dressed                                free
  FEATHERS, ostrich, dressed, per lb. L1 10s. and L5 per cent.
      "     undressed                                  free
  PADDY-BIRD                              1s. and L5 per cent.
  If several are put together, and can be called
    manufactured, on value                per cent.  10  0  0
  CIGARS                          per lb. 9s. and L5 per cent.
  SNUFF                              "    6s. and L5 per cent.
  SILVER 1s. 6d. per oz., and on value L10 per cent.       0 10  0
  SWEETMEATS               B. P. 1d. per lb., foreign 0  0  6
  PICKLES, in vinegar                     per  gall.  0  0  4
  " or vegetables, in salt and water              L5 per cent.

                                                      L  s. d.
  AGATES or CORNELIANS, not set                        free
  "  "                  set  or cut                  10  0  0
  BOOKS, of editions printed prior to 1801, the
    cwt.                                   L1 and L5 per cent.
    "    of editions printed in or since 1801, in
         foreign living languages            L2 10s.     "
    "    in the dead languages, or in the English
         language, printed out of England
         in or since 1801                    L5 and     "
       (_N.B. Pirated editions of English
         works, of which the copyright exists
         in England, are totally prohibited._)
  BOOKS, English, printed in England (unless
         declared that no excise drawback was
         received on exportation) per cwt. L5 and L5 per cent.
  CAMEOS                                   per cent.  5  0  0
  CHINA or PORCELAIN, plain or white               { 10  0  0
    "         "       painted  or gilt             {
  CIGARS (under 3 lb. only allowed in a passenger's
          baggage) from the Continent       the lb.    0  9  0
          Under 7 lb. allowed from East Indies.

        (_N.B. If a greater quantity, a declaration
         required that they are for private
         use, and a petition to Customs for
         permission to import._)
  CLOCKS (must have maker's name on face and
       on works)                                     per cent.  10    0    0
  WATCHES,  (ditto  ditto)                     L10 and L5 per cent.
  CORDIALS and LIQUEURS  (for the  bottles, see
       WINE)                                  per gal.  1   10    4
  COTTON, articles made up of
                                        per cent. L10 and B. P.  5    0    0
  EAU DE COLOGNE, in flasks                  the flask  0    1    0

  (_N.B. If in other than ordinary flasks,
  30s. 4d. the gal. and the bottle-duty._)

  EMBROIDERY and NEEDLEWORK        per cent.  15    0    0
  FLOWER ROOTS                          "            free
  FLOWERS, Artificial                   "              25    0    0
  FURNITURE                             "              10    0    0
  FRAMES, for pictures, &c.                    L10 and L5 per cent.
  FURS and SKINS DRESSED, made up
                                                  L10 and P. B.  5    0    0
     "            "      in  pieces, not made up     free
  GLASS, flint or cut                          2d. per lb.
  JEWELLERY                                 per cent.  10    0    0
  JAPANNED or LACQUERED WARE          "       10    0    0
  MAPS or CHARTS, plain or coloured,
                      each map or part thereof       free
  MAGNA GRAECIA WARE, or ancient earthen vases        free
  MEDALS, silver, or any sort                          "
  MODELS, of cork or wood                              "
  MINERALS and Fossils, or specimens of                "
  MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS                                  10    0    0
  MOCK PEARLS                                          10    0    0
  MARBLE, manufactured           the cwt. 3s. and  5    0    0
                                                      and B. P.  0    1    6
  MOSAIC WORK, STONE and SLATE hewn per ton
                                         10s. and per cent.   5  0  0
                         and from B. P. 1s. and 11s. per cent.
     "                    small ornaments for jewellery, per cent.  10  0  0
  PRINTS and DRAWINGS, plain or coloured, single
                                            each 1d. and L5 per cent.
     "    bound or sewn                the dozen 3d.          "
  PICTURES                        each  1s.  0d. "
     "        and further,      the square foot  1s.          "
     "   being 200 square feet and upwards
                                                   each L10 and L5 per cent.
  PAINTINGS ON GLASS     the superficial foot               0  0  9
  PLATE, of gold or silver, gilt or ungilt, per
                                                  cent. L10 and L5 per cent.
    "   also the stamp-duty. If intended for
        sale, it must be assayed, under the
        penalties and forfeiture regulating the
        standard for plate in England                    per oz.     0  1  6
  SEEDS, garden                   the lb.   free
  SILK, MILLINERY, turbans or caps                 each     0  3  6
    "       "      hats or bonnets                           "       0  7  0
    "       "      dresses                                   "       1 10  0
  SILK HANGINGS, and other manufactures of silk
                                                         per cent.  15  0  0
  TOYS                                         L10 and L5 per cent.
  VELVET, plain (produce of Europe) the lb.                 0  9  0
     "    figured         "           "                              0  9  0
     "    otherwise                                            L15 per cent.
  WINE and SPIRITS, viz.:--
        Wine, in casks, all except Cape,  the
                                        gallon, 5s. 6d. and L5 per cent.
         "    in bottles, six to the gallon,
                                                5s. 6d. and L5 per cent.
              and further, on the bottles the cwt.                   0  0  9
  SPIRITS, in casks, must not be imported under
         twenty gallons                                the  gal.     1  2  10
     "    in bottles, the additional duty for the
          bottles, as wine bottles.


THE FOLLOWING MAY BE IMPORTED FREE OF DUTY.

 BULLION, COINS and MEDALS of gold or
 silver, and battered PLATE.

 DIAMONDS.

 LIVE CREATURES, and other specimens illustrative of Natural
 History.

 PICTURES, SKETCHES and DRAWINGS, on a
 declaration by the proprietor (being a British subject), that they are
 of his or her performance and not intended for sale.

 PLANTS and TREES, alive.

 SPECIMENS OF MINERALS, FOSSILS or ORES.




APPENDIX (C).


It may be useful, as a reference, to give the distances of the
different stations in India from each presidency.


  -----------------+------------------------------+
                   |     Miles distant from       |
  STATIONS.        +-----------+--------+---------+
                   | Calcutta. | Madras.| Bombay. |
  -----------------+-----------+------------------+
  Agra             | 796       | 1238   | 755     |
  Ahmedabad        | 1219      | 1050   | 354     |
  Ahmednuggur      | 1033      | 664    | 162     |
  Ahtoor           | 1232      | 186    | 779     |
  Ajmere           | 1035      | 1272   | 677     |
  Akola            | 829       | 694    | 349     |
  Akulcote         | 1185      | 557    | 269     |
  Akyab            | 548       | 1611   | 1745    |
  Allahabad        | 498       | 1151   | 831     |
  Alleppee         | 1475      | 470    | 805     |
  Allyghur         | 816       | 1321   | 810     |
  Allynuggur       | 416       | 1139   | 920     |
  Almorah          | 896       | 1443   | 1013    |
  Amulnair         | 1078      | 829    | 231     |
  Anantapore       | 1068      | 293    | 507     |
  Anjunwel         | 1240      | 636    | 149     |
  Anopshuhur       | 856       | 1329   | 866     |
  Arcot            | 1085      | 71     | 715     |
  Arnee            | 1104      | 81     | 732     |
  Arracan          | 462       | 980    | 1647    |
  Arrah            | 381       | 1367   | 1033    |
  Aska             | 399       | 707    | 1040    |
  Asseeghur        | 909       | 779    | 313     |
  Ava              | 851       | 1280   | 1947    |
  Avanashy         | 1293      | 289    | 735     |
  Aurungabad       | 963       | 690    | 215     |
  Azimghur         | 475       | 1220   | 977     |
  Backergunge      | 183       | 1246   | 1368    |
  Bagapully        | 1151      | 218    | 566     |
  Bair             | 364       | 1339   | 1105    |
  Baitool          | 789       | 834    | 433     |
  Balasore         | 145       | 922    | 1192    |
  Bancoorah        | 101       | 1062   | 1223    |
  Banda            | 613       | 1102   | 771     |
  Bangalore        | 1161      | 205    | 633     |
  Baraset          | 15        | 1078   | 1202    |
  Bareilly         | 782       | 1329   | 918     |
  Baroda           | 1230      | 997    | 281     |
  Barrackpore      | 16        | 1079   | 1201    |
  Bassein          | 1221      | 784    | 32      |
  Beana            | 1050      | 1292   | 808     |
  Beauleah         | 145       | 1135   | 1345    |
  Behar            | 340       | 1324   | 1120    |
  Beerbhoom        | 127       | 1118   | 1279    |
  Bejapore         | 1173      | 482    | 280     |
  Belgaum          | 1294      | 519    | 318     |
  Bellary          | 1090      | 316    | 446     |
  Benares          | 428       | 1151   | 927     |
  Berhampore       | 118       | 1138   | 1290    |
  Berhampore (Mad.)| 382       | 682    | 1015    |
  Beawur           | 1000      | 1287   | 692     |
  Bezoarah         | 786       | 275    | 603     |
  Bhaugulpore      | 268       | 1288   | 1202    |
  Bhewndy          | 202       | 774    | 34      |
  Bhilsah          | 877       | 973    | 521     |
  Bhoolooah        | 293       | 1356   | 1478    |
  Bhooj            | 1324      | 1281   | 587     |
  Bhopawur         | 1024      | 1095   | 449     |
  Bhopaul          | 848       | 944    | 492     |
  Bimlipatam       | 540       | 518    | 851     |
  Bishnawth        | 627       | 1647   | 1719    |
  Biznore          | 905       | 1420   | 957     |
  Bogra            | 246       | 1266   | 1427    |
  Bolarum          | 972       | 408    | 444     |
  Bombay           | 1185      | 763    | 0       |
  Bolundshuhur     | 857       | 1335   | 872     |
  Broach           | 1228      | 927    | 231     |
  Bugwah           | 332       | 1352   | 1359    |
  Burdwan          | 75        | 1066   | 1227    |
  Burkaghur        | 209       | 1256   | 1162    |
  Buxar            | 446       | 1222   | 988     |
  Cabool           | 1815      | 2134   | 1700    |
  Cachar           | 398       | 1461   | 1583    |
  Calcutta         | 0         | 1062   | 1185    |
  Calicut          | 1374      | 418    | 672     |
  Calimere Point   | 1283      | 224    | 925     |
  Callian          | 1178      | 760    | 36      |
  Calpee           | 657       | 1168   | 803     |
  Cambay           | 1253      | 998    | 250     |
  Canara           | 1350      | 436    | 524     |
  Candahar         | 2047      | 2157    | 1394    |
  Candy            | 1250      | 576     | 1277    |
  Canuanore        | 1375      | 419     | 613     |
  Carangoly        | 1109      | 49      | 777     |
  Caroor           | 1272      | 258     | 799     |
  Cashepore        | 872       | 1418    | 946     |
  Cashmere         | 1564      | 1882    | 1250    |
  Cawnpore         | 628       | 1200    | 854     |
  Chandernagore    | 22        | 1085    | 1207    |
  Chandore         | 1082      | 798     | 150     |
  Chatterpore      | 686       | 1071    | 702     |
  Chicacole        | 498       | 567     | 900     |
  Chingleput       | 1095      | 36      | 767     |
  Chinsurah        | 28        | 1098    | 1218    |
  Chirra Poonjee   | 360       | 1423    | 1545    |
  Chittagong       | 342       | 1405    | 1557    |
  Chittledroog     | 1175      | 343     | 496     |
  Chittoor         | 1079      | 96      | 685     |
  Chitwye          | 1410      | 390     | 726     |
  Chunar           | 433       | 1146    | 952     |
  Chundpore        | 718       | 1259    | 894     |
  Chuprah          | 400       | 1291    | 1056    |
  Cochin           | 1441      | 437     | 772     |
  Coimbatore       | 1319      | 315     | 746     |
  Colgong          | 250       | 1270    | 1368    |
  Combaconum       | 1246      | 187     | 888     |
  Comercolly       | 124       | 1197    | 1304    |
  Comorin Cape     | 1770      | 440     | 830     |
  Condapilly       | 797       | 285     | 599     |
  Conjeveram       | 1086      | 46      | 742     |
  Contai           | 80        | 980     | 1226    |
  Coochbehar       | 342       | 1362    | 1369    |
  Coomreah         | 72        | 1196    | 1348    |
  Coorg            | 1328      | 372     | 676     |
  Coringa          | 674       | 374     | 783     |
  Cotamputty       | 1304      | 250     | 885     |
  Cotapuramba      | 1355      | 400     | 637     |
  Cotyam           | 1495      | 490     | 825     |
  Covilputty       | 1281      | 236     | 862     |
  Cuddalore        | 1170      | 110     | 816     |
  Cuddapah         | 1007      | 166     | 569     |
  Culnah           | 52        | 1122    | 1368    |
  Culneah          | 118       | 1181    | 1303    |
  Cumbum           | 919       | 223     | 617     |
  Cuttack          | 251       | 815     | 1151    |
  Dacca            | 187       | 1250    | 1372    |
  Damaun           | 1209      | 861     | 128     |
  Dapoolie         | 1206      | 622     | 121     |
  Darjeeling       | 343       | 1373    | 1441    |
  Deesa            | 1300      | 1147    | 451     |
  Delhi            | 900       | 1372    | 868     |
  Deyrah Dhoon     | 967       | 1492    | 1008    |
  Dharwar          | 1299      | 468     | 351     |
  Dhoolia          | 1055      | 806     | 208     |
  Dhummow          | 681       | 975     | 654     |
  Dhurrungaum      | 1087      | 780     | 236     |
  Diamond Harbour  | 30        | 1028    | 1176    |
  Dinajepore       | 259       | 1289    | 1357    |
  Dinapore         | 376       | 1337    | 1072    |
  Dindigul         | 1315      | 270     | 819     |
  Dum-Dum          | 8         | 1071    | 1193    |
  Durbangah        | 424       | 1374    |         |
  Ellichpore       | 796       | 736     | 433     |
  Ellore           | 748       | 315     | 648     |
  Errode           | 1258      | 253     | 758     |
  Eta              | 773       | 1319    | 856     |
  Etawah           | 719       | 1221    | 764     |
  Ferozepore       | 1150      | 1695    | 1170    |
  French Rocks     | 1236      | 287     | 626     |
  Furreedpore      | 128       | 1194    | 1313    |
  Furruckabad      | 711       | 1252    | 897     |
  Futtyghur        | 711       | 1252    | 897     |
  Futtypore        | 580       | 1157    | 821     |
  Galle, Point de  | 1380      | 576     | 1277    |
  Ganjam           | 382       | 699     | 1302    |
  Ghazeepore       | 431       | 1209    | 974     |
  Goa              | 1359      | 573     | 318     |
  Golconda         | 907       | 358     | 475     |
  Goomsoor         | 425       | 760     | 1097    |
  Goorgong         | 924       | 1396    | 892     |
  Gopaulpore       | 374       |         | 1022    |
  Goruckpore       | 525       | 1273    | 1038    |
  Ghooty           | 1036      | 262     | 500     |
  Gowahatty        | 502       | 1522    | 1594    |
  Gowalparah       | 425       | 1445    | 1517    |
  Gunga Khair      | 918       | 570     | 301     |
  Guntoor          | 807       | 255     | 617     |
  Gwalior          | 782       | 1164    | 680     |
  Gya              | 289       | 1270    | 1069    |
  Hajeepoor        | 1118      | 1687    | 1161    |
  Hameepore        | 629       | 1142    | 867     |
  Hansi            | 995       | 1476    | 880     |
  Haupper          | 880       | 1350    | 895     |
  Hazareebaugh     | 239       | 1200    | 1166    |
  Heerapore        | 730       | 1014    | 659     |
  Herat            | 2595      | 2510    | 1747    |
  Hidjelee         | 80        | 980     | 1226    |
  Hingolee         | 885       | 608     | 373     |
  Hissar           | 1015      | 1496    | 900     |
  Hooghly          | 28        | 1098    | 1218    |
  Honore           | 1372      | 546     | 414     |
  Hosheyapore      | 1148      | 1647    | 1121    |
  Hospett          | 1129      | 355     | 424     |
  Hurryhur         | 1203      | 393     | 446     |
  Hursole          | 1273      | 1053    | 358     |
  Hussingabad      | 864       | 900     | 460     |
  Hydrabad (Deccan)| 972       | 398     | 434     |
    Do. (Scinde)   | 1626      | 1541    | 778     |
  Incollo          | 848       | 215     | 634     |
  Inchura          | 44        | 1192    | 1228    |
  Indore           | 970       | 975     | 374     |
  Injeram          | 674       | 374     | 783     |
  Jansee           | 766       | 1001    | 400     |
  Jaulnah          | 932       | 651     | 253     |
  Jaunpore         | 466       | 1168    | 933     |
  Jeagunghe        | 125       | 1145    | 1337    |
  Jelalabad        | 734       | 1275    | 910     |
  Jelasore         | 112       | 951     | 1159    |
  Jessore          | 40        | 1141    | 1263    |
  Jeypore          | 933       | 1340    | 745     |
  Joudpore         | 1249      | 1316    | 696     |
  Joynagore        | 139       | 1192    |         |
  Jubulpore        | 700       | 879     | 674     |
  Juggernauth      | 297       | 766     | 1102    |
  Jumalpore        | 301       | 1321    | 1479    |
  Kaira            | 1204      | 1029    | 334     |
  Kalladghee       | 1223      | 453     | 314     |
  Kamptee          | 686       | 722     | 547     |
  Kangra           | 1200      | 1798    | 1170    |
  Karicaul         | 1231      | 175     | 876     |
  Kedgeree         | 64        | 994     | 1210    |
  Khandala         | 1149      | 700     | 56      |
  Kharwarah        | 1004      | 721     | 127     |
  Khasalpore       | 91        | 1144    | 1328    |
  Khatmandoo       | 560       | 1470    | 1215    |
  Khyouk Phyoo     | 648       | 1711    | 1845    |
  Kircumbady       | 1027      | 82      | 680     |
  Kirkee           | 1110      | 670     | 87      |
  Kishnaghur       | 64        | 1114    | 1249    |
  Kishore          | 980       | 1186    | 587     |
  Kolapore         | 1245      | 600     | 220     |
  Kotah            | 971       | 1161    | 562     |
  Kulladghee       | 1223      | 453     | 314     |
  Kurnaul          | 978       | 1477    | 952     |
  Kurnool          | 988       | 289     | 542     |
  Kurrachee        | 1750      | 1596    | 833     |
  Kurturpore       | 1148      | 1647    | 1211    |
  Lahore           | 1356      | 1675    | 1130    |
  Landour          | 980       | 1505    | 1021    |
  Lohoogaut        | 950       | 1497    | 1067    |
  Loodianah        | 1103      | 1602    | 1077    |
  Luckeepore       | 270       | 1379    | 1591    |
  Lucknow          | 619       | 1253    | 907     |
  Madapollum       | 733       | 327     | 698     |
  Madras           | 1063      | 0       | 763     |
  Madura           | 1337      | 292     | 858     |
  Mahableshur      | 1163      | 639     | 130     |
  Mahidpore        | 1028      | 1033    | 432     |
  Malcolm Peyt     | 1163      | 639     | 130     |
  Maldah           | 191       | 1211    | 1288    |
  Malwa            | 1400      | 616     | 278     |
  Malabar          | 1374      | 418     | 672     |
  Malligaum        | 1058      | 774     | 176     |
  Mangalore        | 1359      | 436     | 524     |
  Manuntoddy       | 1317      | 362     | 707     |
  Masulipatam      | 797       | 285     | 654     |
  Meerut           | 906       | 1405    | 912     |
  Mercara          | 1328      | 372     | 676     |
  Mhar             | 1257      | 655     | 107     |
  Mhow             | 980       | 961     | 360     |
  Midnapore        | 69        | 994     | 1116    |
  Mirzapore        | 455       | 1124    | 890     |
  Mithenkote       | 1345      | 1840    | 1077    |
  Mokeran          | 1580      | 1682    | 1156    |
  Mominabad        | 980       | 551     | 269     |
  Monghyr          | 304       | 1324    | 1163    |
  Moorshedabad     | 118       | 1138    | 1290    |
  Moradabad        | 842       | 1388    | 916     |
  Moulmein         | 928       | 1176    | 1939    |
  Mozuffernuggur   | 942       | 1441    | 951     |
  Mow              | 726       | 1111    | 742     |
  Muctul           | 1060      | 349     | 420     |
  Mukhi            | 1183      | 1682    | 1157    |
  Mundeysir        | 1012      | 858     | 328     |
  Munnipore        | 490       | 1557    | 1679    |
  Muttra           | 818       | 1301    | 776     |
  Mymensing        | 281       | 1348    | 1466    |
  Mynpoory         | 739       | 1285    | 797     |
  Mysore           | 1246      | 290     | 636     |
  Nacrecul         | 892       | 329     | 504     |
  Nagercoil        | 1483      | 438     | 1004    |
  Nagery           | 1049      | 56      | 705     |
  Nagore           | 1241      | 182     | 632     |
  Nagpore          | 677       | 713     | 885     |
  Naidopet         | 993       | 70      | 714     |
  Nakodah          | 1138      | 1637    | 1100    |
  Nalchitty        | 173       | 1236    | 1378    |
  Nassick          | 1067      | 762     | 111     |
  Neemuch          | 1049      | 1119    | 516     |
  Neermul          | 859       | 530     | 599     |
  Negapatam        | 1246      | 187     | 888     |
  Nellore          | 952       | 111     | 684     |
  Neilgherries     | 1342      | 338     | 722     |
  Nepaul           | 560       | 1470    | 1215    |
  Nerumbauk        | 1044      | 19      | 756     |
  Noorpore         | 1213      | 1712    | 1186    |
  Noacolly         | 293       | 1356    | 1478    |
  Nowgong          | 610       | 1694    | 1766    |
  Nowgaum          | 425       | 732     | 1065    |
  Nubbenuger       | 349       | 1310    | 1095    |
  Nuddea           | 64        | 1114    | 1249    |
  Nujehabad        | 907       | 1444    | 981     |
  Nursingpore      | 756       | 877     | 574     |
  Nusseerabad      | 1018      | 1255    | 660     |
  Nundydroog       | 1137      | 196     | 599     |
  Nursapore        | 733       | 327     | 698     |
  Odeypore         | 1130      | 1200    | 435     |
  Ongole           | 873       | 189     | 642     |
  Oojein           | 1004      | 1009    | 408     |
  Oolundorpet      | 1177      | 131     | 823     |
  Oomrawuttee      | 774       | 720     | 412     |
  Oorungabad       | 160       | 1180    | 1347    |
  Ootacamund       | 1342      | 338     | 722     |
  Oossoor          | 1184      | 200     | 556     |
  Oude             | 562       | 1228    | 1013    |
  Padigaum         | 1147      | 629     | 130     |
  Palamcottah      | 1435      | 390     | 957     |
  Palaveram        | 1072      | 11      | 758     |
  Palunpore        | 1291      | 1165    | 469     |
  Paniput          | 1000      | 1428    | 924     |
  Panwell          | 1159      | 741     | 20      |
  Patna            | 369       | 1299    | 1065    |
  Paulghaut        | 1350      | 346     | 754     |
  Pelibeet         | 817       | 1364    | 948     |
  Penn             | 1158      | 716     | 27      |
  Periapatam       | 1279      | 324     | 669     |
  Pertabghur       | 1081      | 1151    | 484     |
  Peteraghur       | 975       | 1525    | 1095    |
  Philloor         | 1113      | 1612    | 1086    |
  Pondigul         | 862       | 286     | 550     |
  Pondicherry      | 1157      | 98      | 803     |
  Poonah           | 1107      | 667     | 90      |
  Poonamallee      | 1065      | 12      | 750     |
  Poondy           | 439       | 624     | 957     |
  Pooree           | 297       | 766     | 1102    |
  Poosa            | 422       | 1363    | 1129    |
  Porto Nova       | 1188      | 129     | 850     |
  Pubna            | 137       | 1210    | 1317    |
  Pulicat          | 1043      | 30      | 770     |
  Punderpore       | 1202      | 549     | 212     |
  Purnea           | 228       | 1302    | 1379    |
  Puttahat         | 258       | 1391    | 1513    |
  Puttealee        | 817       | 1321    | 832     |
  Quetta           | 1982      | 1897    | 1134    |
  Quilon           | 1500      | 454     | 859     |
  Ragapore         | 783       | 350     | 683     |
  Rajahmundry      | 690       | 373     | 706     |
  Rajapore         | 1400      | 1099    | 215     |
  Rajeshye         | 145       | 1135    | 1345    |
  Rajcote          | 1383      | 1153    | 458     |
  Rajmahal         | 196       | 1216    | 1312    |
  Rajpootana       | 1018      | 1255    | 660     |
  Ramnad           | 1376      | 331     | 931     |
  Ramree           | 698       | 1761    | 1895    |
  Rhotuck          | 950       | 1422    | 918     |
  Rungpore         | 302       | 1322    | 1329    |
  Rutnagherry      | 1320      | 1320    | 198     |
  Russellcondah    | 370       | 746     | 986     |
  Ryepore          | 497       | 893     | 689     |
  Sadras           | 1118      | 58      | 789     |
  Saharunpore      | 978       | 1477    | 984     |
  Sahuswan         | 796       | 1336    | 863     |
  Salem            | 1221      | 217     | 747     |
  Samulcottah      | 664       | 399     | 737     |
  Sandoway         | 748       | 1811    | 1945    |
  Santepore        | 50        | 1122    | 237     |
  Sattara          | 1180      | 609     | 163     |
  Saugor           | 742       | 964     | 602     |
  Sawunt Warree    | 1360      | 583     | 280     |
  Secunderabad     | 962       | 398     | 434     |
  Sedashagur       | 1397      | 604     | 472     |
  Sehore           | 870       | 966     | 470     |
  Setapore         | 671       | 1305    | 959     |
  Seonie.          | 755       | 791     | 536     |
  Serampore        | 18        | 1081    | 1203    |
  Seringapatam     | 1236      | 281     | 626     |
  Seroor           | 1067      | 661     | 111     |
  Serowie          | 1213      | 1243    | 518     |
  Severndroog      | 1218      | 634     | 133     |
  Shahabad         | 381       | 1367    | 1033    |
  Shahjehanpore    | 735       | 1320    | 916     |
  Shergotty        | 297       | 1258    | 1043    |
  Shekohabad       | 762       | 1257    | 803     |
  Sholapore        | 1162      | 534     | 246     |
  Sigouly          | 461       | 1373    | 1138    |
  Sirdhanah        | 918       | 1417    | 924     |
  Simlah           | 1112      | 1601    | 1086    |
  Sobraon          | 1173      | 1672    | 1147    |
  Subathoo         | 1038      | 1577    | 1062    |
  Sukree Gully     | 213       | 1233    | 1329    |
  Sultanpore       | 436       | 1149    | 941     |
    Do. (Oude)     | 525       | 1228    | 949     |
  Sumbulpore       | 309       | 1081    | 879     |
  Surat            | 1238      | 903     | 191     |
  Sukkur           | 1818      | 1733    | 970     |
  Surdash          | 177       | 1147    | 1357    |
  Sylhet           | 332       | 1395    | 1517    |
  Tanjore          | 1257      | 212     | 871     |
  Tannah           | 1198      | 764     | 27      |
  Tatta            | 1602      | 1467    | 773     |
  Tellicherry      | 1307      | 411     | 629     |
  Tezpore          | 594       | 1614    | 1750    |
  Tindevanum       | 1129      | 77      | 711     |
  Tinnevelly       | 1435      | 390     | 957     |
  Tippera          | 246       | 1306    | 1431    |
  Tirhoot          | 392       | 1342    | 1108    |
  Tranquebar       | 1227      | 168     | 889     |
  Travancore       | 1500      | 454     | 859     |
  Trichinopoly     | 1254      | 209     | 835     |
  Trincomallee     | 1420      | 426     | 1277    |
  Trivandrum       | 1526      | 481     | 892     |
  Tulleh           | 1208      | 680     | 77      |
  Tumlook          | 50        | 1034    | 1156    |
  Tuticoreen       | 1469      | 424     | 990     |
  Umballa          | 1033      | 1532    | 1007    |
  Undul            | 120       | 1088    | 1249    |
  Vaniumbaddy      | 1132      | 130     | 719     |
  Vellore          | 1100      | 86      | 799     |
  Vingorla         | 1370      | 593     | 283     |
  Vizagapatam      | 557       | 501     | 834     |
  Viziadroog       | 367       | 737     | 245     |
  Vizianagram      | 541       | 523     | 856     |
  Wallajahbad      | 1095      | 38      | 753     |
  -----------------+-----------+---------+---------+




INDEX.
                                                                    Page

Aden                                                                  33

Alexandria                                                            26


Bombay, Overland to                                                   36
Bombay, Rules for Passengers by the East India Company's Steamers      39

Boulac                                                                26


Cairo to Suez                                                         30

Ceylon, Passage to      2, 46

China, Overland to


Desert, the                                                           32

Distances from Calcutta, Madras and Bombay                           108


Egypt, Sojourn in                                                     71


Gibraltar                                                              8


Lazaretto, Maltese                                                    67
Lazaretto, Marseilles                                                 62
Lazaretto, Syra                                                       63


Madras, Passage to                                                 2, 50

Malta                                                             11, 67

Miscellaneous                                                         68


Nile, travelling on the                                               71


Overland Journey, Expense of                                          67
Overland _Via_ France, Germany and Italy                              41
Overland Homeward                                                 47, 65


Passengers, Instructions to                                            4

Penang, Overland to                                                   46

Plague, the                                                           54

Pyramids, Ascent of the                                               29


Servants, Indian                                                      80

Singapore, Overland to                                                46

Southampton, Passage to                                               64

Sporting in Egypt                                                     97


Tariff of Duty Goods                                                 101


Vigo, Oporto, Lisbon and Cadiz                                        68





JAMES BARBER AND CO.,

EAST INDIA ARMY AND GENERAL AGENCY,

136, LEADENHALL STREET.

It is not our custom to seek business by the channel of continued
advertisements, but we feel it to be our duty through the present
opportunity to thank the Civil and Military Services of India, as well
as many others, for the confidence they have been pleased to place
in our management, when entrusted with their commands, and, further,
to assure them that our effort to please, which has hitherto secured
to us so large a portion of their patronage and support, will be
energetically continued, and that our constant endeavour is to execute
every commission entrusted to our care with promptness and fidelity.

We feel that a general Agency of this description to be really useful
must embrace every variety of service, and that acute attention should
be paid to the smallest trifle, often regulating the comfort and
convenience of those by whom we are employed.

With these prefatory remarks, we may commence our detail, by observing--

Captain BARBER'S long experience in the East India Company's
maritime service, together with his personal knowledge of all the
first-class ships or steamers, fully qualifies him to furnish every
information that can possibly be required for the voyage to India or
China, whether the long sea or Overland Route be chosen.

Supposing the Overland Route to be chosen, no time should be lost in
giving us directions to select the best vacant berth in the steamer,
and to collect and ship all heavy baggage round the Cape, so that it
may arrive sufficiently early to meet its owner at the Presidency.

The detail of an <big>OUTFIT</big> for so long a journey is a matter of
serious consideration, both as regards comfort and cost--from ignorance
on this subject it too frequently happens, that an expenditure beyond
that which is necessary, fails to provide for the wants that might
have been satisfied for a much less sum--and, further, even when
the list is well chosen, the articles are bought at a great price,
or indiscriminately procured from advertising tradesmen, who supply
inferior goods.

We are always ready with detailed Lists of Outfit, and to advise
parties who apply in time to avail themselves beneficially of our
assistance in this and every other particular relating to the journey.

The Peninsular and Oriental Company do not in any case book through
to <big>BOMBAY</big>, and for information and assistance in removing
all difficulty while _en route_ to that Presidency we recommend that
application be made to this Agency.

BAGGAGE is fetched from any part of London by us and sent down
to Southampton, and there put on board the steamers in accordance with
the Peninsular and Oriental Company's regulations, at a fixed charge on
each package.

The BANKING DEPARTMENT of this agency includes all monetary
operations at home and abroad.

PAY AND PENSIONS RECEIVED. Life insurance and insurance on
baggage, passage and goods, effected; letters of credit granted;
private and public business transacted at all the Government offices,
and at the East-India House.

Military appointments and miscellaneous supplies of every description,
including wines, musical instruments, plated ware, cutlery, sporting
equipments, &c., &c., &c., are procured direct from the manufacturers,
and forwarded as instructed by messes or individuals requiring them.

We are always ready to give advice when required for the packing
of goods and render estimates of Cost of Freight and insurance--of
packages to any part of the world. Having directed particular attention
to this branch of the business, the fullest information and assistance
can be given.

Although it is not indispensable that parties resorting to this Agency
should become permanent SUBSCRIBERS of L1 per annum paid in
advance, we beg to observe that those who do are entitled to the
privilege of admission to a comfortable READING ROOM, provided
with writing materials, and where English newspapers and periodicals
and the latest Indian journals are regularly filed.

Many parties resident in this country experience great difficulty in
the transmission of their Indian Letters, the postmasters, except in
large towns, being frequently ignorant of the rates chargeable, and
unable to afford any accurate information on the subject. The charges
for postage become a serious item in an annual account; the subject is,
therefore, deserving especial attention. Parties who from choice adopt
the Marseilles route, may save much by selecting the lightest paper
made for the purpose and by dispensing with large seals of wax.

The Weight of Letters can scarcely be too carefully kept down, when it
is remembered that, independently of the heavy postage from England
to the Presidency, the weight allowed for a single letter in India is
only that of a sixpenny piece, or, to speak more correctly, forty-five
grains troy!

Letters transmitted through this Agency are duly registered, the proper
postage is paid, and charged in a periodical account; but when the
Agency is used merely for the transmission of letters, a deposit of
the probable amount of postage is required in addition to the annual
subscription.

Lastly, we might refer to numbers who have employed this Agency for
years past to prove that the advantages promised have been realised.


PENINSULAR AND ORIENTAL

STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY.

INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER, IN 1840.

THE COMPANY'S VESSELS START

FROM THE SOUTHAMPTON DOCKS

As follow, with Her Majesty's Mails, Passengers, and Cargo, for the
undermentioned Ports:

SPAIN AND PORTUGAL.

 VIGO, OPORTO, LISBON, CADIZ, and GIBRALTAR, on the 7th, 17th, and 27th
 of every month, at 1 30 p. m. When either these dates fall on Sunday,
 the vessels start the following day.

MEDITERRANEAN.

  MALTA, 20th and 29th of every month.    ALEXANDRIA, 20th of the month.

CONSTANTINOPLE AND BLACK SEA.

On the 29th of the month.

INDIA AND CHINA (VIA EGYPT).

 ADEN, BOMBAY, CEYLON, MADRAS, CALCUTTA, PENANG, SINGAPORE, and HONG
 KONG, 20th of the month.

ADEN and BOMBAY, also on the 29th of the month.

HOMEWARD ROUTES.

The Company's Steamers leave CALCUTTA for England, on the 8th of every
month, except in May, June, and July, when the Steamers sail on the 3rd.

  Leave MADRAS, four days after leaving Calcutta.
    "   CEYLON, nine days after leaving Calcutta.
    "   ADEN, on or about the 30th of every month.
    "   ALEXANDRIA, on or about the 10th.
    "   MALTA, on or about the 14th and 26th.
    "   TREBIZOND, on or about the 12th.
    "   CONSTANTINOPLE, on or about the 19th.
    "   SMYRNA, on or about the 21st.
    "   GIBRALTAR, on or about the 6th, 16th, and 26th.
    "   LISBON, on or about the 9th, 19th, and 29th.

 [atersim] For Plans of the Vessels, rates of Passage-money, and to
 secure Passages and Ship Cargo, please apply at the Company's Offices,
 No. 122, LEADENHALL STREET, LONDON, and No. 57, HIGH
 STREET, SOUTHAMPTON.

N.B.--Length of passage from Southampton to the undermentioned ports,
including all stoppages:

  To GIBRALTAR          Seven Days.
     MALTA              Ten ditto.
     ALEXANDRIA         Sixteen ditto.
     CONSTANTINOPLE     Sixteen ditto.
     BOMBAY             Thirty-five ditto.
     CEYLON             Forty-two ditto.
     MADRAS             Forty-five ditto.
     CALCUTTA           Forty-eight ditto.
     HONG KONG          Fifty-four ditto.


OVERLAND GOODS AND PARCELS FOR INDIA.

 Parcels under one quarter of a cubic foot measurement will be taken
 at five shillings, six and sixpence, seven and sixpence, and nine
 shillings each; above that measurement at the following graduated
 scale, including all charges to the Port of Delivery, except Transit
 Duty:--

  +-------------------------+-------------------+----------+
  |                         |                   |          |
  |                         | Aden, Calcutta,   |          |
  |       Measurement       | Madras, Ceylon,   | Bombay.  |
  |                         | Straits, & China. |          |
  +-------------------------+-------------------+----------+
  |                         |      L s. d.      |  L s. d. |
  | 1/4 foot                |      0 10 0       |  0 15 0  |
  |     Ditto and  1  inch  |      0 11 6       |  0 17 6  |
  |     Ditto and 2 inches  |      0 13 0       |  0 19 6  |
  | 1/2 foot                |      0 14 0       |  1  1 0  |
  |     Ditto and 1 inch    |      0 15 0       |  1  2 6  |
  |     Ditto and 2 inches  |      0 16 0       |  1  4 0  |
  | 3/4 foot                |      0 17 0       |  1  5 6  |
  |     Ditto and  1  inch  |      0 18 0       |  1  7 0  |
  |     Ditto and 2 inches  |      0 19 0       |  1  8 6  |
  | 1 foot                  |      1  0 0       |  1 10 0  |
  +-------------------------+-------------------+----------+

  AND FOR EVERY ADDITIONAL INCH MEASUREMENT IN PROPORTION.

 If the Package weighs more than 20 lbs. to the cubic foot, an
 additional one shilling per lb. will be charged for the additional
 weight.

 _Merchandise taken by Special Agreement before the 16th of the Month,
 and must be at this Office by 3 p. m. on that day._

_No Package will be received if it exceeds 70 lb. in weight._

 For the above Rate of Freight the Company undertake to receive
 packages at their Offices in London or Southampton, and to ship and
 forward them by each Steamer to the Ports of destination, free of any
 other charge, subject to the following conditions:--

 Parcels for Aden, Ceylon, Madras, Calcutta, Singapore, China, and
 Bombay, should be delivered not later than noon, on the 17th of each
 month; _and if forwarded on the 18th, will be subject to an extra
 charge_.

 When the 18th falls on a Sunday, no package will be received after the
 17th.

 Periodicals for each Presidency will be charged 1s. each.

 Parcels for Aden, Ceylon, Madras, Calcutta, and China, not to exceed
 70 lbs. weight, or 5 cubic feet measurement.

 Parcels for Bombay not to exceed 40 lbs. weight, and if in excess of 2
 cubic feet measurement a further extra charge will be made.

 Packages exceeding one cubic foot must be in a wood case, iron-hooped
 at each end, or an additional charge will be made for the same.

 Specie, Jewellery, Silver, Watches, and other valuable articles,
 charged at three per cent. on their value, the Company reserving to
 themselves the right to charge by value, weight, or measurement.

 TRANSIT DUTY.--Ten Shillings per cent. (payable to the
 Egyptian Government) will be added to the above rates.

 [asterism] _Contents and value.--Must be declared at the time of
 booking, or the package cannot be received. A wrong declaration
 of value or contents subjects the consignee to a charge of double
 freight, and the package to seizure at the Custom House abroad._

 CAUTION.--Parcels sent through any intermediate Agency cost
 the proprietor more. Application made personally, or by letter, to
 this Office, are promptly attended to.

 [asterism] Parcels must be applied for to the Company's Agents at the Port
 of Delivery.

  _Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company's
  Office_, 122, LEADENHALL STREET.


FAMILY ENDOWMENT LIFE ASSURANCE

AND

_ANNUITY SOCIETY_,

No. 12, CHATHAM PLACE, BLACKFRIARS, LONDON.

CAPITAL L500,000.

(Established by Act of Parliament, 19th May, 1836).

_TRUSTEES_.

  WILLIAM BUTTERWORTH BAYLEY, ESQ.
  C. H. LATOUCHE, Esq.
  HENRY PORCHER, Esq.

_DIRECTORS_.

  William Butterworth Bayley, Esq., _Chairman_.

  John Fuller, Esq., _Deputy Chairman_.

  Bruce Chichester, Esq.
  Major H. B. Henderson
  C. H. Latouche, Esq.
  Edward Lee, Esq.
  Colonel Ouseley
  Major Turner
  Joshua Walker, Esq.
  Lewis Burroughs, Esq.

  _Bankers_--Messrs. Smith, Payne, and Smiths.

  _Actuary_--Mr. W. Lewis.
  _Secretary_--Mr. John Cazenove.

INDIAN BRANCH.

_COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT, AT CALCUTTA._

  Charles Binny Skinner, Esq.
  James Stuart, Esq.
  T. C. Morton, Esq.
  James Jos. Mackenzie,
  J. S. Judge, Esq.

  _Medical Officer_--John Grant, Esq., _Apothecary General_.
  _Bankers_--Bank of Bengal.
  _Solicitors_--Messrs. Frith and Sands.

This Society offers a lower and more economical scale of Premiums for
Life Assurance than hitherto demanded by the established Offices in
India.

ANNUAL PREMIUM FOR ASSURING ONE THOUSAND RUPEES.

  +--------------------------++--------------------------+
  |          CIVIL           ||    MILITARY AND NAVAL    |
  |------+---------+---------++------+---------+---------+
  | Age. | With    | Without || Age. | With    | Without |
  |      | Profits | Profits ||      | Profits | Profits |
  +------+---------+---------++------+---------+---------+
  | 20   | Rs 33   | Rs 31   || 20   | Rs 83   | Rs 35   |
  | 30   |    38   |    35   || 30   |    44   |    41   |
  | 40   |    49   |    45   || 40   |    53   |    49   |
  | 50   |    63   |    59   || 50   |    66   |    61   |
  | 60   |    82   |    77   || 60   |    84   |    79   |
  +------+---------+---------++------+---------+---------+

All holders of Policies in India on the Profit scale, who may have paid
five annual premiums, will be entitled, at the expiration of the fifth
year, to a year's _profits_, calculated on the average of the preceding
five years; such profit to be paid in cash, or to go in diminution
of the future premiums payable, or to be added to the sum assured by
the policy, at the option of the holder, after the calculation of the
profits shall have been made in London.

After the expiration of 1851, the profits will be declared annually,
and the payers of five complete annual premiums be regularly entitled
to a participation therein, with a like option as to the mode of
application.

Parties assured in India for Life shall, on their return to England for
a _permanency_, and on the first half-yearly premium becoming due, be
entitled to come upon the English rates of premium, and be placed under
the rules and conditions of the Society there obtaining.

All parties assured for life or for terms other than for life,
whatever the number of payments or the permanency or otherwise of
their residence in Europe, shall, after completing a full year from
the date of their quitting India, and on the first half-yearly premium
thereafter becoming due, be entitled to a reduction of their premium
to the English rates, such reduced rates being continued during their
further residence in Europe.

Notices of Assignments of Policies will be duly registered at the
Office of the Secretaries.


The Society also grants ENDOWMENTS and DEFERRED
ANNUITIES for India. The Tables for which, with full information,
may be had at the Office of the Family Endowment Society, No. 12,
Chatham-place; or at the Office of the Secretaries, in Calcutta,
Messrs. GORDON, STUART, and Co.


GREAT BRITAIN

MUTUAL LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY,

AND

INDIA & LONDON LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANY,

14, WATERLOO PLACE, AND 52, KING WILLIAM STREET, CITY.

_DIRECTORS._

  The Chisholm, Erchless Castle, Inverness-shire, and Sloane-street, London, _Chairman_
  Richard Hartley Kennedy, Esq., Deputy Chairman of the Oriental Bank, Resington Lodge, Notting Hill, _Deputy Chairman_
  Colonel Michael E. Bagnold, Bombay Army, Hamilton-terrace, Saint John's Wood
  Henry Stroud Barber, Esq., 36, Fenchurch-street, and Wanstead, Essex
  Francis Brodigan, Esq., Garden-court, Middle Temple
  James William Deacon, Esq., Walbrook, and Southwick-place, Hyde-park Square
  Harry George Gordon, Esq., 58, Porchester-terrace, Chairman of the Oriental Bank
  Henry Allan Harrison, Esq., St. Leonard's-on-Sea, Sussex, Director of the Oriental Bank
  Alexander Robert Irvine, Esq., 14, Waterloo-place, _Managing Director_
  John Inglis Jerdein, Esq., Upper Ground-street, Blackfriars
  James John Kinloch, Esq., Kair, Kincardineshire, and Gloucester-road, Hyde-park Gardens
  Henry Lawson, Esq., Fortress-terrace, Kentish Town
  Robert Francis Power, Esq., M.D., Queen-street, May Fair
  Archibald Spens, Esq., Bombay Civil Service, Manor-house, Inveresk, N. B.
  Reverend F. W. J. Vickery, King-street, Covent-garden

INDIA AND LONDON-LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANY,

CAPITAL, L250,000,

In 5,000 Shares of L50 each.

_This Company assures the lives of healthy persons in any part of the
world._

INDIAN ASSURANCES.

The attention of parties connected with India is directed to the
moderate rates for Assurances on the Lives of either Military or
Naval Officers, or Civilians--by which means young men may secure the
repayment of advances for outfit, &c.--and parties enjoying annuities
from the bounty of their friends, may secure themselves against the
death of their benefactors.

Extract from the Tables for an Assurance of 1,000 Rupees, or L100:--

                       Military or
  Age.  Civilians.    Naval Officers.
  18    Rupees  29      Rupees  38
  25      "     34        "     42
  35      "     43        "     50
  45      "     56        "     62

_Exchange, 2s. per Rupee._

GREAT BRITAIN MUTUAL LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY.

This Society is established on the tried and approved principle of
Mutual Assurance. The first division of profits was declared at a
general meeting of members, held on the 26th May instant, agreeably
to the deed of settlement, when a bonus of 30 per cent. was given in
reduction of future premiums on all policies which had been in force
five years, and hereafter this Society will make an annual division of
the profits.

Credit is allowed for half the annual premium for the first five years.

The following Table exemplifies the effect of the present reduction:--

  +----------+----------+----------------+--------------+----------------+
  |          |          |                |              |                |
  | Age when |  Amount  | Annual Premium | Reduction of | Annual Premium |
  | assured. | assured. | hitherto paid. | 30 per cent. |  now payable.  |
  |          |          |                |              |                |
  +----------+----------+----------------+--------------+----------------+
  |          |          |                |              |                |
  |          |     L    |    L  s.  d.   |   L  s.  d.  |    L  s.  d.   |
  |    20    |   1000   |   20  17  6    |   7   5  3   |   14  12   3   |
  |    30    |   1000   |   25  13  4    |   6  14  0   |   17  19   4   |
  |    40    |   1000   |   33  18  4    |  10   3  6   |   23  14  10   |
  |    50    |   1000   |   48  16  8    |  14  13  0   |   34   3   8   |
  |          |          |                |              |                |
  +----------+----------+----------------+--------------+----------------+

  14, _Waterloo Place_,      A. R. IRVINE, _Managing Director_.


THE

AUSTRALASIAN, COLONIAL AND GENERAL

LIFE ASSURANCE & ANNUITY COMPANY,

No. 1, LEADENHALL STREET.

CAPITAL, L200,000, in 2,000 Shares.

DIRECTORS.

  E. Barnard, Esq.
  Robert Brooks, Esq.
  Henry Buckle, Esq.
  John H. Capper, Esq.
  J. B. Elin, Esq.
  C. E. Mangles, Esq.
  Richard Onslow, Esq.
  William Walker, Esq.

_Trustees_--Edward Barnard, J. H. Capper, and Edward Thompson, Esqs.

_Auditors_--James Easton and Robert Capper, Esqs.

_Solicitors_--Messrs. Maples, Pearse, Maples and Pearse.

_Bankers_--The Union Bank of London.

_Colonial Bankers_--The Bank of Australasia (incorporated by Royal
Charter, 1835), 8, Austin Friars, London.

_Physician_--Dr. Fraser, 62, Guildford-street, Russell-square.

_Actuary and Secretary_--Edward Ryley, F.R.A.S.

At Sydney there is a Board of Directors, and Agents and Trustees at
Western Australia.

Agents in India.

  Calcutta         Messrs. Robinson, Balfour and Co.
  Madras           Messrs. Line and Co.
  Bombay           Messrs. Ritchie, Steuart and Co.
  Ceylon           Dr. J. C. Cameron, Assistant Staff-Surgeon.
                        (_Medical Referee._)

The following peculiar advantages are offered by this Company.

1. Their policies cover the risk of living and voyaging over a far
larger portion of the globe than do those issued by any other Company
in existence. They allow the assured to reside in the Australasian and
North American colonies, and at the Cape of Good Hope. They also allow
one passage out and home to any of those colonies. For British India a
very moderate extra-premium is charged.

2. Premiums may be paid, and claims settled at Sydney, Calcutta, Madras
and Bombay.

3. A third of the premiums may remain unpaid for five years; nor is it
necessary for the maintenance of the Assurance to pay up the premium
at the end of that time, but the unpaid thirds may remain as a debt
against the policy, if the interest be regularly paid upon them as the
renewal premiums fall due.

THE ANNUITIES offered by the Company are on a more favourable
scale than those offered by any other Companies, having been calculated
with reference to the rates of Interest obtainable on Colonial
Investments. Annuitants also participate in the profits.

Specimens of the Rates of Annuity for L100 sunk.

  +------+-------------+---------------+------+-------------+---------------+
  | Age. | Male Lives. | Female Lives. | Age. | Male Lives. | Female Lives. |
  +------+-------------+---------------+------+-------------+---------------+
  |      | L  s.  d.   | L  s.  d      |      | L  s.  d.   | L  s.  d.     |
  | 40   | 7  8   3    | 6  18  2      | 65   | 12 12  0    | 10 19  0      |
  | 50   | 8  13  6    | 7  14  4      | 70   | 15 0   8    | 13 2   6      |
  | 60   | 10 16  3    | 9  9  0       | 75   | 18 9   2    | 16 3   5      |
  +------+-------------+---------------+------+-------------+---------------+

  EDWARD RYLEY, Actuary and Secretary.


CHURCH OF ENGLAND

LIFE AND FIRE INSURANCE INSTITUTION,

LOTHBURY, LONDON.

(_Empowered by Special Act of Parliament, 4 & 5, Vic., Cap. xcii._)

SUBSCRIBED CAPITAL ONE MILLION.

A LIST OF THE PROPRIETORS ENROLLED IN THE HIGH COURT OF CHANCERY.

_DIRECTORS._

MAJOR JAMES OLIPHANT, H.E.I.C., _Chairman_.

  Major James Adair
  The Very Rev. the Dean of Emly
  Rev. W. Harness, M.A.
  J. Hopkinson, Esq.
  Benjamin Jackson, Esq.
  Rev. H. J. Knapp, D.D.
  James Lamb, Esq.
  Captain Macdougall
  William Ambrose Shaw, Esq.
  George Sloane, Esq.
  Edward Heathcote Smith, Esq.
  Rev. H. T. Tucker, M.A.
  John Walker, Esq.
  Sir William White
  Rev. Richard Wood, B.D.

_AUDITORS._

  R. S. Cahill, Esq.
  M. R. Scott, Esq.

_BANKERS._

  Messrs. Herries, Farquhar & Co.
  Commercial Bank of London.

_SOLICITORS._

Messrs. E. C. Harrison.

_SECRETARY._

William Emmens, Esq.

SCOTTISH BRANCH.

  EDINBURGH.
  Office, 55, Great King Street.
  _Agent and Secretary._
  William F. Skene, W.S.

  GLASGOW.
  Office, 24, Gordon Street.
  _Agent and Secretary._
  Robert Baird, Jun.

INDIAN BRANCH.

  CALCUTTA COMMITTEE.
  James Steuart, Esq.
  Andrew Hay, Esq.
  J. Spencer Judge, Esq.
  W. McAdam Stewart, Esq.
  Dr. Duncan Stewart

  _Agents and Secretaries._
  Messrs. Colvio, Ainslie, Cowie & Co.

  MADRAS COMMITTEE.
  Edward F. Elliot, Esq.
  Walter Elliot, Esq.
  Robert Franck, Esq.
  Rev. G. W. Mahon
  Ramsey Sladen, Esq.

  _Agents and Secretaries._
  Messrs. Parry and Company.

SPECIMEN OF RATES.

  +-------------------------+----------------------------------------+
  |          HOME           |                 INDIAN                 |
  +-----+---------+---------+------+----------------+----------------+
  |     |         |         |      |                |                |
  |     |         |         |      |     Civil      |    Military    |
  | Age |  Seven  |  Life   |      +---------+------|---------+------+
  |     |  Years  |         |      |         |      |         |      |
  |     |         |         | Age  | 7 years | Life | 7 years | Life |
  +-----+---------+---------+------+---------+------+---------+------+
  |     | L s. d. | L s. d. |      |   Rs.   |  Rs. |   Rs.   |  Rs. |
  |  25 | 1  2  9 | 1 17  9 |  25  |   28    |  38  |   37    |  45  |
  |  30 | 1  3  7 | 2  2  7 |  30  |   31    |  42  |   39    |  49  |
  |  35 | 1  5  2 | 2  9  1 |  35  |   34    |  47  |   43    |  53  |
  |  40 | 1  8  2 | 2 17  8 |  40  |   38    |  53  |   47    |  59  |
  +-----+---------+---------+------+---------+------+---------+------+

Prospectuses, the necessary Forms, and every requisite information for
effecting Assurances, may be obtained on application to the Secretary,
at the Head Office in London, or to the Agents and Secretaries in
Scotland and India, as above.

  Wm. EMMENS, _Secretary_.


THE LIVERPOOL AND LONDON

FIRE AND LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY.

(Established in 1836. Empowered by Act of Parliament.)

 Offices--8, Water-street, Liverpool; 3, Charlotte-row, Mansion
 House, and 28, Regent-street, Waterloo-place, London; 29,
 Northumberland-street, Edinburgh; and Commercial-buildings, Dublin.

TRUSTEES.

  SIR THOS. BERNARD BIRCH, Bart, M.P.
  ADAM HODGSON, Esq.
  SL. HY. THOMPSON.

DIRECTORS IN LIVERPOOL.

_Chairman_--William Nicol, Esq.

_Deputy Chairmen_--Joseph C. Ewart, Esq., Joseph Hornby, Esq.

  Thomas Booth, Esq.
  William Brown, Esq., M.P.
  Thomas Brocklebank, Esq.
  William Earle, Esq.
  T. Steuart Gladstone, Esq.
  George Grant, Esq.
  Francis Haywood, Esq.
  Robert Higgin, Esq.
  George Holt, Esq.
  John Hore, Esq.
  George H. Lawrence, Esq.
  Harold Littledale, Esq.
  Andrew Low, Esq.
  John Marriott, Esq.
  Edward Moon, Esq.
  Lewin Mozley, Esq.
  John Pennington, Esq.
  H. Stolterfoht, Esq.

_Secretary_--Swinton Boult, Esq.

_Auditors_--T. B. Blackburn, Esq., and Daniel James, Esq.

  _Bankers_--Bank of Liverpool.   Union Bank of London.

_Solicitors_--Messrs. Clay, Swift, and Wagstaff, Union Court, Liverpool.

  _Medical Referees_--James Vose, M.D.  Robert Bickersteth, Esq.

_Surveyor_--John Stewart, Esq.

DIRECTORS IN LONDON.

_Chairman_--William Ewart, Esq., M.P.

_Deputy Chairman_--George Frederick Young, Esq.

  Sir W. P. de Bathe, Bart.
  Mathew Forster, Esq., M.P.
  Frederick Harrison, Esq.
  James Hartley, Esq.
  Ross D. Mangles, Esq., M.P.
  James D. Nicol, Esq.
  Hon. F. Ponsonby.
  John Ranking, Esq.
  J. M. Rosseter, Esq.
  Edward T. Whitaker, Esq.
  Swinton Boult, Esq.

  _Secretary to the Company_.

_Resident Secretary_--Benjamin Henderson, Esq.

_Manager of West-end Branch_--Frederick Chinnock, Esq.

_Bankers_--Union Bank of London.

_Solicitors_--Messrs. Palmer, France, and Palmer, Bedford-row, London.

  _Medical Referees_--Marshall Hall, M.D., F.R.S.   A. Anderson, Esq., F.R.C.S.

_Surveyors_--Messrs. Thompson and Morgan, 2, Conduit-street West, Hyde
Park.

THE AMOUNT OF CAPITAL SUBSCRIBED EXCEEDS L1,500,000. At the
commencement of 1849, the Reserved and Guaranteed Funds were, together,
L164,940. The liability of the Proprietors is unlimited.

THE FIRE BUSINESS HAS STEADILY INCREASED YEAR BY YEAR. The
Duty paid to Government in 1836 was L3,414, in 1846 it reached L12,362.
The Premiums are moderate; the settlement of claims liberal and prompt.
Insurances are effected at home and abroad.

IN THE LIFE DEPARTMENT, simplicity, certainty, and large
GUARANTEED BONUSES, involving no liability of Partnership,
with very reasonable Premiums, are characteristics of the Company. The
amount of Premiums on new business in 1846 was L3,160; in 1847, L3,687;
in 1848, L4,410.

CAPITAL SUMS, _payable on a fixed future day_, giving to
Property held under Lease for years certain the same value as if it
were Freehold, are insured by the Company. Full Prospectuses may be had
on application at the Offices or Agencies.

  BENJAMIN HENDERSON, _Resident Secretary in London_.
  SWINTON BOULT, _Secretary to the Company_.


[Illustration]

UNDER THE ESPECIAL PATRONAGE OF

HER MOST GRACIOUS MAJESTY THE QUEEN.

SOCIETY

FOR GENERAL ASSURANCE ON LIVES.

THE ROYAL MILITARY, EAST INDIA AND GENERAL

LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY,

13, WATERLOO PLACE, LONDON.

DIRECTORS.

Colonel Sir Frederic Smith, K.H., F.R.S., R.E., _Chairman_.

James Nugent Daniell, Esq., _Deputy Chairman_.

  Admiral the Right Hon. Sir G. Cockburn, G.C.B.
  Major-gen. Sir J. Cockburn, Bt., G.C.H.
  General Sir Thomas Bradford, G.C.B., G.C.H.
  Major-gen. Sir P. Ross, G.C.M.G., K.C.H.
  Lieut.-gen. Sir John Gardiner, K.C.B.
  Major-gen. Sir Hew D. Ross, K.C.B., R.A.
  Captain Sir George Back, R.N., F.R.S.
  Major-general Taylor, C.B., E.I.C.S.
  Major-general Edward Wynyard, C.B.
  Major-general Arnold, K.H., K.C.
  Archibald Hair, Esq., M.D., late R.H.G.
  Captain William Lancey, R.E.
  William Chard, Esq., Navy Agent.
  Wilbraham Taylor, Esq.
  Major-general Sir John Rolt, K.C.B.
  Major F. S. Sotheby, C.B., E.I.C.S.
  Lieut.-colonel Alderson, R.E.
  Major-general Sir George Pollock, G.C.B.

BANKERS--Messrs. Coutts and Co., 59, Strand.

PHYSICIAN--Sir Charles Fergusson Forbes, M.D., K.C.H., F.L.S.

STANDING COUNSEL--John Measure, Esq., 4, Serle Street,
Lincoln's-inn-fields.

SOLICITOR--Rowland Neate, Esq., 57, Lincoln's-inn-fields.

ACTUARY--John Finlaison, Esq., the Government Calculator, and
President of the Institute of Actuaries.


Assurances are granted upon the lives of persons in every profession
and station in life, and for every part of the world, with the
exception, for the present, of that part of the western coast of Africa
within the tropics.

The Rates of Premiums are constructed upon sound principles with
reference to every colony, and, by payment of a moderate addition to
the Home Premium, in case of increase of risk, persons assured in this
office may change from one climate to another, without forfeiting their
Policies.

Four-fifths of the Profits are divided amongst the Assured, and the
Bonus may, at their option, either be applied in augmentation of the
Sum Assured, or in reduction of the Annual Premium, or its value may be
received in Cash.

  JOSEPH CARTWRIGHT BRETTELL, _Secretary_.


UNIVERSAL LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY,

ESTABLISHED IN THE YEAR 1834.

_Empowered by Special Act of Parliament._

1, KING WILLIAM STREET, LONDON.

FOR THE ASSURANCE OF LIVES

<g>AT HOME AND ABROAD</g>,

INCLUDING GENTLEMEN ENGAGED IN

THE MILITARY, NAVAL AND CIVIL SERVICES IN INDIA.

DIRECTORS.

  Sir Henry Willock, K.L.S., _Chairman_.
  John Stewart, Esq., _Deputy-Chairman_.
  Major-gen. Sir R. Armstrong, C.B. K.C.T. & S.
  John Bagshaw, Esq., M.P.
  Augustus Bosanquet, Esq.
  Charles Dashwood Bruce, Esq.
  Ellis Watkin Cunliffe, Esq.
  William Kilburn, Esq.
  Francis Macnaghten, Esq.
  Charles Otway Mayne, Esq.
  William Rothery, Esq.
  Robert Saunders, Esq.
  James Duncan Thomson, Esq.
  Captain Samuel Thornton, R.N.

AUDITORS.

  Robert Gardner, Esq.
  Robert Hichens, Esq.
  William Oxborough, Esq.

BANKERS.

The Bank of England and Messrs. Curries and Co.

SOLICITOR.

William Henry Cotterill, Esq.

PHYSICIAN.

  George Burrows, Esq., M.D., F.R.S.
  45, _Queen Anne Street_, _Cavendish Square_.

ACTUARY.

David Jones, Esq.

SECRETARY.

Michael Elijah Impey, Esq.


ADVANTAGES OFFERED BY THIS SOCIETY.

Particular attention is requested to the rates, which, being founded on
the most accurate observations of the duration of human life, are as
moderate as is consistent with perfect security.

The Profits are declared in each year, on the second Wednesday in May,
on which date all those whose Policies have been in existence five
complete years, are entitled to participation therein.

This practice of an annual division, as observed by Mr. Babbage,
"distributes the Profits with more regularity and justice than any
other," and it is especially advantageous to persons of advanced
years, who cannot hope to participate in many septennial or decennial
divisions.

One-fifth of the ascertained Profits of the five preceding years is
divided between the Policy-holders and Shareholders, three-fourths to
the former and one-fourth to the latter. The remaining four-fifths are
set apart to enter into the average of the succeeding years, and thus
to provide against unforeseen contingencies.

 _The Annual Reduction has averaged considerably above 40 per cent.,
 and in no one year has it fallen below that amount._

The following Table will show the operation of the reduction of 40
per cent. made by the Society to all holders of Policies entitled to
participate in Profits, by reason of their having paid six complete
original annual Premiums:--

  +----------+------------+-----------+-----------------+
  |Age when  |            |           |                 |
  |Policy was|Sum assured.|Original   |Reduced annual   |
  |issued.   |            |Premium.   |Premium for      |
  |          |            |           |the current year.|
  +----------+------------+-----------+-----------------+
  |          |            |           |                 |
  |          |    L       |  L  s.  d.|  L  s.  d.      |
  |  20      |  1000      |  19 6   8 |  11 12  0       |
  |  30      |  1000      |  24 8   4 |  14 13  0       |
  |  40      |  1000      |  31 10  0 |  18 18  0       |
  |  50      |  1000      |  42 15  0 |  25 13  0       |
  |  60      |  1000      |  66 11  8 |  39 19  0       |
  |          |            |           |                 |
  +----------+------------+-----------+-----------------+

Thus it will be seen that the benefits arising from the Division of
Profits will be experienced by each whole Life Assurer on the payment
of his seventh annual Premium.

This system of reduction in the Premiums affords immediate benefit
to the Assured, or enables them to secure a considerable bonus by
effecting a new Policy.

INDIAN BRANCH.

Policies are granted in London, and by resident Committees at
Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, on India Risks, at very advantageous
rates, calculated from extensive data and tables, exclusively in the
possession of this Society, to show the true risk of life during
residence in India, and after retirement from foreign service.

To parties who are proceeding to India, this Society offers advantages
such as are not attainable in any other Assurance Company; for, while a
fair and equitable rate is charged for the increased risk of residence
in a tropical climate, the assured are, upon permanent return to this
country, reduced to the English rates, corresponding with the age at
which the assurance was originally effected, without reference to their
state of health, and without being subject to any medical examination
whatever.

AGENTS IN INDIA.

  Messrs. Braddon and Co., Calcutta.
  Messrs. Bainbridge and Co., Madras.
  Messrs. Leckie and Co., Bombay.


RELIANCE MUTUAL LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY,

No. 71, KING WILLIAM STREET, MANSION HOUSE,

LONDON.

The Entire Profits divided among the Assured.

DIRECTORS.

  Vernon Abbott, Esq.
  Lieut. Colonel Abdy.
  George Ashlin, Esq.
  Hall Hall, Esq., R.N.
  John James, Esq.
  John Ledger, Esq.
  R. W. S. Lutwidge, Esq.
  Henry T. Prinsep, Esq.
  William Phelps, Esq.
  Charles H. Smith, Esq.
  James Traill, Esq.
  William Foster White, Esq.
  George Whitmore, Esq.
  Edward Winslow, Esq.
  John Young, Esq.

_Advantages presented by this Society._

LIFE ASSURANCES may be effected upon Equal, Half-Premium,
Increasing or Decreasing Scales; also by Single Payments, or Payments
for limited periods. Tables have been specially constructed for the
Army, Navy, East India Company, and Merchant Services; also for persons
voyaging to, or residing in, any part of the world.

ENDOWMENTS for Widows and Children, Pensions for retired
Officers and Civilians Immediate or Deferred Annuities, and
Survivorships.

The Bonus declared on 30th of March, 1847, gave a Reduction of
Premiums, until next division of Profits, averaging 36 per cent. on
Policies in force Five Years, or an addition to the Sums Assured,
ranging from one-third to one-half of the total amount of Premiums paid.

  E. OSBORNE SMITH, ACTUARY AND SECRETARY.

AGENTS--Messrs. J. OUCHTERLONY & Co., Madras.


THRESHER AND GLENNY,

EAST INDIA AND COLONIAL OUTFITTERS,

152, STRAND, LONDON.

 Messrs. THRESHER AND GLENNY respectfully invite attention to their
 General Outfitting Establishment, which comprises the following
 advantages:--

 EQUIPMENTS for LADIES, GENTLEMEN and FAMILIES, suitable to all
 circumstances and appointments, are supplied at the Wholesale Prices,
 and are prepared, packed, and shipped, without any trouble to the
 parties.

 CLERGYMEN, WRITERS, CADETS, ASSISTANT SURGEONS, and others, are
 provided free of expense with detailed Lists of the requisite
 Equipment for India, China, Australia, &c., both by Ship and by the
 Overland Route.

 MILITARY and NAVAL OFFICERS, CIVILIANS, and others returning to
 India, Officers joining their Regiments, &c., are provided with every
 requisite for the completion of their Outfits, at the usual Wholesale
 Prices.

 ESTIMATES for LADIES, and FAMILY OUTFITS, with Lists of the Articles
 required, the several prices of each, and every particular connected
 with the necessary Equipment for India or the Colonies, will be
 forwarded on application.

 PASSENGERS' BAGGAGE, PACKING, &c.--Messrs. THRESHER and
 GLENNY undertake to receive, arrange, and carefully pack
 Outfits and Passengers' Baggage, and to ship the same, either in the
 Docks, or on Board the Peninsular and Oriental Company's Steamers at
 Southampton; to fit up the Cabins, and to insure the Outfits, Baggage,
 Passage, &c., without entailing any trouble whatever on the parties.

 PASSAGES TO INDIA, CHINA, &c.--Full particulars of the Overland Route
 to India, Regulation of Baggage, Rates of Passage Money to Malta,
 Alexandria, India, China, &c.; also, Expenses of Passage by Ship,
 Lists of Ships sailing, &c., &c., will be forwarded to any part of the
 country free of expense, and Passage secured if required.

 Messrs. THRESHER and GLENNY beg to observe, that Outfits supplied by
 them are arranged with the STRICTEST ECONOMY, all useless
 expense scrupulously avoided, and those Articles only recommended
 which experience has proved to be actually necessary. The Goods are
 all charged at the lowest Wholesale Prices; consequently _all Orders
 and Outfits must be paid for on delivery, and no discount whatever can
 be allowed_.


 _The following Articles, Manufactured by_ THRESHER _and_
 GLENNY, _can only be procured at their Warehouse_, 152,
 STRAND, LONDON.

 THRESHER'S REGISTERED TRAVELLING BAGS--manufactured by authority of
 the Peninsular and Oriental Company, expressly for their Steam Ships
 to Vigo, Oporto, Lisbon, Cadiz, Gibraltar, Malta, Alexandria, and
 India.

 THE REGULATION OVERLAND TRUNK--manufactured by direction of the
 Egyptian Transit Company, for crossing the Desert, and for travelling
 in Egypt, Syria, and India, and authorised by all the Companies
 connected with the Overland Route.

 THE NAPIER BED AND BULLOCK TRUNKS--manufactured expressly for marching
 in India, by direction of General Sir Charles Napier, G.C.B.,
 Commander-in-chief of India, &c., &c., strong, light, and water-proof.

 THRESHER'S INDIA GAUZE WAISTCOATS.--These most important articles of
 clothing for wear in India, possesses all the advantages, without the
 inconvenience, of flannel waistcoats; the texture is light, soft, and
 durable, and perfectly free from every irritating and disagreeable
 quality.


[Illustration]

[Illustration]

J. C. CORDING,

NAUTICAL AND SPORTING

WATERPROOFER AND TAILOR,

231, STRAND,

_Five Doors West of Temple Bar._

Manufacturer of the New Dreadnought Coats, warranted to resist the
effects of any climate. The superiority of this new description of
Waterproof is acknowledged by all who have tried it, being perfectly
pliable and elastic, and not affected by the sun or frost. It answers
equally well on a great variety of fabrics suitable to tropical or
polar regions, and is invaluable to the sportsman, the sailor, and
every one likely to be exposed to the elements.

Cording's Sheet India Rubber Fishing Boots are made up with
improvements, the suggestions of veteran sportsmen, and have the
appearance of leather, but are one-half the weight; they are, also,
more pliable, and never crack; they are perfectly waterproof for any
length of time, require no dressing to keep them in condition, and are
pronounced by gentlemen who have tried them to be the only article fit
for the purpose.

YACHTING JACKETS, TROUSERS, LEGGINGS, HATS AND SOUTHWESTERS.

_Patent Life Belts._

LADIES' CAPES, HOODS AND PETTICOATS.

Gig and Box Aprons, Travelling Knee Wrappers, Driving and Travelling
Gloves.

FISHING STOCKINGS AND GOLOSHES, SNIPE BOOTS.

_Every description of article made to order if required, either Black
or Drab coloured._

A new and excellent Oil-proof Cape, for labourers and keepers,
_warranted not to crack_, from 3s. 6d. each, or 40s. per dozen upwards.

CAUTION.--As many shopkeepers are selling inferior goods
as "Cording's Waterproofs," thereby causing disappointment to the
purchaser and bringing undeserved discredit on the good article,
gentlemen are requested to observe that J. C. Cording's name is on all
articles manufactured by him, and he requests he may be judged by the
service of those only.

Every one may be certain of purchasing Articles really Waterproof from

J. C. CORDING, 231, STRAND,

(FIVE DOORS WEST OF TEMPLE BAR.)

[Illustration]


W. BUCKMASTER & CO.,

MILITARY TAILORS, &c.

No. 3, NEW BURLINGTON STREET, LONDON.


DIRECTIONS FOR MEASURING

_May be taken with a Piece of Tape, and reduced to Inches._

[Illustration]

  +------------------------------------------+----+
  |COAT MEASURE.                             |Inch|
  |                                          |    |
  |1.      Height and length of Collar       |    |
  |2 to 3. From bottom of Collar to          |    |
  |        Hip Buttons                       |    |
  |3 to 4. From Hip Buttons to bottom        |    |
  |        of Skirt                          |    |
  |5.      From centre of Back to Elbow      |    |
  |6 to 7. Continued to length of            |    |
  |        Sleeve                            |    |
  |8.      Size round top of Arm             |    |
  |9.      Size round Chest, _over_ Coat     |    |
  |        Ditto  ditto  _under_ Coat        |    |
  |10.     Size round Waist, _over_ Coat     |    |
  |        Ditto  ditto  _under_ Coat        |    |
  |                                          |    |
  |          TROUSERS                        |    |
  |                                          |    |
  |11 to 12. From top of Trousers to         |    |
  |          bottom                          |    |
  |13 to 14. From Fork to bottom of          |    |
  |          Trousers                        |    |
  |15.       Size round top of Thigh,        |    |
  |          taken tight                     |    |
  |16.       Ditto Calf ditto                |    |
  |17.       Ditto Waistband                 |    |
  |18.       Ditto Hips                      |    |
  |                                          |    |
  |Size round Head for Caps, &c.             |    |
  |                                          |    |
  |Height of Person                          |    |
  |                                          |    |
  +------------------------------------------+----+

[Illustration]

Please to state if any peculiarity in figure--as, very upright, or
inclined to stoop, high or low shoulders, &c., &c.

Measures taken as above, will answer every purpose, stating whether
measured over a Uniform or Plain Coat.

Gentlemen who have not previously had an account with the House, will
be pleased to make a reference to their Agents in London; or, if they
wish to avail themselves of the discount, to refer to them for payment.


[Illustration]

MILITARY EQUIPMENT.

TO THE OFFICERS OF THE QUEEN'S OR EAST INDIA COMPANY'S SERVICE,

_EMBARKING TO INDIA OR THE COLONIES._

GENTLEMEN proceeding on appointment to join their Regiments
abroad, provided with Regimentals and every necessary article of the
very best quality and manufacture, strictly uniform, at the lowest
possible prices,

BY

SAMUEL ISAAC,

21, ST. JAMES'S STREET, LONDON,

AND

71, HIGH STREET, CHATHAM.

S. ISAAC has had the honour to supply Officers of Her Majesty's Service
for the last twenty years most satisfactorily, which the numerous
testimonials in his possession will certify.

S. ISAAC having supplied Regiments and Depots with necessaries of every
description for many years, to the entire satisfaction of the Officers
Commanding, respectfully begs their examination of his kit and prices,
being uniformly pronounced by many distinguished Officers in Her
Majesty's Service at least 30 per cent. less in price, and 20 per cent.
superior in quality,[15] to any yet issued to the soldier!

_Gentlemen, on landing from India, provided with Plain Clothes, and
every necessary article for use in England, in_ one day.

PASSAGE AND GENERAL AGENCY.

Plans and correct information of every Ship sailing to India and New
South Wales may be obtained. Passages engaged, whether by sailing or
the overland vessels; and baggage also shipped through this medium, at
a considerable saving of time, trouble and expense.

[Footnote 15: _Vide_ Testimonials in S. Isaac's possession.]


_Patronized by the Commander in Chief, General Sir Charles Napier,
G.C.B., and Staff_.

JOHN B. JOHNSTONE,

_MILITARY TAILOR_,

CAP AND ACCOUTREMENT MAKER,

No. 27, JERMYN STREET, ST. JAMES'S,

LONDON.


MILITARY APPOINTMENTS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION.

_Camp and Barrack Furniture_.


INSTRUCTIONS TO TAKE MEASURE

May be taken with Tape and reduced to Inches.

[Illustration]

       COAT                  |        TROUSERS
                      Inches.|                     Inches.
  1 From, bottom of Collar   |    1 to 2 From Top of the
      to Waist.              |         Trousers to Sole of
  2 From Waist to Skirt.     |         Boot.
  3 From centre of Back to   |    3 to 4 From Fork to Sole
      Elbow.                 |         of Boot.
  4 From Elbow to            |
      Knuckle.               |    5 Exact size of the Top
  5 Round centre of Arm.     |         of the Thigh.
  6 Round the Chest over     |
      Waistcoat.             |    6 Round Waist
  7 Round the Waist do. do.  |    7 Round Seat.

[Illustration]

Please to mention the height, and if any peculiarity in the Figure.


N.B. Gentlemen who have not previously had an Account with the House,
will be pleased to make a reference to their Agents in London, or, if
they wish to avail themselves of the Discount, to refer to them for
payment.


[Illustration]

LADIES' RIDING HABITS.


LADIES RESIDING IN INDIA AND THE COLONIES

ARE RESPECTFULLY INFORMED, THAT THE ABOVE ELEGANT

EQUESTRIAN COSTUME

May be insured to fit perfectly, by a tight fitting Cotton Body and
Sleeve being suited to the figure, and a pattern of the same on tissue
paper, with the exact size of waist on tape, forwarded per Overland
Mail to

UNDERWOOD AND CO.,

_HABIT MAKERS_,

1, VERE STREET, OXFORD STREET, LONDON.

N.B. Orders will be promptly attended to, accompanied by a satisfactory
reference.


BOWRING AND GLENNY,

_OUTFITTERS_,

33, LOMBARD STREET, LONDON.


GENTLEMEN AND FAMILIES supplied with every article in
UNDER CLOTHING for home use or wear in a foreign climate.
_Each article_ marked, washed, and packed at a few hours notice.

_Lists of Outfits_, and every information given to parties going
abroad, upon application at 33, Lombard-street.

Messrs. BOWRING and GLENNY respectfully invite the
attention of gentlemen travelling, to their

IMPROVED WATER-PROOF BAG,

combining the advantages of a portmanteau, with the convenience of
a _carpet bag_, to be obtained _only_ at 33, LOMBARD-STREET,
LONDON.


POPE AND PLANTE,

No. 4, WATERLOO PLACE, PALL MALL,

HOSIERS AND GENERAL OUTFITTERS TO INDIA AND THE COLONIES,

Manufacture all the best description of Hosiery, in Silk, Cotton, and
Woollen Stockings, Socks and Under-clothing. Elastic Gaiters, for
Ladies, which require neither lacing nor buttoning, suitable for home,
the carriage, promenade, or equestrian wear, and can be forwarded
in a Letter; also of the Elastic Stockings, Leggings, and Knee-caps
for VARICOSE VEINS, Weakness, &c., which afford suitable
compression and support, _without the trouble of lacing_.


JULLIEN and COMPANY'S

LATEST

CATALOGUE OF INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC

FOR FULL MILITARY BANDS,

AS PERFORMED BY ALMOST EVERY REGIMENTAL BAND IN HER MAJESTY'S SERVICE,
AT HOME AND ABROAD.


JULLIEN and COMPANY have the honour to submit to the Colonels,
Commanding Officers, Presidents of Band Committees and Band-Masters
in the British Army, and the Hon. East-India Company's Service, a
Prospectus of their MILITARY JOURNAL, arranged for full
Military Bands, by C. GODFREY, Band-Master of the Coldstream
Guards, which contains all the most Popular Overtures, Symphonies,
Fantasias and the Principal Novelties of the day in Musique Dansante,
as performed at Her Majesty's Theatre, the Ancient and Philharmonic
Concerts, and at JULLIEN'S celebrated Concerts, also at
the Court Balls and the Soirees of the Nobility. The extensive and
increasing patronage this highly popular Journal has met with in Her
Majesty's Service, is a sufficient guarantee of its utility, such a
publication having never before existed in so perfect a form.

 This Journal will be found a most desirable medium of procuring
 the most Popular Works of BEETHOVEN, ROSSINI,
 MENDELSSOHN, VERDI, ROCH-ALBERT,
 BENEDICT, BALFE, KOENIG, BARRET,
 FLOTOW, AUBER, MARETZEK, PUGNI,
 JULLIEN, ETC.

 _Terms of Subscription_, THREE GUINEAS per annum, or
 THREE POUNDS TEN SHILLINGS per annum, _postage paid_, payable
 in advance, for which each Subscriber will receive TWELVE PIECES
 OF MUSIC, being twice the number of Pieces allowed by any other
 Publisher for Three Guineas, arranged for Full Military Bands, one
 of which is published the first of every month. The subscription
 commences on the first of January in each year. Subscribers can select
 any piece that has been published during a previous year at the
 Subscription Price; to NON-SUBSCRIBERS, 10s. 6d. each.

 N.B.--To ensure the quickest possible transmission of the Music to
 India, after its publication in London, Messrs. JULLIEN AND
 CO., have made arrangements to send the monthly parts to their
 agents, Messrs. Young and Co., of Bombay, and Messrs. Oliva and Co.,
 of Calcutta, immediately after publication; for which they charge One
 Guinea a-year extra, to include all expenses of carriage to Bombay or
 Calcutta. Subscribers adopting this plan are requested to inform the
 Agents in India how they wish the music forwarded to their respective
 stations.


JULLIEN'S JOURNAL FOR FULL MILITARY BANDS.

  _Terms of Subscription_       THREE GUINEAS PER ANNUM.

  _FIRST YEAR_.

  1 Semiramide Quadrille                       Jullien
  2 English Quadrille                            Idem
  3 Valse a deux Tems                              "
  4 Bouquet Royal Valse                            "
  5 Chinese Quadrille                              "
  6 Original and Royal Polkas                      "
  7 Tarentella de Belphegor                  Roch-Albert
  8 Selection, "_The Bohemian
       Girl_"                                      Balfe
  9 Zampa Quadrille                              Jullien
  10 Post Horn Galop                            Koenig
  11 Drawing-Room Polka                          Jullien
  12 Stabat Mater                                Rossini
                { Introduction,
      1st Book  { Aria, Cujus Animam

  _SECOND YEAR_.

  13 Original Mazurka and Cellarius
     Cellarius Valse                             Jullien
  14 Stabat Mater                                Rossini
                 { Duo, Quis est Homo
      2nd Book   { Aria, Pro Pecatis,
                 { Coro, Eia Mater
  15 Selection, "_The Daughter
      of St. Mark_"                                Balfe
  16 Chimes Quadrille                            Jullien
      { Mazurka d'Extase,
  17  {     "_Eoline_"                             Pugni
      { Septette, "Vedi Come,"
      {     "_Ernani_"                             Verdi
  18 Pas des Fleurs Valse                       Maretzek
  19 Bohemian Polka                             Koenig
  20 Minuet Quadrille                        Jullien
  21 Overture "La Barcarole"                   Auber
  22 Stabat Mater                            Rossini
               { Quartette, Sancta Mater
    3rd Book.  { Cavatina, Fac ut Portem
               { Air et Choeur, Inflamatus
  23 Bridal Waltz (_Second Set
      of the celebrated "Valses
      a Deux Tems_")                     Jullien
  24 Introduction and Allegro
    Scherzo Movement, _Third
    Grand Symphony_, Composed
    for and Dedicated
    to Her Majesty, by                    Mendelssohn

  _THIRD YEAR_.

     { Original Polonaise                     Jullien
  25 { And Two Quick Steps,
     { from "_La Barcarole_,"
     { arranged by                               Mohr
  26 Original Napolitaine (_Tarentelle
      des Salons_)                            Jullien
  27 Cricket Polka                            Jullien
  28 British Navy Quadrille                     Idem
  29 Fleur de Marie Valse                      Barret
  30 Stabat Mater                             Rossini
                 { Quatour, Quando Corpus
      4th Book.. { Finale, Chorus, Amen
  31 Selection "_The Crusaders_"             Benedict
         { Overture to Stradella               Flotow
  32     { Grand March and Chorus
         {  "_Nino_"                            Verdi
  33 Hyacinth Waltz                          Koenig
  34 Selection "_I Lombardi_,"                  Verdi
  35 Ernani Quadrille                         Jullien
  36 American Polka                             Idem

  _FOURTH YEAR_.

  37 British Army Quadrille                    Jullien
  38 Camelia Polka                               Idem
  39 Selection, "_The Bondman_"               Benedict
  40 Garland Waltz                            Koenig
  41 Phantom Dancers' Quadrille                Jullien
     { Allegretto, _Ninth Grand_
  42 { _Symphony_, and
     { Presto, _Choral Symphony_             Beethoven
  43 Olga Waltz                                Jullien
  44 Standard Bearer Quadrille                   Idem
  45 Figlia del Reggimento Polka                  "
  46 Jenny Lind Waltz                         Koenig
  47 Selection, "_I Due Foscari_"                Verdi
  48 Carriole Polka                           Koenig

  _FIFTH YEAR_.

  49 Swiss Quadrille                           Jullien
  50 Selection (1st) "_Maid of
      Honor_"                                    Balfe
  51 Eclipse Polka                            Koenig
  52 Ravenswood Waltz                          Jullien
  53 Original Schottisch                         Idem
  54 Queen of May Quadrille                        "
  55 Selection (2nd) "_Maid of Honor_"           Balfe
  56 Jupiter Polka                            Koenig
  57 Pearl of England Waltz                    Jullien
  58 Selection, "_La Figlia del
      Reggimento_"                           Donizetti
  59 Overture, to "_Haydee_"                 Auber
  60 Maitraume Walzer                Prince Metternich

  _SIXTH YEAR_.

  61 Drum Polka                                Jullien
  62 Selection, "_Les Huguenots_"            Meyerbeer
  63 Fuchsia Waltz                              Barret
  64 Caledonian Quadrille                      Jullien
  65 Selection, "_Haydee_"                 Auber
  66 Trumpet Polka                            Koenig
  67 Masaniello Quadrille                      Jullien
       { Valse d'Amour                        Koenig
  68   { March, Souvenir des Alpes              Bender
  69 Valse Lucrezia                            Jullien
       The "Coronation March," }
  70   "Le _Prophete_"    }              Meyerbeer
       Cavatina, I'Lombardi                      Verdi
  71 Prophete Quadrille                        Jullien
  72 Jetty Treffy Polka                        Jullien


_List of Subscribers to M. Jullien's Military Journal._

      The Governor General of India (Earl Dalhousie)
  2nd Regiment of Life Guards
      Royal Regiment of Horse Guards
  1st (The King's) Regiment of Dragoon Guards
  2nd (Royal North British) Regiment of Dragoons
  3rd (The Prince of Wales's) Regiment of Dragoon Guards
  3rd (The King's Own) Regiment of Light Dragoons
  4th (The Queen's Own) Regiment of Light Dragoons
  6th Regiment of Dragoon Guards (Carabineers)
  11th (Prince Albert's Own) Regiment of Hussars
  14th (The King's) Regiment of Light Dragoons
  16th (The Queen's) Regiment of Light Dragoons (Lancers)
  17th (Regiment of Light Dragoons Lancers)

      Scots' Fusilier Guards
      Coldstream Regiment of Foot Guards
  1st (Royal) Regiment of Foot
  2nd (The Queen's Royal) Regiment of Foot
  3rd (The East Kent) Regiment of Foot (The Buffs)
  4th (The King's Own) Regiment of Foot
  6th (Inniskillen) Regiment of Dragoons
  5th Regiment of Foot (Northumberland Fusiliers)
  7th Regiment of Foot (Royal Fusiliers)
  8th (The King's) Regiment of Foot
  9th (The East Norfolk) Regiment of Foot
  10th (The North Lincolnshire) Regiment of Foot
  13th Prince Albert's Regiment of Light Infantry
  17th (The Leicestershire) Regiment of Foot
  19th (1st Yorkshire North-riding) Regiment of Foot
  21st Regiment of Foot (Royal North British Fusiliers)
  23rd (Royal Welsh Fusiliers) Regiment of Foot
  25th (The King's Own Borderers) Regiment of Foot
  26th (The Cameronian) Regiment of Foot
  28th (The North Gloucestershire) Regiment of Foot
  30th (The Cambridgeshire) Regiment of Foot
  31st (The Huntingdonshire) Regiment of Foot
  33rd (The 1st Yorkshire West-riding) Regiment of Foot
  34th (The Cumberland) Regiment of Foot
  35th (The Royal Sussex) Regiment of Foot
  36th (The Herefordshire) Regiment of Foot
  37th (The North Hampshire) Regiment of Foot
  40th (The 2nd Somersetshire) Regiment of Foot
  44th (The East Essex) Regiment of Foot
  45th (The Nottinghamshire) Regiment of Foot
  46th (The South Devonshire) Regiment of Foot
  48th (The Northamptonshire) Regiment of Foot
  51st (The 2nd Yorkshire West-riding King's Own Light Infantry)
      Regiment of Foot
  55th (The Westmoreland) Regiment of Foot
  56th (The West Essex) Regiment of Foot
  57th (The West Middlesex) Regiment of Foot
  58th (The Rutlandshire) Regiment of Foot
  60th (The King's Royal Rifle Corps) 1st Battalion
  60th (The King's Royal Rifle Corps) 2nd Battalion
  61st (The South Gloucestershire) Regiment of Foot
  62nd (The Wiltshire) Regiment of Foot
  63rd (The West Suffolk) Regiment of Foot
  65th (The 2nd Yorkshire North-riding) Regiment of Foot
  66th (The Berkshire) Regiment of Foot
  68th (The Durham) Regiment of Foot
  72nd (The Duke of Albany's Own Highlanders) Regiment of Foot
  74th (Highland) Regiment of Foot
  75th Regiment of Foot
  79th Regiment of Foot (Cameron Highlanders)
  81st Regiment of Foot (Royal Lincoln Volunteers)
  82nd Regiment of Foot (The Prince of Wales's Volunteers)
  83rd Regiment of Foot
  84th (York and Lancaster) Regiment of Foot
  86th (The Royal County Down) Regiment of Foot
  90th Regiment of Foot (Perthshire Volunteers Light Infantry)
  92nd (Highland) Regiment of Foot
  97th (The Earl of Ulster's) Regiment of Foot
  32nd (The Cornwall) Regiment of Foot
  98th Regiment of Foot
      Royal Artillery, Woolwich
      Royal Marines, Portsmouth
      Royal Marines, Chatham
      Royal Marines, Plymouth
      Royal Dockyard Infantry, Portsmouth
      Royal Hospital Schools, Greenwich
      Royal Caledonian Asylum
      H.M.S. Bellerophon
  1st West Indian Regiment

  BENGAL.

  3rd Regiment of Light Cavalry
  2nd Regiment of Native Infantry
  9th Regiment of Native Infantry
  11th Regiment of Native Infantry
  21st Regiment of Native Infantry
  26th Regiment of Light Infantry
  31st Native Infantry
  36th Native Infantry
  40th Regiment of Native Infantry
  42nd Regiment of Light Infantry
  45th Regiment of Native Infantry
  50th Regiment of Native Infantry
  54th Regiment of Native Infantry

  MADRAS.

  1st European Regiment (Fusiliers)
  3rd (Or Palamcottah Light Infantry)
  4th Regiment of Native Infantry
  5th Regiment of Native Infantry
  9th Regiment of Native Infantry
  16th Regiment of Native Infantry
  20th Regiment of Native Infantry
  25th Regiment of Native Infantry
  34th (Or Chicacole) Light Infantry
  38th Regiment of Native Infantry
  39th Regiment of Native Infantry
  40th Regiment of Native Infantry
  46th Regiment of Native Infantry
  49th Regiment of Native Infantry

  BOMBAY.

  2nd Regiment of Light Cavalry
  1st European Regiment (Fusiliers)
  1st (Grenadiers) Regiment of Native Infantry
  2nd (Grenadiers) Regiment of Native Infantry
  3rd Regiment of Native Infantry
  7th Regiment of Native Infantry
  9th Regiment of Native Infantry
  10th Regiment of Native Infantry
  16th Regiment of Native Infantry
  20th Regiment of Native Infantry
  26th Regiment of Native Infantry

_Numerous Yeomanry Bands, Musical Societies, Amateurs, &c., &c._


LONDON:

Published by JULLIEN AND COMPANY, at their Royal Conservatory
of Military Music, 214, Regent Street, and 45, King Street.


[Illustration]

TO MEMBERS OF REGIMENTAL MESSES.

The Members of Regimental Messes, resident in India and the Colonies,
are respectfully solicited to inspect the articles supplied them,
purporting to be the manufacture of CROSSE and BLACKWELL, as from the
patronage they have obtained for the sale of their various Condiments,
vast quantities of goods are prepared, approximating outwardly so
closely to theirs, that the deception is not discovered until the
purchaser has opened them.

It is, therefore, important to all who wish their goods, to inspect
the articles minutely, as C. and B. do not guarantee any to be their
manufacture that have not their name and address in full, on all the
various labels and corks. The indents, C. and B., are now executing for
many of the principal storekeepers in India and the British Colonies,
consist, in addition to their usual assortment of Pickles, &c., of
the undermentioned articles, many of which are just introduced and
guaranteed to keep.

The Royal Table Sauce, a warm, rich sauce for cold meat and general
purposes.--The celebrated Soho Sauce, for game, venison, fish,
&c.--Dinmore's Essence of Shrimps, a most delicious sauce for all kinds
of boiled and fried fish, prepared expressly at their factory on the
sea-shore, thereby retaining the true flavour of the shrimps.--Sir
Robert Peel's Sauce for general purposes, labelled with a fac-simile
of Sir Robert Peel's letter of approval.--Soyer's New Sauces, one mild
for the Ladies, and one warm for the Gentlemen, manufactured under
his own direction.--Pure Mushroom Catsup and White Mushrooms, in tin
canisters, prepared as they are gathered at Lewes in Sussex, where C.
and B. have a factory for the purpose.--Fruits in Bottles for Tarts,
Fruits in Jelly and Crystallised Fruits for Dessert; also Jams and
Jellies of first quality, manufactured by C. and B. at the gardens,
Dawley Wall, and West Drayton, Middlesex. By this means the fine aroma
of the fruit is most effectually preserved.--Strasbourg Meat, Bloater
and Anchovy Paste, for Sandwiches, in small glass jars.--Fine Bologna
Sausages, hermetically sealed in tins.--Russian Caviare, in bottles,
Russian Ox and Rein-Deer Tongues, secured in skins.--Real York Hams,
cooked in Jelly; fine Wiltshire Bacon, secured in tins.--Berkley
Cheese, hermetically sealed in tins; prepared Parmesan and Gruyere, in
bottles, for Maccaroni, &c.; rich Stilton Cheese, in tins.--Preserved
Salmon, Oyster, Lobsters for Sauce, Eels and Herrings, a la Sardines,
Dried Sprats, Haddocks and Yarmouth Bloaters, Sardines and Anchovies in
Oil.--All the various kinds of Sauce, Pickles, Preserved Meats, Soups,
Game, Vegetables, &c., carefully selected and secured, and warranted
fit for immediate use.--Syrups for Ices, comprising Pine-apple, Lemon,
Orange, Raspberry, Limes, Currant, Strawberry and Cherry. Any of the
above diluted with water, make a cool and delightful beverage.--Dried
Herbs in bottles, Essences of Herbs and Spices of all kinds--most
useful preparation for flavouring.--Arrowroot, Maccaroni, Vermicelli,
Durham Mustard, Table Vinegar, Olives, Capers, &c., &c.

CROSSE AND BLACKWELL,

PURVEYORS IN ORDINARY TO HER MAJESTY,

  21, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.
  ESTABLISHED 1706.


[Illustration]

JOSEPH RODGERS AND SONS,

CUTLERS TO HER MAJESTY,

No. 6, NORFOLK STREET,

SHEFFIELD,

MANUFACTURERS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION OF

_CUTLERY, SILVER PLATE_,

AND

BEST SHEFFIELD PLATED WARES.

PLATE, CHESTS, CANTEENS, &c., FITTED UP IN THE BEST MANNER ON THE
SHORTEST NOTICE.


AGENTS.

  LONDON        Mr. A. HAMILTON, HATTON GARDEN.

  CALCUTTA       Messrs. LEACH, KETTLEWELL Co.

  BOMBAY         Messrs. WILLIAM ELSAM & Co.

  HONG KONG      Messrs. FOX, RAWON & Co.

  NEW YORK       Mr. JOHN A. NEWBOLE.


RECONNOITERING TELESCOPES.

These celebrated Instruments, measuring, when closed, 3-1/2 inches,
possess sufficient power to show clearly Jupiter's Moons. Its efficient
performance as a Reconnoitering Telescope, both as to magnifying and
defining power, renders it peculiarly adapted to the Military Gentleman
and Tourist. Price 35s.; or sent through the post at 36s.

The same Instrument, with an additional Eye-piece to show Saturn's Ring
and some of the Double Stars, with Stand and Case, 4-1/2 inches by 3
inches, to contain the whole, L3 2s.

To be had of the Maker, JOHN DAVIS, Optician, DERBY.


WEISS AND SON,

162, STRAND, LONDON.

IMPROVED ENEMA SYRINGES, with Metal Pistons, for use in warm climates,
where the ordinary Pistons become hard or unfit for use. These Syringes
are not only superior from their durability, but more perfect, more
easy in their action, and much better adapted for the use of invalids.

PATENT CORK NIPPLES FOR SUCKLING, AND BOTTLES FOR FEEDING
CHILDREN.--This elegant invention possesses the most decided advantages
over all the artificial Nipples at present in use; they are perfectly
free from the impurities and the injurious effects of the prepared
calves' teats, or those made of elastic gum. They are made of the
finest cork, prepared for the purpose, presenting a smooth velvety
surface to the lips; and, although supple and elastic, they are so firm
that there is no danger of their collapsing from the pressure of the
gums.

WEISS'S IMPROVED SCISSORS WITH ECCENTRIC OR LEVER JOINTS.--The joints
of these Scissors being placed at the side, instead of in the centre as
usual, cause the blades to cross diagonally, and thus a drawing cut is
obtained, similar to that made by a knife. By this means the power of
the Scissors is greatly increased, not only by the additional leverage
obtained by the position of the joints, but by the sliding action of
the blades on each other. This has long been a desideratum in Scissors,
not only where power is required, but even for the lightest work. Every
description of Scissors is made upon this improved principle.

WEISS'S best Town-made RAZORS, and CUTLERY of every description,
peculiarly adapted for use in India.


TO SPORTSMEN.

PAGET,

WORKING CUTLER,

REAL RAZOR AND SURGICAL INSTRUMENT MAKER,

(Upwards of Forty Years in constant Practice),

197, PICCADILLY,

OPPOSITE SACKVILLE STREET,

LONDON.


NOBLEMEN and GENTLEMEN are informed that they can be
supplied with every description of HUNTING KNIVES, WILD BOAR SPEARS,
OTTER SPEARS, &c., &c., made to any design, and in such a manner as to
give perfect satisfaction and ensure a continuance of favours.


N.B. ALL SPURS WARRANTED TO PIERCE A SPANISH DOLLAR.


[Illustration]


NORMAN RAZOR.

THE REGISTERED PATENT NORMAN RAZOR

Is the only one now before the public that is entitled to be ranked as
an Invention; it is an ENTIRE NEW SHAPE, and so studied and
constructed, that it is admitted to be the MOST PERFECT RAZOR EVER
MADE.

 To Gentlemen who wear moustaches, it will be found invaluable, as it
 can be handled with the greatest freedom and facility. The following
 is one of the many spontaneous testimonies of its superiority over
 every other Razor:--

 "SIR,--I not only think it a duty I owe you for your
 ingenuity, but I have great pleasure in informing you that I have been
 using your NORMAN RAZORS for some time, and, in my opinion,
 for _philosophical shape_, _elegance of make_, and _keenness of
 cutting_, they cannot be exceeded. Sincerely wishing you success for
 your improvement,

  "BATH, _August 29th, 1848_.  (Signed)  I remain, yours, &c.,  J. BULLEN, _Admiral_."

Black handle, 3s. 6d.; Ivory handle, 5s. each.

J. DAVIS, 69, LEADENHALL-STREET (_four doors from Aldgate
Pump_), and 39, THREADNEEDLE-STREET, _adjoining the South Sea
House_, Maker of the Unrivalled Razor Strop.

[asterism] _Superior London-made Knives and Forks. Officers' Messes
supplied on very reasonable terms._


THOMAS HARRIS AND SON'S

THO^s. HARRIS & SON'S

[Illustration]

CRYSTAL SPECTACLES.

Improved Achromatic Telescopes.

THE BEST FOR PRESERVING THE SIGHT.

By using Harris and Son's Spectacles, the many painful sensations in
the eyes so frequently complained of by ladies when at needle-work,
music, &c., are removed; they are very beneficial by candlelight,
and enable the wearer to continue reading a much longer time without
fatigue, or the risk of injuring the sight.

T. H. and Son have especial regard in adapting the proper shape to
fit each person's face. Badly formed spectacles subject the wearer
to many annoyances, such as continually shifting their position from
the eyes, the frame intersecting the sight, causing too much pressure
on the temples, disarranging the hair, marking the nose, &c.; these
inconveniences may be avoided by the use of T. H. and Son's spectacles,
which from their light (nearly invisible) appearance, do not at all
disfigure the countenance; and being composed of _pure crystal, are the
most efficient for preserving the sight_.

PRICES.

  For Ladies        Best Blued Steel, 15s.   Silver, 20s.  Gold, from 42s.
  For Gentlemen     Best Blued Steel, 18s.   Silver, 24s.  Gold, from 50s.

Extra Crystals, per pair, 10s.

Improved Eye Protectors, invaluable for preserving the Eyes from Light,
Heat, Dust, Flies, &c., with glass or wire gauze, from 16s. to 24s.

THE BINOCULAR OPERA GLASS.

The most powerful ever made. An infinite variety of the newest fashion,
from 8s. each. Patronised by Her Majesty the Queen Dowager, H.R.H. the
Duchess of Cambridge, H.R.H. Prince George.

[Illustration]

By reason of their great power, have now the preference in the army and
navy. The price of one to show an object distinctly at the distance of

  Eight miles, made of Brass, is  L0  18
  Twelve miles        do.          1  10
  Sixteen miles       do.          2   2
  Twenty miles        do.          4   0

  The same size in German Silver, L1  18  0
                Do.       do.      3   0  0
                Do.       do.      4   0  0
                Do.       do.      7   0  0

The smallest reconnoitering Telescope, 28s., of Brass. German Silver,
42s.

Leather Sling Case for the above-sized Telescopes, 5s. 6d., 7s. 6d.,
9s. 6d. and 12s.

Every description of Astronomical Telescopes at equally reduced prices.

Thomas Harris and Son's newly invented Deer-stalking Telescope,
patronised by H.R.H. Prince Albert. Price, with sling leather case, L5.
This Telescope has given the greatest satisfaction.

THOMAS HARRIS AND SON,

OPTICIANS TO THE ROYAL FAMILY,

141A, OXFORD STREET,

(CORNER OF CAVENDISH STREET);

ALSO AT

52, GREAT RUSSELL STREET, BLOOMSBURY.

ESTABLISHED SEVENTY YEARS.


KENT'S PATENT KNIFE CLEANER.

May be seen in use on board the RIPPON, the GREAT WESTERN, the
HINDOSTAN and the AVON.

This is the only invention for KNIFE CLEANING for which Her Majesty's
Letters Patent have been granted, and is distinct from all others,
in every essential principle, however closely imitated in external
appearance. This Machine, so eulogised by the Press, and which, after
the test of three years, is acknowledged by all to be the most useful,
as well as the most successful, invention (for a domestic purpose)
which the present age has produced; is made in eight sizes, and
thereby adapted for the smallest private Families or largest Public
Establishments; they are portable, durable, ornamental in appearance,
noiseless, and so perfectly cleanly, that they may be used in any
apartment; are incapable of getting out of order, and so simple in
operation, that the SMALL ONES FOR FAMILIES MAY BE USED BY A
CHILD, whilst the saving in time and in cutlery is immense, as the
number of Knives each Machine is adapted to take at one time, are not
only cleaned and beautifully polished, equal to new, in less time than
One Knife can be cleaned on the knife-board, but are not subject to the
risk of injury they sustain when cleaned by the old method, nor can
they ever be worn away at the points or backs.

To be had of the Patentee, at the MANUFACTORY, 329, STRAND, LONDON.
(OPPOSITE SOMERSET HOUSE).

  First Size, to clean 10 knives           L14  14  0
  Second      do        9  do               12  12  0
  Third       do        8  do               10  10  0
  Fourth      do        7  do                9   0  0
  Fifth       do        6  do              L 7  10  0
  Sixth       do        5  do                6  0  0
  Seventh     do        5  do                4  15  0
  Eighth      do        5  do                3  18  0

The principals of the following Establishments (among many others), in
which Kent's Knife Machines are in constant use, have kindly given the
Patentee permission to refer to them.

LONDON REFERENCES.

  Army and Navy Club, St. James's square
  Adelaide Hotel, London-bridge
  Albion Tavern, Aldersgate street
  Anderton's Hotel, Fleet-street
  Bache's Langbourne Dining Rooms
  Bath Hotel, Piccadilly
  Brunswick Hotel, Blackwall
  Brett's Hotel, Holborn
  Bridge House Hotel, London-bridge
  Bay Tree Tavern, St. Swithin's-lane
  Bank Dining Rooms, Throgmorton-street
  Bedford Hotel, Covent Garden
  Betsey's Chop House, Old Broad-street
  Blue Posts Hotel, Cork-street, Bond-street
  Cathedral Hotel, St. Paul's Churchyard
  Cesarini's Hotel, Golden-square
  Christie's Hotel, St. James's-street
  Chequers' Tavern, Abingdon-street
  City Arms Tavern, Pope's Head-alley
  City of London Club, Broad-street
  Castle and Falcon, Aldersgate-street
  Clarendon Hotel, Bond-street
  Clarence Hotel, Aldersgate-street
  Clothworkers' Hall, Mincing-lane
  Coulson's Hotel, Brook-street
  Commercial Travellers' School
  Cox's Hotel, Jermyn-street
  Crown and Sceptre Tavern, Greenwich
  Castle Tavern, Guildhall
  Cock Tavern, Fleet-street
  Cafe de l'Europe, Haymarket
  Coventry House Club, Piccadilly
  Christ's Hospital, Newgate-street
  Dolly's Chop House, City
  Dr. Butler's Head Tavern, Coleman-street
  Edinburgh Castle Tavern, Strand
  Euston Hotel, Euston-square
  Exchange Dining Rooms, 'Change-alley
  Exeter Hall Hotel, Strand
  Electric Telegraph Refreshment Rooms
  Ellis's Hotel, St. James's-street
  Eagle Tavern, City-road
  Fishmongers' Hall, London-bridge
  Fenton's Hotel, St. James's-street
  Freemason's Tavern, Great Queen-street
  Foundling Hospital
  Free Trade Club, St. James's-square
  Giraud's Hotel, Castle-street
  Gordon's Hotel, Albemarle-street
  Gresham Club, King William-street
  Gresham Dining Rooms, Bucklersbury
  Grillion's Hotel, Albemarle-street
  Guildhall Hotel, Guildhall
  Green Dragon Hotel, Bishopsgate-street
  Gerard's Hall Tavern, Basing-lane
  Gray's Inn Coffee House, Holborn
  Girdlers' Arms, Sherbourne-lane
  Golden Cross Hotel, Charing Cross
  Groves's Hotel, Albemarle-street
  Gunter's, Messrs, Berkeley-square
  Hotel de Provence, Leicester-square
  Hotel de l'Europe, Leicester-square
  Home and Colonial School, Gray's-inn-road
  Hanover Hotel, Hanover-square
  House of Commons (_Refreshment Depart._)
  Joe's Chop House, Finch-lane
  London Tavern, Bishopsgate-street
  London Hotel, Albemarle-street
  London Coffee House, Ludgate-hill
  Lloyd's Coffee House, Royal Exchange
  Lake's Dining Rooms, Cheapside
  Mullin's Hotel, Ironmonger-lane
  Morley's Hotel, Trafalgar-square
  New Hummum's, Covent-garden
  Old Hummum's, Covent-garden
  Osborn's Hotel, Adelphi
  Oxford and Cambridge Club, Pall-mall
  Peel's Coffee House, Fleet-street
  Piazza Hotel, Covent-garden
  Plough Tavern, Blackwall
  Pulteney Hotel, Albemarle-street
  Queen's Hotel, St. Martin's-le-Grand
  Queen's Hotel, Cork-street, Bond-street
  Royal Naval School, New-cross
  Ship and Turtle Tavern, Leadenhall-street
  Sabloniere Hotel, Leicester-square
  Somerset Coffee House, Strand
  Taylor's Dining Rooms, Moorgate-street
  Tavistock Hotel, Covent-garden
  Travellers' Club, Pall-mall
  Virginia Tavern, Cornhill
  Union Hotel, Cockspur-street
  United University Club, Pall-mall
  Wood's Hotel, Furnival's-inn
  Woolpack Tavern, St. Peter's-alley
  Windham Club, St. James's-square

PROVINCIAL REFERENCES.

  Adelphi Hotel, Liverpool
  Albert Hotel, Glasgow
  Albion Hotel, Brighton
  Albion Hotel, Hastings
  Albion Hotel, Manchester
  Albion Hotel, Glasgow
  Bath Hotel, Leamington
  Bedford Hotel, Brighton
  Bell Hotel, Gloucester
  Bell Hotel, Worcester
  Brunswick Hotel, Liverpool
  Bull Hotel, Preston
  Bush Hotel, Carlisle
  Buck's Head Hotel, Glasgow
  Cafe Royal, Edinburgh
  Castle Hotel, Richmond
  Clarence Hotel, Brighton
  Clarendon Hotel, Leamington
  Clarence Hotel, Manchester
  Cavendish Mansion, Bridge House, Brighton
  Clarendon Mansion, Bridge House, Brighton
  Cafe de l'Europe, Manchester
  Crow Hotel, Glasgow
  Crown Hotel, Worcester
  Commercial Hotel, Belfast
  Dolphin Hotel, Southampton
  Dolphin Hotel, Chichester
  Eton College
  Eldon Dining Rooms, Liverpool
  Esplanade Boarding House, Brighton
  Fountain Hotel, Portsmouth
  George Hotel, Portsmouth
  George Inn, Warwick
  Greyhound Hotel, Richmond
  George Inn, Frome
  Great Northern Hotel, Lincoln
  Guildhall Hotel, Bristol
  Harrison's Hotel, Brighton
  Imperial Hotel, Liverpool
  Imperial Hotel, Dublin
  Jury's Hotel, Dublin
  King's Head Hotel, Gloucester
  King's Head Hotel, Margate
  King's Arms Tavern, Richmond
  Lamb Hotel, Cheltenham
  London Hotel, Dover
  London Hotel, Edinburgh
  Marine Hotel, Hastings
  Marlborough College, Marlborough
  Montague Tavern, Bristol
  Morrison Hotel, Dublin
  Mount Ephraim Hotel, Tonbridge Wells
  Nelson Hotel, Birmingham
  New Steine Hotel, Brighton
  Norfolk Hotel, Brighton
  Old Bowling Green Hotel, Leamington
  Old Ship Hotel, Brighton
  Pier Hotel, Brighton
  Plough Hotel, Cheltenham
  Queen's Hotel, Birmingham
  Queen's Hotel, Manchester
  Radley's Hotel, Dublin
  Railway Tavern, Southampton
  Reindeer Hotel, Worcester
  Red Lion Hotel, Portsea
  Regent Hotel, Leamington
  Roebuck Tavern, Richmond
  Royal Hotel, Edinburgh
  Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester
  Royal Albion Hotel, Ramsgate
  Royal Hotel, Plymouth
  Royal Hotel, Richmond
  Royal George Hotel, Southampton
  Royal Kent Hotel, Ryde, Isle of Wight
  Royal Western Hotel, Bristol
  Royal York Hotel, Brighton
  Royal Oak Hotel, Hastings
  Royal Oak Hotel, Portsea
  Royal Victoria Hotel, St. Leonard's
  Royal Hotel, Deal
  Royal Pier Hotel, Ryde, Isle of Wight
  Royal Hotel, Torquay
  Scarborough Hotel, Leeds
  Sea House Hotel, Worthing
  Star and Garter Hotel, Portsmouth
  Star and Garter Hotel, Richmond
  Star and Garter Hotel, Worcester
  Spread Eagle Hotel, Gloucester
  Talbot Tavern, Richmond
  Thistle Tavern, Glasgow
  Three Swans' Hotel, Salisbury
  Trafalgar Hotel, Greenwich
  Trinity College, Cambridge
  Unicorn Hotel, Worcester
  Union Hotel, Birmingham
  Victoria Hotel, Preston
  White Hart Hotel, Bath
  White Lion Hotel, Bath
  White Lion Hotel, Brighton
  Windsor Hotel, Southampton
  Wolverton Station Refreshment Rooms
  Wovendon's Dining Rooms, Manchester
  Waterloo Hotel, Liverpool
  White Hart Hotel, Margate
  York House, Bath

The Patentee has also been favoured with approving testimony from
(with full permission of reference to) a large number of the Nobility,
Gentry and Clergy, the Heads of Public Institutions, Colleges and other
Scholastic Establishments, with numerous Private Families, in nearly
all parts of England, where his Machines are in constant use; as also
in many parts of Ireland and Scotland; therefore, Gentlemen wishing
to be satisfied of the merits of this Invention, may be referred to
parties in their own vicinity who have it in use, by application to

GEORGE KENT, 329, Strand, London.


PHILOSOPHICAL and CHEMICAL APPARATUS.

HORNE, THORNTHWAITE, AND WOOD,

_OPTICIANS_,

123, NEWGATE STREET, LONDON,

Manufacture and sell every description of Apparatus illustrative of
Chemistry, Hydraulics, Hydrostatics, Pneumatics, Frictional and Voltaic
Electricity, Electro-Magnetism, Electro-Metallurgy, Optics, Models of
Steam Engines, Turning Lathes, Soda Water Machines, &c., &c., Apparatus
for showing the Dissolving Views, Oxy-Hydrogen Microscope, Telescopes,
Achromatic and other Microscopes, Daguerreotype Apparatus and Calotype
Apparatus for taking Portraits and Views on Silver Plates and Paper,
from L5 5s. to L20. Electro-Galvanic Machines for administering Medical
Galvanism, from L3 3s. to L15 15s.

A descriptive Catalogue, containing upwards of 500 Engravings, can be
procured through any Bookseller or Agent, price 2s. 6d. or per Overland
Mail, Post free, 3s. 6d.

Orders containing a remittance, or order for payment, in London,
promptly attended to.


ALFRED BROOKS,

(_From Dollond's_,)

OPTICAL, MATHEMATICAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL INSTRUMENT MAKER,

 Begs respectfully to return thanks for the liberal patronage
 he has already received; and, in soliciting future favours and
 recommendation, feels confidence in stating that, having had twenty
 years' experience in Dollond's, all articles submitted by him may be
 relied upon as being of the most perfect character, and at economical
 charges.

Spectacles, Telescopes, Microscopes, Opera and Race-glasses, Sextants,
Compasses, Barometers, Surveying Instruments, Rules, Scales, &c., of
every description.

 Orders may be sent through Messrs. James Barber and Co., Grindlay and
 Co., or direct to 41, Ludgate-street, St. Paul's.


TO GENTLEMEN--APARTMENTS TO LET,

_En suite_, with extra Bed Rooms if required; the house is modern,
well-furnished, and in the centre of the most fashionable part.
Gentlemen and small Families requiring a superior abode in London, with
good attendance and all the advantages of an Hotel, will find this
desirable. Terms moderate.

 15, BURY STREET, ST. JAMES'S.




[Illustration]

TO GENTLEMEN WITH TENDER FEET.

J. CHAPPELL, 388, STRAND,

CORNER OF SOUTHAMPTON STREET,

_BOOT MAKER AND PROFESSOR OF FITTING_,

Begs to call the attention of such to his Method of Measuring, by which
he guarantees at the first trial to produce a fit unprecedented for
comfort, yet combined with the most fashionable shape.

Those Gentlemen on whom Boot Makers have practised unsuccessfully, are
particularly solicited by J. C., who will undertake to fit them at
once, however difficult.--Established, 1825.




BOOTS FOR INDIA.

T. GRUNDY,

Boot Maker,

133, LEADENHALL STREET,

OPPOSITE THE INDIA HOUSE,

AND

44, ST. MARTIN'S LANE, CHARING CROSS,

Respectfully begs leave to acquaint Officers of the Army, the Civil
Service, Cadets, and others proceeding to India, that he has introduced
an entirely new process in the preparation of leather, whereby it
is rendered most beautifully soft and pliable, and at the same time
so much changed in its nature, as not to occasion that pain and
inconvenience universally experienced in wearing new boots. They
bear a most beautiful polish, requiring no blacking; they do not
crack or become hard, and are remarkably soft and pleasant to wear.
Ease, elegance and durability, are combined in these Boots, and are
invaluable for warm climates.

T. Grundy earnestly solicits one trial, which will be convincing.




TO SPORTSMEN IN INDIA, CHINA, AND THE COLONIES.

J. COLLINS,

(SUCCESSOR TO WILSON),

115, REGENT STREET, CORNER OF VIGO LANE.

_GUN MAKER_

AND

REPOSITORY FOR GUNS BY ALL THE LONDON MAKERS,

Respectfully informs Gentlemen in her Majesty's and the Honourable East
India Company's Services, Merchants, Planters, and others, that he has
always on hand a Stock of

FOWLING PIECES, DOUBLE AND SINGLE BARRELLED RIFLES, &c., &c.,

Expressly prepared for Sportsmen in India, which he continues to supply
on the most reasonable terms, at which a suitable and well-finished
article can be sold.

J. COLLINS invites special attention to his assortment of
Pistols, and every description of weapon that is manufactured.

ORDERS FROM ABROAD CAREFULLY EXECUTED.




BECKWITH AND SON,

GUN MAKERS

TO THE HONOURABLE EAST INDIA COMPANY,

58, SKINNER STREET,

SNOW HILL, LONDON.

BECKWITH AND SON manufacture for Sportsmen double and single
Guns, at the lowest possible price, that will insure the assistance of
the best mechanics in the gun trade, which guns, for workmanship and
shooting cannot be surpassed. Also double and single Rifles made to
shoot with the greatest accuracy.

B. and Son make Guns marked No. 2, which will be found on trial much
better and cheaper than most second hand Guns, and prevent the loss now
so often sustained in the purchase of what are called second-hand Guns,
but which are really very common ones, with London maker's names forged
upon them.

Also Guns marked No. 8, perfectly safe and made to shoot well, suitable
for the Colonies.

DOUBLE AND SINGLE GUNS, RIFLE PISTOLS, SWORDS, &c., FOR EXPORTATION,

All kinds of Implements for Sportsmen, Powder, Wadding, Caps, &c., &c.




TO THE SPORTING WORLD.

GEORGE AND JOHN DEANE,

_GUN MAKERS_

TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCE ALBERT,

Have much satisfaction in making public their important discovery of
manufacturing Gun Barrels entirely of Pure Steel, which are found in
all respects as decidedly superior to stubb twist as the later is
to common plain Iron Barrels. Some of the most important advantages
possessed by DEANE'S Steel Barrels are, first, that they are
found to stand a much more severe test in proof than those of any other
description, and even in comparison with the best Stubb Barrels of the
same length and calibre. The Steel Barrels will stand the same proof,
although one-fourth lighter; the greater safety which this invention
secures is therefore obvious. Secondly, the Shooting is from 25 to 35
per cent. stronger and closer than any other. And, thirdly, they will
not become leaded or foul, or by constant use lose their superiority of
shooting. As an Advertisement precludes the possibility of detailing
their full merits, Sportsmen are respectfully invited to inspect the
STEEL BARREL GUNS, and test their Shooting, at G. & J.
DEANE'S FACTORY; where also will be found the largest assortment
of Double and Single Fowling Pieces, Double and Single Rifles of every
calibre, and fitted with extra barrels for shot; Air Guns and Air Canes
for all descriptions of Shooting; and Pistols in endless variety.

DEANE'S GUN MANUFACTORY,

No. 30, KING WILLIAM STREET, LONDON BRIDGE.




GUNS AND PISTOLS.

JOHN BLISSETT, GUN MAKER,

321, HIGH HOLBORN, LONDON,

Respectfully begs to thank his customers in India for their long and
continued patronage, and to state that, from the great experience he
had in making DOUBLE RIFLES, he has attained to a principle
of making them throw with equal precision to a Single Rifle, which
he unhesitatingly challenges the world to surpass, even those who
charge nearly double his price. His Fowling Pieces are bored upon a
system, and the interior of the breeching made upon such an improved
plan, as to throw small shot stronger and closer than has ever before
been accomplished. Double and Single Rifles, with extra barrels for
small shot, to fit in the same stocks. Pistols of every description,
both double and single, for holster, belt, pocket, or duelling. The
Regulation Cavalry and Infantry Pistols, with musket or carbine-size
bores. The Six-barrel Self-acting Pistol now made complete and perfect.

J. B. has always a large stock of Second-hand Guns and Pistols
of his own make and all the other first-rate London makers, at most
reasonable prices, together with every article connected with the trade.

N. B.--Observe the Name and No. 321, High Holborn, London, directly
opposite Gray's-inn Gate.


GUNS.

JOHN BLANCH & SON,

GUN, PISTOL, AND RIFLE MAKERS,

29, GRACECHURCH STREET,

LONDON.

Guns, &c. manufactured upon the Premises, at the lowest possible Price,
consistent with first-rate workmanship.

ESTABLISHED IN 1809.


FREDERIC BARNES,

RIFLE, GUN, AND PISTOL MANUFACTURER,

No. 3,

_UNION ROW, TOWER HILL_,

LONDON.

A LARGE ASSORTMENT OF FINE SINGLE AND DOUBLE FOWLING PIECES, RIFLES,
MUSKETS, SWORDS AND CUTLASSES ALWAYS ON HAND.


TO FAMILIES FURNISHING.

JEREMIAH EVANS AND CO.,

FURNISHING IRONMONGERS,

33, KING WILLIAM STREET, LONDON BRIDGE,

Respectfully acquaint the Nobility and Gentry, that they have just
completed

A LARGE STOCK OF KITCHEN REQUISITES,

Including Stewpans, Saucepans, &c., in Copper, Iron, and Block Tin;
Patent Dish Covers, Roasting Jacks, Meat Screens, and every requisite
for the Kitchen; also Knives and Forks, Japan Ware, Table and
Suspending Lamps, Tea and Coffee Urns, and the largest Assortment of
Stoves, Fenders, and Fire-irons, improved Kitchen Ranges, &c.


MAYNARD AND HARRIS,

126, LEADENHALL STREET,

OPPOSITE THE INDIA HOUSE.

MILITARY AND CIVIL SERVICES.

Officers and Families, Writers, Army, and Naval Cadets proceeding to
India, can be completely equipped on the shortest notice.

[asterism] The articles supplied at this establishment are of the
best qualities and strictly correct as to the Uniform of either
Presidency--Samples, with the Prices, and detailed Lists of
Necessaries, may be seen at the Warehouse, or transmitted by request,
per post.

REGIMENTAL CONTRACTS

Promptly executed for Mess Supplies, Officers' and Privates' Clothing
and Accoutrements, Plate, China, Glass, Musical Instruments, Wines,
&c., &c.

THE NEW INFANTRY SWORD,

Tested on the most powerful machine, and gild by the best London
workmen, supplied at L3 3s. each.

THE NEW CHAKO

Now adopted by the Honourable Company, supplied, both for Officers and
Privates, on the very best terms.

CABIN FURNITURE,

And every article of personal outfit, ready for immediate shipment.

FOR THE OVERLAND ROUTE, THEIR CONDENSED TRAVELLING EQUIPAGE

Is strongly recommended; also their very Light Waterproof Trunk,
21s., and their Regimental Trunk, 30s.

AGENCY.--M. and H. transact all Business, receive Pay, and
engage Passages, &c., for Officers on Furlough, or returning to India.

MAYNARD AND HARRIS, 126, LEADENHALL STREET.

(_Removed from 27, Poultry._)


[Illustration]

[Illustration]

SILVER SUPERSEDED BY RICHARD AND JOHN SLACK'S CHEMICALLY PURIFIED
NICKEL SILVER.

A good substitute for silver has long been sought after, and numerous
have been the attempts to produce a perfect metal that will retain its
colour when in use. How fruitless the attempts have been the public
know too well, from the fact that all their purchases have, after a
few days' wear, exhibited a colour little better than brass. The very
severe tests that have been applied to our metal (which in all cases
it has withstood), at once places it pre-eminent above all others, and
from its silver-like appearance, its intrinsic and valuable properties,
gives us confidence in asserting that it is, and must remain, the _only
pure and perfect substitute for silver_.


                                       Fiddle    Strongest   Thread    King's
                                      Pattern.    Fiddle.   Pattern.  Pattern.

  Table Spoons and Forks per dozen  12s. and 15s.  19s.       28s.      30s.
  Dessert ditto and ditto           10       13    16         21        25
  Tea ditto                          5        6     8         11        12

Cruet Frames with Rich Cut Glasses, from 22s.

Table Candlesticks, 12s. per pair.

Tea Sets, and every article for the Table, at proportionate prices.

R. and J. S. beg to caution the public against several spurious
imitations of their articles, which are daily offered to the public
as Albata British Plate. The genuine are to be had only at their
establishment, 336, Strand, opposite Somerset House, where no inferior
goods are kept.

FENDERS, FIRE IRONS, &c.

RICHARD and JOHN SLACK are now offering the most
extensive and elegant assortment of Fenders in London, embracing
the newest designs, at prices 30 per cent. under any other house.
Ornamental Iron Fenders, 3 feet long, 4s. 6d.; 3 feet 6 inches, 5s.
3d.; 4 feet, 6s.; ditto, bronzed, from 6s.; Bed-room Fenders, from
2s. 6d.; rich Scroll Fenders, with Steel Spear, any size, from 10s.;
Chamber Fire-irons, 1s. 9d. per set; Parlour ditto, 3s. 6d.; superior
ditto, with cut head and bright pans, from 6s. 6d.; new patterns,
with bronzed head, 11 s.; ditto, with ormolu and China heads, at
proportionate prices.

[Illustration]

  Balance Ivory Table Knives      10s. per dozen.
  Dessert ditto                    9
  Carvers                          3 6d. per pair.
  White Bone Table Knives          6
  Dessert                          4
  Carvers                          2
  Superior Kitchen Table
    Knive and Forks from           6s. 6d. per doz.
  Table Knives with pure
    Nickel Silver, Tables         22
  Dessert ditto                   18
  Carvers                          6   6d.

All marked RICHARD and JOHN SLACK, and warranted.

RICHARD and JOHN SLACK, in submitting the above
prices, beg it to be understood it is for articles of the best quality
only.

RICHARD and JOHN SLACK, 336, Strand, London.

Their Illustrated Catalogue may be had gratis, or sent to any part of
Great Britain, post free.

ESTABLISHED, 1818.

The Money returned for every article not approved of.


_Published on the Morning after the arrival in London of every Overland
Mail._

Price SIXPENCE; or 10s. for 24 Numbers paid in advance.

THE

INDIAN NEWS,

A FORTNIGHTLY JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENCE OF PUBLIC AND PERSONAL INTEREST,

FROM

INDIA, CHINA, AND THE EASTERN ARCHIPELAGO.

[asterism] This Journal was established in June, 1840, by a numerous
body of the principal Merchants, Company's Officers, and others
connected with India, and has ever since maintained its influence and
circulation among Anglo-Indians, and parties in this country having
friends or relatives in the Civil and Military Services of the Company;
also among Merchants, Shippers, and others interested in our Eastern
Empire. Its contents are arranged as follows:--

SUMMARY OF PUBLIC NEWS.

A continuous sketch, bringing down the Political, Military and
Miscellaneous Transactions in an historical form from mail to mail.

DETAILS FROM THE PAPERS.

Giving the more interesting Materials of the foregoing History, in
Extracts from the various Indian and Chinese papers.

NEWS FROM THE PRESIDENCIES, CEYLON, ETC.

This department contains the Anecdotes and _on dits_ of the English
in India, and generally all Articles of News not included under the
foregoing head.

GOVERNMENT NOTIFICATIONS, ETC.

Civil, Military, Naval, Medical, Ecclesiastical and Miscellaneous;
Births, Marriages and Deaths; Shipping Intelligence, Arrivals,
Departures and Lists of Passengers.

COMMERCIAL.

Comprehensive Views of the Movement of Trade and Commerce in India,
China and the Archipelago, from the best authorities on the spot, with
price current.

LEADING ARTICLES.

On the Indian topics of the day; Sketches of Manners in India;
Proceedings of Public Societies; Resources and Improvement of the
Country, &c.

LITERATURE AND ART.

Embracing a Critical Review, not confined to Works on India.

HER MAJESTY'S FORCES IN INDIA.

DISTRIBUTION OF THE ARMY IN INDIA.

And general list of Casualties from time to time.

PARLIAMENT AND THE INDIA HOUSE.

Examinations at the Colleges; Reports of Arrivals, Permissions to
return or remain, Applications to retire, &c.

HOME INTELLIGENCE.

Containing everything interesting to the Indian body in England up
to the day of publication; Births, Marriages, and Deaths, Shipping
Intelligence, Arrivals, Departures, Lists of Passengers, &c.

London: PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY STEWART & MURRAY,

GREEN ARBOUR COURT, OLD BAILEY,

To whom all communications for the Editor, or orders for Subscriptions,
may be addressed; or to

SMITH, ELDER & CO., 65, CORNHILL; or, W. H. SMITH, 136, STRAND.


_NOTICE.--NO OPIUM OR ANY OF ITS PREPARATIONS IN THESE LOZENGES._

UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF ROYALTY AND THE AUTHORITY OF THE
FACULTY.

KEATING'S COUGH LOZENGES.

A CERTAIN REMEDY for disorders of the _Pulmonary Organs_--in
difficulty of breathing--in redundancy of phlegm--in incipient
_Consumption_, of which _Cough_ is the most positive indication, they
are of unerring efficacy. In _Asthma_, and in _Winter Cough_, they have
_never_ been known to fail.

KEATING'S COUGH LOZENGES are free from every deleterious
ingredient; they may, therefore, be taken at all times, _by the
most delicate female and by the youngest child_; while the _public
speaker_ and the _professional singer_ will find them invaluable in
allaying the hoarseness and irritation incidental to vocal exertion,
and consequently a powerful auxiliary in the production of melodious
enunciation.

Prepared and sold in boxes, 1s. 1-1/2d., and tins, 2s. 9d., 4s. 6d.
and 10s. 6d. each, by THOMAS KEATING, Chemist, &c., No. 79,
St. Paul's Church-yard, London; and retail by all Druggists and Patent
Medicine Venders in the Kingdom.

N.B.--To prevent spurious imitations, please to observe that the words
"Keating's Cough Lozenges" are engraved on the government stamp of each
box.

IMPORTANT TESTIMONIALS.

Copy of a Letter from COLONEL HAWKER (the well-known Author on
"Guns and Shooting.")

  _Longparish House, near Whitchurch, Hants_, Oct. 21st, 1846.

SIR,--I cannot resist informing you of the extraordinary
effect I have experienced by taking only a few of your _Lozenges_. I
had a cough for several weeks, that defied all that had been prescribed
for me; and yet I got completely rid of it by taking about half a small
box of your Lozenges, which I find are the only ones that relieve the
cough without deranging the stomach or digestive organs.

  I am, sir, your humble servant,
        P. HAWKER.

To Mr. Keating, 79, St. Paul's Church-yard.


RED PARAGUAN SARSAPARILLA.

D'VERE'S COMPOUND FLUID EXTRACT.

(Prepared by cold process) from the above fine species of the root,
and prescribed by the first physicians and surgeons of the day, is
acknowledged by the faculty to be the best form of Sarsaparilla now in
use. It is remarkable for its medicinal properties as a purifier of the
blood, and restorative of the vital energies of the system, in cases
of debility consequent on acute disease and other causes, or wherever
tonic or alternative remedies are indicated. It has
been prescribed with marked success in the treatment of the following
class of complaints:--Skin Disease, Scrofulous Complaints, Glandular
Enlargements, Scorbutic Affections, Blotched Face, Boils and Tumours,
Obstinate Ulcerations, Chronic Rheumatism, Affections of the Liver,
Biliary Obstructions, Indigestion, Loss of Appetite, Loss of Flesh,
Lowness of Spirits, Local, Nervous, and General Debility, and in most
disorders depending on a depraved habit of body, bad state of the
blood, or debilitated constitution.

"I have prescribed the _Fluid Extract of the Red Sarza_ (by the cold
process) to many of my patients with considerable benefit, and, I
may say, in cases where the ordinary forms of Sarsaparilla seemed to
have little effect I am persuaded this is a valuable preparation for
the profession, and have recommended it for use in University College
Hospital."--_Letters of the late Professor Liston._

To be obtained in bottles, half-pints, 8s.; pints, 15s.; quarts, 25s.;
(accompanied with doses and directions), of T. KEATING,
Chemist, 79, St. Paul's Church-yard, London.


COD-LIVER OIL.

The increasing demand for this medicine, and the difficulty of
procuring it, has induced Messrs. Henry Cox and Co. to make
arrangements for a constant supply of this valuable article, which can
be depended upon (colour, taste and smell being uniform), and which
will bear the strictest test.

To be had retail of Mr. T. KEATING, Dispensing Chemist, 79,
St. Paul's Church-yard.

"_Hospital for Consumption and Diseases of the Chest--Brompton, July 5,
1849._

"Mr. Cox--Please supply 20 gallons Cod Liver Oil.--Osborn P. Cross,
Secretary."

"July 18--Please supply as last 20 gallons Cod Liver Oil.--Osborn P.
Cross, Secretary."

"August 1--Please supply as last 20 gallons Cod Liver Oil.--Osborn P.
Cross, Secretary."

_Agents for_ Calcutta, William Cragg, Esq.-Madras, Messrs. Gordon and
Co.--Bombay, Messrs. Treacher and Son.--Gibraltar, T. H. Roberts,
Apothecary.


TRAVELLERS AND RESIDENTS IN WARM CLIMATES

WILL FIND

ROWLAND'S KALYDOR

a most refreshing preparation for the Complexion, dispelling the
cloud of languor and relaxation, allaying all heat and irritability,
and immediately affording the pleasing sensation attending restored
elasticity and a healthful state of the skin. Composed of choice
exotics of balsamic nature, utterly free from all mineral admixture,
and pleasing and delightful in its effects, "Rowland's Kalydor" tends
to neutralise the action of the atmosphere upon the skin, and to
promote that healthy action of the microscopic vessels, by which its
general well-being and the beauty of its appearance are so essentially
promoted. It exerts the most _soothing_, _cooling_ and _purifying_
action on the skin; and effectually dissipates all _REDNESS_, _TAN_,
_PIMPLES_, _BLOTCHES_, _SPOTS_, _FRECKLES_, and other Cutaneous
Visitations. The radiant bloom it imparts to the _CHEEK_, and the
softness and delicacy it induces on the _HANDS_ and _ARMS_, render
it indispensable to every toilet. In cases of SUN-BURN,
STINGS of INSECTS, or incidental Inflammation, its
virtues have long and extensively been acknowledged. Gentlemen after
Shaving, will find it allay all irritation and tenderness of skin, and
render it soft and smooth. Its _purifying and refreshing properties_
have obtained its exclusive selection by _Her Majesty the Queen, the
Court, and the Royal Family of Great Britain, and the several Courts of
Europe; together with the "elite" of the Aristocracy_, from the sultry
climes of India to the frozen realms of the Czar. Price 4s. 6d. and 8s.
6d. per bottle.

[asterism] BEWARE of _spurious_ "KALYDORS" for sale,
containing mineral astringents utterly ruinous to the Complexion, and
by their repellent action endangering health.

ROWLAND'S MACASSAR OIL,

powerful, yet balsamic, efficacious, yet mild; its effects, either in
restoring the Human Hair when lost, or preserving it in its original
strength and beauty, are in many cases all but miraculous, and are
recorded by testimonials most numerous in themselves, and certified
by the highest authorities. It has obtained the exclusive patronage
of Royalty, not only as regards our own Court, but those of the whole
of Europe. From its exquisite purity and delicacy, it is admirably
adapted for the hair of children, even of the most tender age, and is
constantly employed for this purpose in the Nursery of Royalty, and by
the families of the nobility and aristocracy. It is alike suited for
either sex; and whether employed to embellish the tresses of female
loveliness, or to add to the attractions of manly grace and aspect,
will be found an indispensable auxiliary to the toilet both of ladies
and gentlemen. Price 3s. 6d.--7s. Family bottles, (equal to 4 small)
10s. 6d.; and double that size, 21s. per bottle.

ROWLAND'S HAIR WASH,

A preparation from the choicest Oriental Herbs, of peculiarly mild and
detersive properties. It pleasingly and effectually cleanses the Hair
and Skin of the Head from Scurf and every species of impurity, and
imparts a delicate fragrance. It is particularly recommended to be used
after Bathing, as it will prevent the probability of catching cold in
the head, and will render the hair dry in a few minutes. Price 3s. 6d.
per bottle.

ROWLAND'S ODONTO (or PEARL DENTRIFRICE),

A WHITE POWDER, compounded of the choicest and most _recherche
ingredients of the Oriental Herbal_, of inestimable value in
_preserving_ and _beautifying_ the Teeth, _strengthening_ the Gums,
and in rendering the breath sweet and pure. Its truly efficient and
fragrant aromatic properties have obtained its selection by "The
Queen," the Court and Royal Family of Great Britain, and the Sovereigns
and Nobility throughout Europe. Price 2s. 9d. per box.

ROWLAND'S ALSANA EXTRACT,

For relieving the Tooth-ache, Gum-boils, and Swelled Face, and which,
by constantly using, prevents those maladies. In the anguish of
excruciating pain it affords instantaneous relief. Price 2s. 9d., 4s.
6d., and 10s. 6d. per bottle.

IMPORTANT CAUTION!

UNPRINCIPLED SHOPKEEPERS, for the sake of gaining a trifle
more profit, vend the most SPURIOUS COMPOUNDS under the
same names. It is, therefore, highly necessary to see that the word
"ROWLANDS'" is on the wrapper or label of each article. Sold by the
Proprietors--A. ROWLAND AND SONS, 20, HATTON GARDEN,
LONDON, and by all respectable Chemists and Perfumers.


_Officers in the Military and Civil Service proceeding to India or the
Colonies, supplied on better terms than at any other House in London._

SADDLERY PACKED IN CASES SUITABLE FOR SHIPPING.

All Orders sent direct from India must be accompanied with a Reference,
or an Order for Payment in England.

A. DAVIS,

 SPONGE MERCHANT, BRUSH MANUFACTURER, AND REPOSITORY FOR HORSE
 CLOTHING, BLANKETS, SADDLERY, HARNESS, &c.

BY ESPECIAL APPOINTMENT TO HER MAJESTY, AND H. R. H. PRINCE ALBERT.

[Illustration]

AND THEIR GRACES THE DUKES OF NORTHUMBERLAND, BUCCLEUCH, MONTROSE,
SOMERSET, AND ARGYLE, AND THE DOWAGER DUCHESS OF BEDFORD.

33, STRAND, LONDON,

 Families in the Country will find an unprecedented advantage regarding
 quality and price. The Articles printed in this list warranted of
 the first-rate quality. Many Articles cannot be priced, owing to the
 multiplicity of Sizes; but guaranteed at Wholesale Prices.

PATENTEE OF THE FLEXIBLE CONCAVE HORSE AND MANE BRUSHES.

SADDLERY.

                                                                  _L  s. d._
  Best Hunting Saddles, full size, with superior made
    trees with spring bars, warranted of the best materials
    and shape, complete, with best steel stirrup irons, girths,
    and stirrup leathers                                             4 14  6
  Ladies' superior Side Saddles, with slipper girths, &c., all
    complete, warranted of the first quality                         6 16  6
  Ladies' Side Saddles, with leaping heads for hunting               7 17  6
  Race Horse Saddles complete, with irons, girths, sursingle,
    &c., any weight, from 2 lbs                                      4  4  0
  Superior Double Rein Bridles, with highly polished steel bits,
    spring curbs, bradoon, &c., covered buckles, warranted most
    superior                                                         1 10  0
  Superior Single Snaffle Bridles, with highly polished snaffle
    bits, covered buckles                                            0 17  6
  Ladies' most unique Double Rein Bridles, with round reins and
    head pieces, nose bands, rosettes, with extra highly polished
    steel bits, spring curbs, &c., made in the first style of
    fashion                                                          2 12  6
  Exercising Bridles, with leading reins                             0  8  6
  Hunting Breast-plates, with covered or plated rings, stuffed
    pads, superior quality                                           1  1  0
  Round ring Martingales                                             0 10  6
  Flat ditto ditto                                                   0 10  6
  Round Carriage Reins, per pair                                     2  2  0
  Round Chaise Reins                                                 0 18  0
  Hobbles, per pair                                                  0  6  6
  Leather Head Collars, on all the improved principles, to prevent
    slipping                                                         0  6  6
  Colts' Head Collars                                                0  6  6
  Leather Head Collar Reins, per pair                                0  6  6
  Sponge Boots                                                       1  5  0
  Shoe Brush Cases
  Patent Saddle Cloths                                               0 12  6
  Greyhound Slips, per pair                                          1  1  0
  Spring Dog Couples                                                 0  4  0
  Best Stirrup Leathers, with steel bar buckles, warranted, per
    pair                                                             0  7  3
  Pillar Reins                                                       0  4  9
  Ditto with spring hooks                                            0 12  0
  White and Blue Saddle Girths, with steel bar buckles, most
    superior quality, per pair                                       0  4  6
  Horse Blankets, 9 quarter, extra heavy                             0 12  0
  Ditto ditto 8 quarter ditto                                        0 10  6
  Best Body Rollers, extra strong                                    0 12  0
  Complete suit of superfine Kersey Horse Clothing, bound
    and edged with superfine cloth, stitched throughout,
    with silk initials, &c., all complete                            4 11  0
  Complete suit of Summer Horse Clothing, stitched throughout,
    with silk initials, &c.                                          1 15  0
  Complete suit of Blanket Horse Clothing, with hood, full breast
    cloth roller, initials, &c., extra heavy, all complete           2 12  6
  Sweating Hoods, lined throughout                                   1  2  6

INFANTRY MOUNTED, OR STAFF OFFICERS.

                                                               L  s.  d.
  Saddles for Infantry mounted, or Staff Officers, with loops
    complete                                                   4  14  6
  If metal cantle to ditto                                     0   9  0
  Pair of Helsters, and patent leather flounce                 2   2  0
  Regulation Bridle, with gilt bosses                          2  15  0
  Breast-plate and Crupper                                     0  12  0
  White Field Collar                                           0   9  0
  Infantry Saddle Cloth, edged gold lace                       4   0  0
  Staff Saddle Cloth, edged gold  lace                         5  10  0

BRUSHES.

DAVIS'S WHOLESALE PRICES.

                                                              L   s.  d.
  Horse Brushes                                               0   5   4
  Water ditto                                                 0   3   9
  Heel ditto                                                  0   3   3
  Spoke ditto, four-row                                       0   3   9
  Dandy ditto                                                 0   2   2
  Improved mane brushes, to supersede the use of mane combs   0   3   0
  Oil brushes                                                 0   1   3
  Inside carriage ditto, various
  Bit ditto                                                   0   1   4
  Crest ditto                                                 0   1   6
  Boot-top ditto                                              0   1  10
  Harness blacking and compo. ditto                           0   2   6
  Shoe ditto (per set)                                        0   7   6
  Davis's patent curry-comb brushes, to supersede the use of
    iron combs                                                0   5   0
  Chamois leather                                             0   1   9
  Curry combs, best four knocker                              0   1   3
  Mane and trimming combs                                     0   0   4
  Trimming scissors, bent and straight
  Mane pullers and pickers
  Horse scrapers, spurs, whips, &c.
  Pillar and rack chains
  Stable sponge, very best, per lb.                           1   1   0

HARNESS.

                                                              L  s.  d.
                                       { Silver Furniture    11  11   0
  Single Horse Harness, with breeching { Silver and covered  10  10   0
    or kicking straps, lined,          { Brass                9   9   0
    throughout, bits, &c., &c.         { Brass and covered    9   9   0
                                       { Covered              9   9   0

                                       { Silver               9   9   0
  Pony Chaise Harness, to fit about    { Silver and covered   8   8   0
    12 hands high, warranted superior  { Brass                7   7   0
                                       { Brass and covered    7   7   0
                                       { All covered          7   7   0

  Pair Horse Phaeton Harness without    { Silver              25   0   0
    breechings, four times stitched,   { Silver and covered  23   0   0
    with bits all complete, warranted  { Brass               21   0   0
    of the most superior quality       { Brass and covered   21   0   0
                                       { All covered         21   0   0

                                       { Silver              26   5   0
  Tandem Harness for wheel and leader, { Silver and covered  25   0   0
    first style, with bits, reins, &c.,{ Brass               20   0   0
    all complete                       { Brass and covered   20   0   0
                                       { All covered         20   0   0

  Pair of Pony Harness, without        { Silver              21   0   0
    breechings, to fit about 12 hands, { Silver and covered  19   0   0
    superior quality, bits, &c., all   { Brass               17  10   0
    complete                           { Brass and covered   17  10   0
                                       { All covered         17  10   0

Game Bags, Letter Bags, Horse Nets, Dressing Muzzles, Coupling Rings,
India Rubber Cutting Boots.


THE INVISIBLE VENTILATING HEADS OF HAIR.

[Illustration: _Ross and Sons' Method of measuring the Head_,

In. 8-ths.

Round the Head

From Ear to Ear

Forehead to Poll]

THE NATURAL AND UNNATURAL STYLE.

If you wish to excel, study nature; this is particularly applicable
in making ornamental hair, as unless the previous way of wearing
it is imitated, so complete a transformation takes place, that, as
Byron says,--"a mother would not know her son." ROSS and SONS having
succeeded beyond all calculation in producing perfect imitations of
nature, have given the name of the Invisible Ventilating Head of Hair
to their productions, and are enabled to offer them to both Ladies and
Gentlemen, from one guinea and a half upwards.

THE ATRAPILATORY, OR LIQUID HAIR DYE.

The only Dye that really answers for all colours, and does not require
re-doing, but as the hair grows, as it never fades or acquires that
unnatural red or purple tint common to all other dyes. ROSS and
SONS can, with the greatest confidence, recommend the above DYE as
infallible; and ladies or gentlemen requiring it are requested, if
convenient, to have it done the first time at their establishment,
which will enable them to use it afterwards themselves without the
chance of failure. They think it necessary to add that, by attending
strictly to the instructions given with the Dye, numerous parties have
succeeded equally well without coming to them.

BOTANIC WATER AND BEARS' GREASE.

When the hair is becoming thin, and falling off, the only effectual
remedy, besides shaving the head, is the use of the two above-named
articles, applied alternately, the Botanic Water to cleanse the roots
from scurf, and as a stimulant, and the Bears' Grease as a nourisher.
If any further evidence was required of the virtues of Bears' Grease
for renovating and preserving the hair, Mr. Catlin's account of the
quantity used, and the length of hair obtained by some of the North
American Indians, would be a sufficient answer. ROSS and SONS, who
first introduced the use of Bears' Grease in this country, and who fat
and kill the animals, recommend the public to purchase none other but
with their names and addresses printed on pot, or the chances are their
obtaining a spurious article.

THE NEW TOOTH-PICK AND TOOTH-BRUSH.

Thoroughly cleansing between the teeth when used up and down, and
polishing the surface when used crossways, the hair warranted never
to come out; in four strengths, viz.:--No. 1, hard; No. 2, less hard;
No. 3, medium; No. 4, soft. The double anti-pressure nail-brush, which
does not divide the quick from the nails. The triple hair-brush, which
thoroughly searches and cleanses the hair in one-fourth part of the
time of any other method, and acts as both comb and brush combined. The
medium shaving-brush, being a selection of the strongest badgers' hair,
so well secured in the socket as never to come loose. And, though last
not least, the newly-invented "Renovator" Clothes-brush, which makes
an old coat look like a new one, and a new coat to look new double the
usual time. Invented and made only by ROSS and SONS.

THE TEETH AND GENERAL HEALTH.

It may be fairly said, the state of the Teeth depends greatly upon the
state of the bodily health, and the state of the bodily health depend
greatly upon the state of the Teeth. The homoeopathic principle of
infinitesimal doses in all cases of weakness and nervousness, is no
doubt the right one, as nature is not then overpowered, but assisted.
The United Dentists' Tooth Powder carries this out to its utmost
extent, as some of the most strengthening articles in the _Materia
Medica_ are contained in it; and a small portion being gradually
absorbed every day, not only strengthens the gums, but the whole
system. It likewise thoroughly cleanses the teeth, gradually removing
the tartar, purifies the breath, thereby preventing infection, and
corrects acidity both in mouth and stomach. Address ROSS and SONS.

THE FOUR REQUISITES FOR A COMFORTABLE SHAVE.

Firstly, a good Razor. Secondly, a good Strop. Thirdly, good Soap.
Fourthly, a good Shaving Brush. And these are be to obtained, of the
best quality, and newest construction, of ROSS and SONS, who can
strongly recommend their Triple Converted Railway Razor; their Railway
Strop, with Hone attached; their Pearl Shaving Paste, beautifully
scented, and making a durable lather; and their medium badgers' hair
Shaving Brush. They also recommend travellers to inspect their Russian
Dressing Case, which contains the largest number of conveniences in the
smallest space.

Address, ROSS and SONS, 119 & 120, Bishopsgate Street, London.


Under Royal Patronage.

INSTANT RELIEF AND A RAPID CURE OF

ASTHMAS, CONSUMPTION, COUGHS,

AND ALL DISORDERS OF THE BREATH AND LUNGS,

ARE INSURED BY

DR. LOCOCK'S PULMONIC WAFERS.

[asterism] _Small books, containing many hundreds of properly
authenticated testimonials, may be had from every agent._

 Extract of a letter from W. J. Taylor, Esq., Agra and United Service
 Bank, Madras, dated February 13, 1846.

 "In all that I do, I beg you will understand that I am actuated with
 the desire of benefitting my fellow creatures. I consider in very
 truth that the medicine is, 'under Divine Providence,' a blessing and
 a cure; there are many instances here of its efficacy, and it is doing
 good to all classes--European and native.

  (Signed) W. J. TAYLOR.

 From J. D. Marshall, M.D., Lecturer to the Royal Institution, Belfast,
 and Chemist in Ireland to her Majesty the Queen.

  8, High-street, Belfast, Sept. 21, 1847.

 Gentlemen, I have the gratification of stating that from all I have
 been enabled to observe of Dr. Locock's Pulmonic Wafers, they have
 been of eminent service in the alleviation of severe asthmatic coughs,
 pains in the chest, &c.

 I have no doubt that when they become more generally known in the
 north of Ireland, they will be as highly esteemed as they are in other
 parts of the kingdom.

  J. D. MARSHALL, M. D.

 TO SINGERS AND PUBLIC SPEAKERS they are invaluable, as in a
 few hours they remove all hoarseness, and wonderfully increase the
 power and flexibility of the voice.

 They have a pleasant taste. Price 1s. 1-1/2d., 2s. 9d., and 11s. per
 box.

 Agents: DA SILVA and Co., 1, Bride-lane, Fleet-street, London. Sold by
 all Medicine Vendors.


PROTECTED BY ROYAL LETTERS PATENT,

DR. LOCOCK'S

(HAVE NO TASTE OF MEDICINE.)

[Illustration]

FEMALE WAFERS.

PRICE, 1s. 1-1/2d., 2s. 9d., and 11s. per box.

The only Medicine recommended to be taken by Females!

BEWARE OF IMITATIONS!

Unprincipled Persons Counterfeit this medicine in the form of PILLS,
&c. Purchasers must therefore observe that none are Genuine but
"WAFERS," and that the words

"DR. LOCOCK'S WAFERS"

are in the Stamp outside each Box.

OBSERVE.--_There are various Counterfeit Medicines, having
words on the Stamp so_ NEARLY RESEMBLING THESE, _as to mislead
the unwary_. _Purchasers must therefore strictly observe the above
Caution._

 Prepared only by the Proprietor's Agents, DA SILVA & CO., 1, Bride
 Lane, Fleet St., London. Sold by all Medicine Vendors.

 DR. LOCOCK'S FEMALE WAFERS fortify the constitution at all
 periods of life, and in all Nervous Affections act like a charm. They
 remove Heaviness, Fatigue on Slight Exertion, Palpitation of the
 Heart, Lowness of Spirits, Weakness, and allay Pain.

 They create Appetite, and remove Indigestion, Heart-burn, Wind,
 Head-aches, Giddiness, &c.

 In Hysterical Diseases, a proper perseverance in the use of this
 Medicine will be found to effect a Cure after all other means have
 failed.

 [asterism] Full Directions are given with every box.

 NOTE.--These Wafers do not contain any Mineral, and may be
 taken either dissolved in water, or whole.


FAMED THROUGHOUT THE GLOBE.

HOLLOWAY'S PILLS.

THE EARL OF ALDBOROUGH CURED OF A LIVER AND STOMACH COMPLAINT.

_Extract of a Letter from His Lordship, dated Villa Messina, Leghorn_,

  To Professor HOLLOWAY,     _21st February, 1845_.

SIR,--Various circumstances prevented the possibility of my
thanking you before this time, for your politeness in sending me your
Pills as you did. I now take this opportunity of sending you an order
for the amount, and, at the same time, that your Pills have effected a
cure of a disorder in my Liver and Stomach, which all the most eminent
of the Faculty at home, and all over the Continent, had not been able
to effect; nay, not even the waters of Carlsbad and Marienbad. I wish
to have another Box and a Pot of the Ointment, in case any of my family
should ever require either.

  Your most obliged and obedient Servant,
  (Signed) ALDBOROUGH.

Sold at the Establishment of Professor HOLLOWAY, 244, Strand,
(near Temple Bar), London, and by most all respectable Druggists and
Dealers in Medicines throughout the civilised world, at the following
prices:--1s. 1-1/2d., 2s. 9d., 4s. 6d., 11s., 22s., and 33s. each
Box. There is a considerable saving by taking the larger sizes. N.B.
Directions for the guidance of Patients in every Disorder are affixed
to each Box.

HOLLOWAY'S PILLS AND OINTMENT _are Sold in every part of
India_.


THE

NEW BATH GLOVES AND RUBBERS,

Manufactured on a entirely new principle, are the most perfect frictors
for freeing the pores and producing an agreeable re-action.

THE IMPROVED PATENT HORSE-HAIR GLOVES AND STRAPS,

Are indispensable articles of health for all persons travelling by sea
or land, as by friction they promote a healthy action of the skin, than
which nothing can be of greater importance, especially in tropical
climates.

They were first introduced to the two Services and the Public, some
years since, by Major-general ROLT, in his "Treatise on Moral
Command;" and have since possessed the entire approbation of the
Medical Faculty; and, undoubtedly, of all who have resorted to their
use, _in every country where civilization exists_.

It is beyond a doubt, that, by a healthy action of the skin, many
diseases may be escaped, and even that dire malady the ASIATIC
CHOLERA amongst them, as by freeing the pores, acidity of the
stomach is removed, with all its train of annoyances.

_A peculiar Fabric manufactured expressly for the use of Ladies._

MANUFACTURED ONLY BY LAWRENCE AND CO.,

ISLINGTON PARK ROAD,

LONDON.

SOLD BY DRUGGISTS GENERALLY.


CLARK'S

PATENT DIAMOND LAMP,

FOR

INDIA AND THE COLONIES.

[Illustration: Fig. 30.]

THIS Lamp is beyond doubt the best Lamp for India. Royal
Letters Patent have been granted to RICHARD CLARK, for the
recent improvements. In simplicity, in beauty, there is none to equal
the Diamond Lamp. It gives the light of fourteen candles, and burns
for twelve hours without attention. Is so simple, that it cannot be
mismanaged--a wick has been woven expressly for this Lamp, which
ensures a brilliant flame. The Diamond Light is tranquil amid the
draught of the Punkah, and unaffected by currents from the windows
or doors. The Table Lamps (as Fig. 30) are now fitted with a ribbed
cut crystal under-dish, ventilating Punkah top and enamelled shade.
The light and appearance thereby is considerably improved. The Table
Lamps, from L3 18s. complete, to L8 9s., can be had in gold colour or
bronze, or in bronze in relief, which is very handsome, or in artistic
bronze in relief. Also with Derbyshire slate pillar, ornamented. Also
with crystal pillars, plain or cut, which with the ribbed cut crystal
under-dish, has a magnificent effect. The price is from L7 complete, to
L11 10s.; also, Table Lamps can be had plated or electro-plated, from
L7 15s. complete, to L12 12s. complete.

The Table Lamps fitted with an ornamented slate pillar with Ionic
capital, either in gold colour, or bronzed in relief, are very much
recommended for their elegance and durability; the price is, complete,
L5 19s., if fitted with Punkah apparatus; but 14s. less is charged when
the Punkah apparatus is not required.

The Hanging Lamps, with two, three, four, or more burners, are very
superior. They are so simple in construction, that servants cannot
mismanage them. These lamps can be had in gold colour or in bronze in
relief. Each burner gives the light of ten candles, and a three-burner
lamp will illumine a large apartment; but where lights are required
for remote parts of the room, or particular positions, then the
bracket-lamps to fix to the wall are recommended, or lamps to stand on
brackets, or on the mantel-piece, &c. The Hanging Lamps are from L8
10s. to L14 for two burners, complete; for three burners, complete,
from L12 15s. to L18 10s., and so on, according to the number of
burners required.

Bracket Lamps can be protected from external draughts, for L3 15s.,
complete, and for L3 1s. if not required to be so protected.

Study, or Reading, or Writing Lamps, or Sideboard Lamps, or
Mantel-piece Lamps, or Lamps to stand on brackets, or Hall Lamps (as
Fig. 32), are also fitted with Punkah apparatus to protect the light
from draughts of air; the price is L4 10s. complete, but 14s. less if
not required to be fitted with Punkah apparatus.

These Lamps burn admirably with cocoa-nut or olive oils.

Orders are executed with extreme care, so that every article must
render real service.

Extra cotton-holders are always sent with each lamp, so that the
lamp cannot become damaged and thereby unfit for use. All necessary
directions are on each lamp-cotton box.

Cut crystal glass or gold colour Candle Chandeliers and Candelabra.
Candlesticks in gold colour or bronze, or artistic bronzed in relief.
Royal Wax Candles made expressly for warm climates, 14s. per dozen lbs.

Fire-proof lamp chimneys for the Diamond Lamp, 12s. per dozen.

Patent Lamp wicks for the Diamond Lamp, 6s. per gross.

Ground Lotuses for Hanging Lamps (as Fig. 31), or Lamps (as Figs. 32
and 33), are 6s. 6d. each.

Lamp-trimming scissors, 3s. per pair.

Cut under-dishes for Table Lamps, 12s. 6d. each.

The packages for a single lamp, with _et ceteras_, vary in price from
10s. to 18s.

[Illustration: Fig. 32.]

_Orders received through the East India Agents, or direct, by_

THE METROPOLITAN LIGHT COMPANY.

  _RICHARD CLARK_,    }
  _WILLIAM SHEPHERD_, } _Resident Managers_.

447, WEST STRAND, LONDON.

_An Order for payment on some person in England must please accompany
the order._


T. TRELOAR,

BRASS AND IRON BEDSTEAD,

AND

_BEDDING MANUFACTURER_,

42, LUDGATE HILL, LONDON.

ILLUSTRATED PRICE LIST FORWARDED POST FREE.


CHRONOMETER, 61, CORNHILL.

JOHN CARTER, CHRONOMETER MAKER TO THE ROYAL NAVY,

 Takes leave to submit the following high and flattering testimonial
 of his Marine and Pocket Chronometers, and to assure Gentlemen of
 the United Services, Merchants, and Captains, that they may fully
 rely on the steadiness and general uniformity of the rates of
 his Chronometers, Pocket Watches, and Astronomical Clocks, being
 manufactured under his own especial care and attention, regardless of
 time or expense in the perfection of such important instruments.

  _"Royal Observatory, Greenwich, Oct. 22, 1838._

 "I certify that, since the commencement of the annual trials of
 Chronometers at the Royal Observatory, in competition for rewards
 offered by the Government for the best Chronometers, Mr. CARTER,
 CHRONOMETER MAKER, of TOOLEY STREET, has obtained a
 greater number of rewards than any other Chronometer Maker, and that
 he obtained the two last rewards given by the Government. I certify,
 also, that since I have had charge of the Royal Observatory, several
 Chronometers constructed by Mr. CARTER, either belonging to
 the Royal Navy, or on trial for purchase by the Government, have been
 rated at the Royal Observatory, and that they have generally been
 extremely good.

  (Signed)  "G. B. AIREY."

 Chronometers and Watches carefully adjusted, timed, and rated or
 exchanged.--61, CORNHILL.


CHUBBS' LOCKS, FIRE-PROOF SAFES, AND CASH BOXES.

CHUBBS' PATENT DETECTOR LOCKS give perfect security from false keys and
picklocks, and also detect any attempt to open them. They are made of
all sizes, and for every purpose to which locks are applied, and are
strong, secure, simple, and durable.

CHUBBS' PATENT LATCH, for front doors, counting-house doors, &c., is
simple in construction, low in price, and quite secure. The keys are
particularly neat and portable.

CHUBBS' PATENT FIRE-PROOF SAFES, BOOKCASES, CHESTS, &c., made entirely
of strong wrought-iron, so as effectually to resist the falling of
brick-work, timber, &c., in case of fire, and are also perfectly secure
from the attacks of the most skilful burglars.

CHUBBS' CASH and DEED BOXES, fitted with the Detector Locks.

CHUBB and SON, 57, ST. PAUL'S CHURCH-YARD, LONDON.


BASS'S EAST INDIA PALE ALE.

H. & G. BERRY AND CO., 3, ST. JAMES'S STREET,

LONDON,

THE AGENTS for Bottling this celebrated Ale, have on hand a
large Stock of the above in excellent condition, in quart and pint
bottles, and casks of eighteen gallons and upwards. They have always in
good condition

BARCLAY'S DOUBLE BROWN STOUT, STOUT and PORTER, and the STRONG
BURTON and SCOTCH ALES, in casks and bottles.

[asterism] _Mess of Regiments and Gentlemen going Abroad, can still
be supplied with some of the choicest brewings._


ALL OVER THE WORLD.

  E. MOSES & SON, as the Monarchs of Trade,
  Not only in Britain have mightily sway'd,
  But proofs of their prowess have long been display'd
                                          _All over the World_.
  Full many a vessel its service has done,
  In bearing the Goods of E. MOSES & SON,
  Whose Fame, by this means, has triumphantly run
                                          _All over the World_.
  E. MOSES & SON sell attire as they ought,
  With elegance fashion'd, and famously wrought,
  And you never would equal their dress, if you sought
                                          _All over the World_.
  How many, when leaving their own native land,
  To MOSES repair with their Cash in their hand:
  And thus does the glory of MOSES expand
                                          _All over the World_.
  And now, worthy reader, if _you_ are about
  To sail on the Seas for a long, distant route,
  Come and purchase of MOSES, whose Flag is spread out
                                          _All over the World_.
  Whatever you wish to obtain, ere you go,
  May be cheaply obtained at their noted Depot;
  Then hasten to MOSES, whose benefits flow
                                          _All over the World_.
  Thus aid Messrs. MOSES, the Monarchs of trade,
  Who, not only in Britain have mightily sway'd,
  But proofs of whose triumphs have long been display'd
                                          _All over the World_.


  READY MADE.                                                  L  s. d
  Mens' Spring and Summer Wrappers                      from   0  8  6
  The Bulwer Pacha Paletot and every description of  }   --    0 12  6
    light Over Coats                                 }
  Cloth Over Coat of light texture & handsomely trim'd   --    1  1  0
  Ditto ditto lined with Silk.                           --    1  8  0
  Ditto ditto Superior quality                           --    1 18  0
  Jean and Holland Blouses                               --    0  2  9
  Fancy Victoria ditto                                   --    0  4  0
  Tweed  ditto                                           --    0  4  6
  Dress Coats                                            --    0 17  0
  Frock ditto                                            --    1  0  0
  Spring and Summer Trowsers                             --    0  4  0
  Doeskin and Buckskin ditto                             --    0  7  6
  Spring and Summer Vests in every variety               --    0  1  6
  Black & Figured Satin Vests                            --    0  4  6
  Black ditto Superior quality                           --    0  9  6
  White Marcella Vests                                   --    0  4  6
  Men's Black Cloth Vests                                --    0  3  6
  Boys' Spring & Summer do                               --    0  0 10
  Boys' Hussar & Tunic Suits                             --    0 15  0
  Men's Fishing Coats in great variety                   --    0  4  0

  MADE TO MEASURE.
  Paletots made froma variety of material}              from   1  1  0
    fitted for Summer wear               }
  Ditto very elegantly trimm'd ditto                     --    1  8  0
  Superior Cloth of a light texture                      --    1 15  0
  Ditto ditto lined with Silk                            --    2  2  0
  Ditto Dress Coat                                       --    1 12  0
  Best ditto                                             for   2 15  0
  Superfine Frock ditto                                  --    1 15  0
  Best ditto ditto                                       --    3  3  0
  Fancy Doeskin Trowsers                                 from  0 16  6
  Black ditto ditto                                      --    0 16  0
  Best ditto ditto                                       --    1  6  0
  Black Cloth Vests                                      --    0  8  6
  Best ditto ditto                                       --    0 13  6
  Splendid Satin ditto                                   --    0 14  6
  Best ditto ditto                                       --    0 18  6
  Hussar and Tunic Suits                                 --    1  5  0
  Superfine ditto ditto                                  --    1 15  0
  Men's White Marcella Vests                             --    0  7  0
  Fishing Coats in endless variety           from 10s. 6d. to  1 16  0
  Elegant Dressing Robes in great variety        from 16s. to  5  0  0

_Mourning to any extent at Five minutes' notice. A Suit of Clothes
complete for_ L1 10s.

The new Book entitled _The Great Fact_, with full directions for
Self-measurement, can be had on application, or forwarded Post-free to
any part of the Kingdom.

NOTICE.--The Shawl and Parasol departments are now replete
with Novelty of the Season.

OBSERVE.--Any Article purchased either Ready-made, or made to
Measure, if not approved of, _will be exchanged or the money returned_.

E. MOSES and SON, Tailors, Woollen Drapers, Clothiers, Hatters,
Hosiers, Furriers, Boot and Shoemakers, and General Outfitters, 154,
155, 156, & 157, Minories, and 83, 84, 85, & 86, Aldgate, City, London.
All communicating with each other, and forming one vast Establishment.

CAUTION.--E. MOSES and SON regret having to guard against
imposition, but having heard that the untradesmanlike falsehood
of being connected with them, or it is the same Concern, has been
resorted to in many instances, and for obvious reasons; they beg to
state they have no connexion with any other House in or out of London,
except their Branch Establishments, 36, Fargate, Sheffield, and 19,
Thornton's-buildings, Bradford, Yorkshire, and those who require Cheap
and Genuine Clothing, &c., should call at or send to the Minories, and
Aldgate, City, London, or either of the Branches as above.

TAKE NOTICE.--This Establishment is Closed from Sun-set,
Friday, till Sun-set, Saturday, when Business is resumed till 12
o'Clock.




WORKS ON INDIA, &c.,

PUBLISHED BY

WM. H. ALLEN & CO.,

7, LEADENHALL STREET.


Biographical Index to the Historians of Muhammedan India. By Sir
HENRY M. ELLIOT, K.C.B., Foreign Secretary to the Government
of India. Vol. I. 8vo. 16s.

[asterism] _To be completed in Four Volumes._


History of the British Empire in India, to the close of Lord
Ellenborough's Administration. By EDWARD THORNTON, Esq.
Illustrated by Maps, showing the Possessions of the East-India Company
at various times. 6 vols. 8vo., cloth lettered, L4. 16s.

 "It (Thornton's India) presents such a mass of valuable and authentic
 information respecting the origin, government, and resources of our
 Indian territories, as is to be found in no other publication. * * *
 It is the best, the most comprehensive, and the most original history
 of India which has yet appeared, and we cannot doubt its becoming the
 most popular, if, indeed, it be not so already. The style in which
 it is written is clear, vigorous, and terse, and free from those
 far-fetched, flowery, and pompous clap-traps which too many writers
 of the present day are apt to inflict upon their readers."--_United
 Service Gazette._

 "The style of the work is free, rapid, and spirited, and bears marks
 of a thorough familiarity with the subject. Every Englishman ought to
 be acquainted with the history of the British empire in India, and we
 therefore cordially recommend this work to our readers."--_Patriot._

 "Mr. Thornton's history is comprehensive in its plan, clear and
 forcible in its style, and impartial in its tone."--_Globe._

 "A sound, an impartial, and a searching composition; chaste, elegant,
 and flowing in diction, profound in thought, and thoroughly logical in
 reasoning."--_Colonial Magazine._


A Dictionary, Hindustani and English; to which is added a
reversed part, ENGLISH and HINDUSTANI. By DUNCAN
FORBES, LL.D., Professor of Oriental Languages in King's College,
London; Member of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and
Ireland; Member of the Asiatic Society of Paris, &c. In 1 Vol., royal
8vo., cloth, L2. 12s. 6d., or half-bound, L2. 16s.

 "The present volume, by Dr. Forbes, we regard as an inestimable
 contribution to our Oriental literature, and worthy of a more extended
 notice than we can give to such a work. To compose a lexicon of the
 Hindustani tongue, suited to the present advanced state of this and
 kindred studies, demands in its author an uncommon share of learning
 and critical sagacity,--that he be cautious, well practised in
 analysis and arrangement, with ability to assign to secondary and
 figurative meanings a due position, a philosophical classification
 under their proper themes. To this part of the task Dr. Forbes has
 brought rare qualifications, many years' experience, great aptness
 in teaching the Oriental tongues, much tact with respect to the kind
 and degree of help required to their thorough mastery. He has already
 done good service; his former works have stimulated many to acquire
 that knowledge which is essential to an efficient discharge of the
 various offices of trust and responsibility of every Indian resident.
 To say that it is an entirely new work would be to claim for it an
 equivocal character; but we do say _it is a matchless production of
 its kind_, every way calculated to sustain its author's well-earned
 reputation. The plan and principal authorities are fully detailed
 in the preface, to which we refer our readers; the classical works
 have been diligently explored; the more modern and valuable works
 of Thompson, Herklots, Cox, and H. M. Elliot have been laid under
 contribution for particular terms and local usage; the aim has been
 to compile a thoroughly usable and economical book. The words are
 given in alphabetical order; the leading word, and the meaning of
 which it, its derivatives and compounds, are susceptible, are given
 with great care;--in a word, if condensation and definiteness, if due
 distinction between the provinces of a grammarian and lexicographer,
 if to avoid faults, to reject things of a doubtful utility, to
 supply deficiencies, and do all this with a determination that
 typography, paper, and price shall be unexceptionable,--if these in
 combination be a recommendation to an author and his work, then Dr.
 Forbes's Dictionary is fully worthy of the patronage of the patrons
 and students of Hindustani literature. We have to add, for we must
 not omit to mention, that it contains a second part, or a reversed
 dictionary--a very valuable companion indeed."--_Friend of India,
 published at Serampore._


Grammar of the Hindustani Language, in the Oriental and Roman
Characters, with numerous Copper-plate Illustrations of the Persian
and Devanagari Systems of Alphabetic Writing. To which is added, a
copious Selection of Easy Extracts for reading in the Persi-Arabic
and Devanagari Characters, forming a complete introduction to the
Bagh-o-Bahar, together with a Vocabulary and explanatory Notes. By
DUNCAN FORBES, LL.D. 8vo., cloth, 12s.


Hindustani Manual; a Pocket Companion for those who visit India
in any capacity, consisting of a compendious Grammar and Exercises on
its more prominent peculiarities; with a Selection of Useful Phrases
and Dialogues, on familiar subjects, together with a Vocabulary of
useful Words, English and Hindustani, showing at the same time the
Difference of Idiom between the two languages. By DUNCAN FORBES,
LL.D. New Edition, considerably improved, 18mo., bound, 5s. 6d.

 "The work can be honestly recommended to all who are desirous of
 acquiring the elements of the language, or of making themselves
 understood among the people of this country. We have seldom, if ever,
 seen such a small pocket-companion, with such a variety of useful
 instruction. The language of the Vocabulary and of the Dialogues
 appears quite unexceptionable. Any one acquainted with Hindustani will
 at once recognize its idiomatic accuracy, and cheerfully recommend
 it to the notice of all those who desire to come out to India not
 altogether unprepared to convey their own wishes to those who surround
 them."--_Friend of India._


Grammar of the Persian Language. To which is added, a Selection
of Easy Extracts for Reading, together with a copious Vocabulary. By
DUNCAN FORBES, LL.D. Second edition. Royal 8vo., cloth, 12s.
6d.


Bagh-o-Bahar; consisting of entertaining Tales in the Hindustani
Language. By MIR AMMAN, of Delhi. A new edition, carefully
collated with original Manuscripts, having the essential vowel-points
and punctuation marked throughout. To which is added a Vocabulary by
DUNCAN FORBES, LL.D. Royal 8vo., cloth, 15s.

 [asterism] The Bagh-o-Bahar is the test-book in which Cadets and
 Assistant Surgeons have to pass an examination in India. This edition
 was prepared under the authority of the Honourable the East-India
 Company.


Oriental Penmanship: an Essay for facilitating the reading
and writing of the Ta'lik Character, as generally used in the East
in Persian and Hindustani Manuscripts and Printed Works; consisting
of various Specimens of Fine Writing, accurately lithographed from
Original Native MSS., accompanied by Letter-press Descriptions,
together with explanatory Notes and Observations. By DUNCAN FORBES,
LL.D. 4to. cloth, 8s.

The British World in the East; a Guide to India, China,
Australia, South Africa, and the other possessions or connections
of Great Britain in the Eastern and Southern Seas. By LEITCH
RITCHIE. 2 vols. 8vo., cloth lettered, L1. 4s.

The object of this work is to embody everything of a practical
nature that is known of the countries in question, in an historical
description of the course of that great eastward stream of commerce
and colonization which has commenced a new era in the destinies of the
world.

COUNTRIES DESCRIBED.

  British India.
  Beeloochistan.
  Affghanistan.
  Cashmere.
  Thibet.
  Burmah.
  Siam.
  Malay Peninsula.
  Indian Archipelago.
  Empire of Anam.
  Chinese Empire.
  New Zealand and the other Islands of the Pacific.
  Japan.
  Australia with Tasmania.
  Islands of the Indian Ocean.
  Southern Africa.
  Islands of the South
    Atlantic Ocean.

 "An able summary of events connected with the rise, progress, and
 present state of the British Empire in the Eastern hemisphere. The
 author has well worked out the desire of the publishers, 'to have
 the spirit and results of history in a form at once popular and
 practical;' and although he professes to give only 'the heads of
 knowledge,' there is nothing dry in the manner in which his task has
 been performed; on the contrary, the book is exceedingly readable,
 and will be found of great value, both as a work of reference, and
 as presenting a comprehensive and interesting sketch of an important
 portion of a mighty empire. A work which seems, in every respect,
 worthy of public patronage."--_Foreign Quarterly Review._

 "The title of this book will show its comprehensive character, and
 those who wish to have an Encyclopaedia of information on Eastern and
 Southern history, commerce, everything, in fact, but physical science,
 and not without a good deal even on that, will here find what they
 require. It is a condensation of the contents of multifarious volumes,
 and may justly be termed 'many things in few words.' If read, it will
 impart to the student nearly all that is known on the subject to which
 it relates, and afford him withal much entertainment. If kept as a
 book of reference, few questions relating to Eastern affairs can arise
 for which it will not furnish a complete answer."--_Indian Mail._

 "This book will become invaluable for reference, since it embraces all
 the leading circumstances in the histories and position (social and
 political) of India, China, and Australia."--_Court Journal._

 "This comprehensive title-page may be regarded as a faint outline of
 the prodigious mass of information which is contained in the work to
 which it belongs. Divided into ten books, subdivided into forty-seven
 chapters, and consisting of 1,000 rather closely-printed 8vo. pages,
 the reading, research, and labour, both of mind and pen, requisite for
 its production, may readily be supposed to have been great. It was
 with no slight expectation that we sat down to a perusal of his (Mr.
 Ritchie's) volumes; and we must do him the justice to say, that our
 anticipations have been more than realized. By judicious management,
 and by skilfully and forcibly exercising the art of condensation, he
 has succeeded in drawing within one lucid focus an infinite variety
 of subjects, all more or less interesting and important."--_Naval and
 Military Gazette._


History of the Punjab, and of the Rise, Progress, and present
Condition of the Sect and Nation of the Sikhs, including a full account
of the Military Operations on the Banks of the Sutlej in 1846, and the
Proclamations and Treaties of the Governor-General in India relating
thereto. By THOMAS THORNTON, Esq. 2 vols. post 8vo., cloth
lettered, L1. 1s.

 "The work gives all the information on the history and topography of
 the Punjab that could be desired; and in the fullness and completeness
 of its details, and the diligence with which information has been
 collected from every available source, constitutes this the best
 and most authentic work extant on the important country of which it
 treats."--_Britannia._


The East-India Gazetteer; containing Descriptions of the
Empires, Kingdoms, Cities, Towns, Districts, &c., of Hindostan and
adjacent Countries, with Sketches of the Manners, Customs, &c. of their
various Inhabitants. By WALTER HAMILTON. Second edition, 2
vols. 8vo., cloth, L1. 12s.

 "A valuable and excellent work."--_Times._


The Memoirs of a Griffin; or, a Cadet's First Year in India.
By Captain BELLEW. Illustrated from Designs by the Author. 2
vols. post 8vo., cloth lettered, L1. 1s.

 "Our author deserves a favourable hearing, not only for the spirit
 of hilarity and the invariable good humour with which he encounters
 his various difficulties, but because the recital presents us with
 an accurate and faithful account of the manners of the luxurious
 East. The minutiae of domestic life, all the various usages of the
 presidencies, together with spicy military detail, which supply
 us with a very welcome and agreeable view of the way in which our
 fellow-subjects contrive to make themselves happy under the warm
 sunbeams of the Orient. There is a constant succession of new scenes,
 a great diversity of actors, and much new matter in this work; the
 whole enlivened by a _bonhomie_ which gives it its most interesting
 aspect."--_Metropolitan Magazine._


Travels in Western India; embracing a visit to the Sacred
Mountains of the Jains, and the most celebrated Shrines of the Hindu
Faith between Rajpootana and the Indus, and an account of the ancient
city of Nehrwalla. By the late Lieut.-Col. JAMES TOD, Author
of "The Annals of Rajast'han." Royal 4to. cloth boards. L3. 13s. 6d.


Instructions by Major-Gen. Sir John Malcolm, G.C.B., K.L.S.,
&c., to Officers acting under his Orders in Central India, A.D. 1821.
Post 8vo. cloth. 2s. 6d.


Advice to Cadets and other Young Persons proceeding to India.
By Capt. KERR, formerly Commandant of Gentlemen Cadets at
Calcutta. Second edition, post 8vo., cloth, 5s.

 "A man of experience in the superintendence of Cadets, coming forward
 in this unaffected and truly parental manner with his advice, is sure
 to be listened to."--_Overland Paper._

 "The words may be few, but they contain much valuable information, and
 furnish much salutary advice."--_Conservative Journal._

 "The advice is so sensible, so judicious, so friendly, and so
 prudent."--_Metropolitan Magazine._


The Hand-Book of India. A Guide to the Stranger and Traveller,
and a Companion to the Resident. By J. H. STOCQUELER, Esq.,
late Editor of the "Calcutta Englishman." Post 8vo., cloth lettered,
price 14s.

This publication embraces, in a condensed form, complete and accurate
information respecting the Topography, Climate, Government, Commerce,
Laws, Institutions, and Products of India; the Manners and Customs of
the Inhabitants; the Method of Travelling throughout the Empire, and
the Expense attendant thereon; the Condition of the European (English)
Society; the Rules and Regulations of the various branches of the
executive; the Cost and Manner of proceeding to India; the Sports,
Ceremonies, and Pageants common to the Country, &c. &c.

 "Mr. Stocqueler's excellent Hand-book of India."--_Foreign Quarterly
 Review._

 "An able, interesting, and comprehensive work."--_Morning Herald._

 "Mr. Stocqueler's Hand-book of India is entitled to no inconsiderable
 praise."--_Spectator._

 "There can be no hesitation in saying that the plan and execution of
 this Hand-book are equally excellent; that it is the most complete and
 accurate vademecum which has yet appeared, and cannot fail to be both
 interesting and useful to all those whom business or pleasure may send
 to India."--_Friend of India, published at Serampore._

 "We can safely recommend this 'Guide' as one which will impart a
 correct notion of all those parts of the continent of British India
 which are the principal places of resort of Englishmen proceeding
 from this country to enter the service of Government, or embark in
 commercial, agricultural, or other pursuits."--_Atlas._

 "This, for what it professes to do, is truly an excellent book. As is
 stated in the preface, it contains at one view a very complete outline
 of everything relating to India which may be sought to be known; and
 such pains have been taken to give the information, in a form as clear
 as it is ample, that we might say it was altogether a history as well
 as a Hand-book."--_Literary Gazette._


Rambles in Ceylon; minute Details of Scenes and Impressions. By
Lieut. DE BUTTS, H.M.'s 61st Regiment. Post 8vo. 10s.


Treatise on Field Fortification and Artillery. By Major
HECTOR STRAITH. 4th Edition. 8vo. cloth, with folio Plans. L2.
2s.


Treatise on Military Surveying; including Sketching in the
Field, &c. By Lieut.-Col. BASIL JACKSON. Third Edition, 8vo.
cloth. 14s.


Bactrian Coins; Note on the Historical Results deducible from
Recent Discoveries in Afghanistan. By
H. T. PRINSEP, Esq. 8vo. cloth. 15s.


Travels in the Punjab, Afghanistan, and Turkistan, to Balk,
Bokhara, and Herat; and a Visit to Great Britain and Germany. By
MOHAN LAL. 8vo. cloth, lettered, 16s.

 "To the readers of this volume we can promise much amusement, and no
 slight portion of information."--_Naval and Military Gazette._

 "This is one of the most extraordinary volumes in reference to India
 that has issued from the press for a considerable time."--_Cheltenham
 Journal._

 "On a variety of subjects it affords both information and amusement in
 no inconsiderable degree."--_United Service Magazine._


The Regimental Moonshi, being a course of Reading in Hindustani,
designed to assist Officers and Assistant Surgeons on the Madras
Establishment preparing for the Examination ordered by Government. By
Captain E. T. COX. Royal 8vo. 18s.

Journal of Asiatic Society of Bengal, published monthly. Per
number, 3s. 6d.


Chinese Repository, published monthly. Per number, 2s.


Thugs of India, illustrations of their History and Practices,
and Notices of some of the proceedings of the Government of India for
the suppression of the Crime of Thuggee. 8vo. cloth. 15s.


The East India Register and Army List, (Published Half-yearly);
containing complete Lists of the Company's Servants, at home and
abroad; Regulations respecting the appointment of Writers, Cadets, &c.,
compiled from the official returns received at the East-India House. By
F. CLARK, of the Secretary's Office, East-India House. 1 Thick
Vol. 12mo. Sewed, 10s., or 11s. 6d. strongly bound.

[asterism] Separate Presidencies--Bengal, 6s.; Madras, 5s.; Bombay, 5s.


Dictionary of the Chinese Language, in Three Parts. By R.
MORRISON, D.D.: viz.--

 1. Chinese and English, arranged according to the Radicals. 3 vols.
 royal 4to. L7. 10s.

 2. Chinese and English, arranged alphabetically. 2 vols. royal 4to.
 L6. 6s.

 3. English and Chinese. Royal 4to. 31s. 6d.

[asterism] _Each Part forms a complete Dictionary._


Sanscrit Plays. The Mrichchakati, or the Toy-cart; Vikrama
and Urvasi, or the Hero and the Nymph; Uttara Rama Cheritra, or
Continuation of the History of Rama; Malati and Madhava, or the Stolen
Marriage; Mudra Rakshasa, or the Signet of the Minister; Retnavali, or
the Necklace, translated from the original Sanscrit; together with an
account of the Dramatic System of the Hindus, Notices of the different
Dramas, &c. By Professor H. H. WILSON, of the University of
Oxford. Second Edition. 2 vols. 8vo. L1. 1s.


Scenes and Characteristics of Hindostan, with Sketches of
Anglo-Indian Society. By Miss EMMA ROBERTS. Second Edition. 2
vols. post 8vo. cloth. 18s.

 "Miss Roberts's pictures are all drawn with great spirit and accuracy,
 and remarkable for the truth of their colouring."--_Quarterly Review._


The Overland Guide Book, a complete epitome of useful
information for the Overland Traveller to India _via_ Egypt: with
Remarks upon Outfit, &c. By Capt. JAMES BARBER, H.C.S. 2nd
Edition. Post 8vo. cloth. 5s.

 "The advice furnished is not only sound and honest, but also judicious
 and practicable.... The individual whose pleasure or business
 leads him to traverse the route treated of, will find inseparable
 disappointment and irretrievable inconvenience if lacking the
 information contained in its pages: for the author is not only well
 acquainted with his subject, but has carefully studied the wants and
 difficulties of the race of travellers of either sex."--_Times._


Despatches, Minutes, and Correspondence of the Marquess
Wellesley, K.G., during his Administration in India. Revised by his
LORDSHIP. 5 Vols. 8vo. cloth, with Portrait, Map, &c. L6. 10s.

 "A publication of extraordinary interest."--_Edinburgh Review._


A Gazetteer of the Punjab, Sinde, Afghanistan, Beloochistan,
and Neighbouring States, compiled by authority of the Honourable Court
of Directors of the East-India Company, and chiefly from documents in
their possession. By EDWARD THORNTON, Esq. 2 vols. 8vo. L1. 5s.


The East-India Calculator; or Guide to the Merchant and Trader,
in computation of Interest, Commission, Rent, Wages, &c. in Indian
Money; containing copious Tables of the Exchanges between London,
Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay, and of the relative Value of Coins
current in Hindostan, Tables of the Weights of India and China, with
their respective Proportions, &c.; also an Account of the Moneys,
Weights, and Measures of India, China, Persia, Arabia, &c., collected
from the best sources. By THOMAS THORNTON, Esq. 8vo. cloth.
21s.


Cotton-Wool, Raw Silk, and Indigo, Papers respecting the
cultivation and manufacture of. Printed by order of the Honourable
East-India Company. 8vo. 12s.


The Ship, its Origin and Progress, a complete Naval History;
together with a Description of every kind of Vessel, to the close of
1848. Illustrated by Plates, and accompanied by a Book of Flags of all
Nations. By FRANCIS STEINITZ. 4to. half-bound. L2. 10s.


Hints to Cadets; with a few Observations on the Military Service
of the Honourable East-India Company. By CAPTAIN POSTANS,
Bombay Army. Post 8vo. cloth. 3s. 6d.


The Customs and Manners of the Mussulmans of India, with a full
and exact Account of their various Rites and Ceremonies from the Moment
of Birth to the Hour of Death. By G. A. HERKLOTS, M.D. 8vo.
16s.


Medical Advice to the Indian Stranger. By JOHN M'COSH,
M.D., Member of the Bengal Medical Service. Post 8vo. cloth
lettered. 5s. 6d.

 "The Cadet may accept this as a valuable addition to his luggage. It
 contains, in a short space, a mass of useful information for Europeans
 visiting India. People of all classes will find something in it
 applicable to their particular circumstances and position; and to
 individuals connected with the military or civil service it will be
 especially valuable. The medical hints are thoroughly practical, and
 the notes upon climate and diet cannot be too earnestly recommended to
 the attention of all our countrymen in the East."--_Atlas._

 "We cordially recommend the work as an exceedingly sensible,
 well-written book, replete with useful and even valuable
 information."--_Naval and Military Gazette._


Horsburgh's Directory. The India Directory; or, Directions
for Sailing to and from the East-Indies, China, Australia, and the
interjacent Ports of Africa and South America. Compiled chiefly from
Original Journals of the Honourable Company's Ships, and from the
Observations and Remarks resulting from the Experience of Twenty-One
Years in the Navigation of those Seas. By JAMES HORSBURGH,
Esq., F.R.S., &c. Fifth Edition. 2 vols. 4to., cloth lettered. L4. 6s.


Horsburgh's Charts, for the Navigation from England to India and
China, and throughout the Eastern Seas, viz.--

  1. North Atlantic Ocean. 6s.
  2. South Atlantic Ocean. 7s. 6d.
  3. Anchorage at Gough's Island. 2s.
  4. Bird's Islands and Doddington Rock. 3s. 6d.
  5 & 6. Cape of Good Hope, S. E. Africa, and Madagascar Seas. 2 sheets. 10s. 6d.
  7. Indian Ocean. 7s. 6d.
  8. Arabian Sea and East Africa. 7s. 6d.
  9. Hindoostan Coasts and Islands. 7s. 6d.
  10. Bombay Harbour. 10s. 6d.
  11. Goa Road and River and Murmagoa Anchorage. 7s. 6d.
  12. Maldiva Islands and Channels. 5s.
  13. Bay of Bengal. 6s.
  14. Peninsula and Islands of India, East of Bengal Bay. 9s.
  15. West Coast of Sumatra. 6s.
  16. Straits of Malacca and Singapore. 1 sheet. 7s. 6d.
  17, 18, & 19. Straits of Malacca and Singapore. 3 sheets. 18s.
  20. Strait of Sunda. 6s.
  21. Straits of Banca and Gaspar. 7s. 6d.
  22. Carimata Passage and Borneo West Coast. 7s. 6d.
  23. Straits of Rhio, Durian, Lingin, and Singapore. 7s. 6d.
  24 & 25. China Sea and Coasts adjacent. 2 sheets. 15s.
  26. Canton River and its approximate Channels. 7s. 6d.
  27. East Coast of China. 8s. 6d.
  28. Bashee Islands and Channels between Luzon and Formosa. 3s. 6d.
  29, 30, & 31. Eastern Passages to China. 3 sheets, L1. 11s. 6d.
  32. Passages through the Barrier Reefs, Australia East. 4s.


Maps of India and China.

_All from the latest Surveys, and drawn by_ JOHN WALKER.


A Newly constructed and improved Map of India,

 Compiled chiefly from Surveys executed by Order of the Hon. East-India
 Company. On six sheets--Size 5 ft. 3 in. wide; 5 ft. 4 in. high. L2.
 12s. 6d.; or on cloth, in a case, L3. 13s. 6d.

Map of India;

 From the most recent Authorities. On two sheets--Size, 2 ft. 10 in.
 wide; 3 ft. 3 in. high. 18s.; or on cloth, in a case, 25s.


Map of the Western Provinces of Hindoostan,

 The Punjab, Cabool, Sinde, &c.; including all the States between
 Candahar and Allahabad. On four sheets--Size 4 ft. 4 in. wide; 4 ft. 4
 in. high. 31s. 6d.; or on cloth, in a case, 45s.


Map of the Punjab and Sikh Territory.

On one sheet. 5s.; or on cloth, in a case, 6s.


Map of Affghanistan and the Adjacent Countries.

 On one sheet--Size 2 ft. 3 in. wide; 2 ft. 9 in. high. 9s.; or on
 cloth, in a case, 12s.


Map of the Overland Routes between England & India,

 With the other Lines of Communication. On one sheet--Size 2 ft. 9 in.
 wide; 2 ft. 2 in. high. 9s.; or on cloth, in a case, 12s.


Map of the Routes in India;

 With Tables of Distances between the principal Towns and Military
 Stations. On one sheet--Size 2 ft. 3 in. wide; 2 ft. 9 in. high. 9s.;
 or on cloth, in a case, 12s.


Map of China,

 From the most Authentic Information. One large sheet--Size 2 ft. 7 in.
 wide; 2 ft. 2 in. high. 8s.; or on cloth, in a case, 11s.


Map of India and China, Burmah, Siam, the Malay Peninsula, and the
Empire of Assam.

 On two sheets--Size 4 ft. 3 in. wide; 3 ft. 4 in. high. 21s.; or on
 cloth, in a case, 30s.


_Published immediately on the Arrival of the_ MARSEILLES
PORTION _of each_ OVERLAND DESPATCH.

32 closely-printed pages, price 1s. Stamped, or 24s. per annum.

ALLEN'S INDIAN MAIL,

AND

Register of Intelligence

FROM BRITISH AND FOREIGN INDIA, CHINA,

AND

ALL PARTS OF THE EAST.

This Paper furnishes a full, exact, and authentic body of information
respecting the countries above named, compiled not merely from public
journals, but from private and exclusive sources, to the latest date.
The intelligence may be classed under the following general heads:--

A SUMMARY AND REVIEW,

in which the substance of the news brought by each Mail is digested
into a perspicuous narrative, with critical comments.

POLITICAL AND LOCAL INTELLIGENCE

from each of the Presidencies of India, from China, Persia, and other
Eastern countries.

GOVERNMENT GENERAL ORDERS, COURTS-MARTIAL, &c. APPOINTMENTS, FURLOUGHS,
&c.

Arrival and Departures of Ships and Passengers in India.

REPORTS OF TRADE AND MONEY MARKETS.

The intelligence under these heads is so arranged as to be readily
referred to, the same being alphabetically dispersed.

THE HOME INTELLIGENCE RELATING TO INDIA,

besides original leading articles, Correspondence, and Reviews of
Books, comprehends Proceedings in Parliament, Appointments, Casualties,
Arrivals, Departures, Extension of Furloughs, and all Affairs connected
with India and the Services.

LITERATURE AND SCIENCE.

Under this head, each number of the INDIAN MAIL is enriched
with matter, original and selected, archaeological, critical, and
miscellaneous, illustrative of the literature and science of the East.

Each year's Papers form a moderate-sized volume, which, with its
Analytical Index, forms a complete ASIATIC ANNUAL REGISTER and
LIBRARY OF REFERENCE.

The contemporary Press has pronounced the INDIAN MAIL to be
INDISPENSABLE to all those who have friends or relatives in
the East, as affording the only _correct_ information regarding the
Services, Movements of Troops, Shipping, and all events of Domestic and
Individual interest.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Overland Guide-book, by James Barber

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OVERLAND GUIDE-BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 45706.txt or 45706.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/7/0/45706/

Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
