The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Happy Average, by Brand Whitlock

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Happy Average

Author: Brand Whitlock

Illustrator: Howard Chandler Christy

Release Date: May 23, 2014 [EBook #45728]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAPPY AVERAGE ***




Produced by Peter Bayes, Roger Frank and the online
Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net





[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           The Happy Average

                           By BRAND WHITLOCK

                               AUTHOR OF
                   "Her Infinite Variety," "The 13th
                            District, etc."

                             ILLUSTRATED BY
                        HOWARD CHANDLER CHRISTY

                           A. L. BURT COMPANY
                         Publishers    New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            COPYRIGHT, 1904
                       THE BOBBS-MERRILL COMPANY

                                OCTOBER

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           The Happy Average

                               CHAPTER I

                          A YOUNG MAN'S FANCY

"Come on, old man."

Lawrence led the way with a jaunty step that was intended to show his
easy footing with the Carters. But Marley lagged behind. Even if calling
on girls had not been such a serious business with him, he could not
forget that he was just graduated from college and that a certain
dignity befitted him. He wished Lawrence would not speak so loud; the
girls might hear, and think he was afraid; he wished to keep the truth
from them as long as possible. He had already caught a glimpse of the
girls, or thought he had, but before he could make sure, the vague white
figures on the veranda stirred; he heard a scurrying, and the loose bang
of a screen door. Then it was still. Lawrence laughed--somehow, as
Marley felt, derisively.

The way from the sidewalk up to the Carters' veranda was not long, of
course, though it seemed long to Marley, and Marley's deliberation made
it seem long to Lawrence. They paused at the steps of the veranda, and
Lawrence made a low bow.

"Good evening, Mrs. Carter," he said. "Ah, Captain, you here too?"

Marley had not noticed the captain, or Mrs. Carter; they sat there so
quietly, enjoying the cool of the evening, or such cool as a July
evening can find in central Ohio.

"My friend, Mr. Marley, Mrs. Carter--Glenn Marley--you've heard of him,
Captain."

Marley bowed and said something. The presentation there in the darkness
made it rather difficult for him, and neither the captain nor his wife
moved. Lawrence sat down on the steps and fanned himself with his hat.

"Been a hot day, Captain," he said. "Think there's any sign of rain?" He
sniffed the air. The captain did not need to sniff the air to be able to
reply, in a voice that rumbled up from his bending figure, that he had
no hope of any.

"Mayme's home, ain't she?" asked Lawrence, turning to Mrs. Carter.

"I'll go see," said Mrs. Carter, and she rose quickly, as if glad to get
away, and the screen door slammed again.

"Billy was in the bank to-day," Lawrence went on, speaking to Captain
Carter. "He said your wheat was ready to cut. Did you get Foose all
right?"

"Yes," said the captain, "he'll give me next week."

"Do you have to board the threshers?"

"No, not this year; they bring along their own cook, and a tent and
everything."

"Je-rusalem!" exclaimed Lawrence. "Things _are_ changing in these days,
ain't they? Harvesting ain't as hard on the women-folks as it used to
be."

"No," said the captain, "but I pay for it, so much extra a bushel."

His head shook regretfully, but he would have lost his regrets in
telling of the time when he had swung a cradle all day in the harvest
field, had not Mrs. Carter's voice just then been heard calling up the
stairs:

"Mayme!"

"Whoo!" answered a high, feminine voice.

"Come down. There's some one here to see you."

Mrs. Carter turned into the parlor, and the tall windows that opened to
the floor of the veranda burst into light.

"She'll be right down, John," said Mrs. Carter, appearing in the door.
"You give me your hats and go right in."

"All right," said Lawrence, and he got to his feet. "Come on, Glenn."

Mrs. Carter took the hats of the young men and hung them on the rack,
where they might easily have hung them themselves. Then she went back to
the veranda, letting the screen door bang behind her, and Lawrence and
Marley entered the parlor. Marley took his seat on one of the haircloth
chairs that seemed to have ranged themselves permanently along the
walls, and Lawrence went to the square piano that stood across one
corner of the room, and sat down tentatively on the stool, swinging from
side to side.

Marley glanced at the pictures on the walls. One of them was a steel
engraving of Lincoln and his cabinet; another, in a black oval frame,
portrayed Captain Carter in uniform, his hair dusting the strapped
shoulders of a coat made after the pattern that seems to have been worn
so uncomfortably by the heroes of the Civil War. There was, however, a
later picture of the captain, a crayon enlargement of a photograph, that
had taken him in civilian garb. This picture, in its huge gilt frame,
was the most aggressive thing in the room, except, possibly, the walnut
what-not. Marley had a great fear of the what-not; it seemed to him that
if he stirred he must topple it over, and dash its load of trinkets to
the floor. Presently he heard the swish of skirts. Then a tall girl came
in, and Lawrence sprang to his feet.

"Hello, Mayme. What'd you run for?" he said.

He had crossed the room and seized the girl's hand. She flashed a rebuke
at him, though it was evident that the rebuke was more out of deference
to the strange presence of Marley than for any real resentment she felt.

"This is my friend, Mr. Marley, Miss Carter," Lawrence said. "You've
heard me speak of him."

Marley edged away from the what-not, rose and took the hand the girl
gave him. Then Miss Carter crossed to the black haircloth sofa and
seated herself, smoothing out her skirts.

"Didn't know what to do, so we thought we'd come out and see you," said
Lawrence.

"Oh, indeed!" said Miss Carter. "Well, it's too bad about you. We'll do
when you can't find anybody else to put up with you, eh?"

"Oh, yes, you'll do in a pinch," chaffed Lawrence.

"Well, can't you find a comfortable seat?" the girl asked, still
addressing Lawrence, who had gone back to the piano stool.

"I'm going to play in a minute," said Lawrence, "and sing."

"Well, excuse _me_!" implored Miss Carter. "Do let me get you a seat."

Lawrence promptly went over to the sofa and leaned back in one corner of
it, affecting a discomfort.

"Can't I get you a pillow, Mr. Lawrence?" Miss Carter asked presently.
"Or perhaps a cot; I believe there's one somewhere in the attic."

"Oh, I reckon I can stand it," said Lawrence.

Marley had regained his seat on the edge of the slippery chair.

"Where's Vinie?" asked Lawrence.

"She's coming," answered Miss Carter.

"Taking out her curl papers, eh?" said Lawrence. "She needn't mind us."

Miss Carter pretended a disgust, but as she was framing a retort,
somehow, the eyes of all of them turned toward the hall door. A girl in
a gown of white stood there clasping and unclasping her hands curiously,
and looking from one to another of those in the room.

"Come in, Lavinia," said Miss Carter. Something had softened her voice.
The girl stepped into the room almost timidly.

"Miss Blair," said Miss Carter, "let me introduce Mr. Marley."

The sudden consciousness that he had been sitting--and staring--smote
Marley, and he sprang to his feet. Embarrassment overpowered him and he
bowed awkwardly. Lawrence had been silent, and his silence had been a
long one for him. Seeming to recognize this he hastened to say:

"Well, how's the world using you, Vinie?"

The girl smiled and answered:

"Oh, pretty well, thank you, Jack."

It grated on Marley to hear her called Vinie. Lavinia Blair! Lavinia
Blair! That was her name. He had heard it before, of course, yet it had
never sounded as it did now when he repeated it to himself. The girl had
seated herself in a rocking-chair across the room, almost out of range,
as it were. He was rather glad of this, if anything. It seemed to
relieve him of the duty of talking to her. He supposed, of course, they
would pair off somehow. The young people always did in Macochee. He
supposed he had been brought there to pair off with Lavinia Blair. He
liked the thought, yet the position had its responsibilities. Somehow he
never could forget that he could not dance. He hoped they would not
propose dancing. He always had a fear of that in making calls, and all
the calls he made seemed to come to it soon or late; some one always
proposed it.

Marley was aware that Lawrence and Mayme Carter had resumed the exchange
of their rude repartee, though he did not know what they had said. They
kept laughing, too. Lavinia Blair seemed to join in the laughter if not
in the badinage. Marley wished he might join in it. Jack Lawrence was
evidently funnier than ever that night; Mayme Carter was convulsed. Now
and then Lawrence said something to her in a tone too low for the others
to hear, and these remarks pushed her to the verge of hysterics. Marley
had a notion they were laughing at him.

Meanwhile Lavinia Blair sat with her hands in her lap, smiling as though
she were amused. Marley wondered if he amused her. He felt that he ought
to say something, but he did not know what to say. He thought of several
things, but, as he turned them over in his mind, he was convinced that
they were not appropriate. So he sat and looked at Lavinia Blair, looked
at her eyes, her mouth, her hair. He thought he had never seen such a
complexion.

Mayme Carter had snatched her handkerchief back from Lawrence, and
retreated to her end of the sofa. There she sat up stiffly, folded her
hands, and, though her mirth still shook her spasmodically, she said:

"Now, Jack, behave yourself."

Lawrence burlesqued a surprise, and said:

"I'll leave it to Vine if I've done anything."

Marley wondered how much further abbreviation Lavinia Blair's name would
stand, but he was suddenly aware that he was being addressed. Miss
Carter, with an air of dismissing Lawrence, said:

"You have not been in Macochee long, have you, Mr. Marley?"

Marley admitted that he had not, but said that he liked the town. When
Lawrence explained that Marley was going to settle down there and become
one of them, Miss Carter said she was awfully glad, but warned him
against associating too much with Lawrence. This embarrassed Marley, if
it did not Lawrence, and he immediately gave the scene to Lawrence, who
guessed he would sing his song. To do so he went to the piano, and began
to pick over the frayed sheets of music that lay on its green cover. To
forestall him, however, Miss Carter rushed across the room and slid on
to the piano stool herself, saying breathlessly:

"Anything to stop that!"

She struck a few vagrant chords, and Marley, glad of a subject on which
he could express himself, pleaded with her to play. At last she did so.
When she had finished, Lawrence clapped his hands loudly, and stopped
only when a voice startled them. It was Mrs. Carter calling through the
window:

"Play your new piece, Mayme!"

Miss Carter demurred, but after they had argued the question through the
window, the daughter gave in, and played it. The music soothed Lawrence
to silence, and when Miss Carter completed her little repertoire, his
mockery could recover itself no further than to say:

"Won't you favor us, Miss Blair?"

When Lavinia Blair declined, he struck an imploring attitude and said:

"Oh, please do! We're dying to hear you. You didn't leave your music at
home, did you?"

Marley heard the chairs scraping on the veranda, and the screen door
slammed once more. Then he heard Captain Carter go up the stairs, while
Mrs. Carter halted in the doorway of the parlor long enough to say:

"You lock the front door when you come up, Mayme."

Mayme without turning replied "All right," and when her mother had
disappeared she said:

"It's awful hot in here, let's go outside."

Marley found himself strolling in the yard with Lavinia Blair. The moon
had not risen, but the girl's throat and arms gleamed in the starlight;
her white dress seemed to be a cloud of gauze; she floated, rather than
walked, there by his side. They paused by the gate. About them were the
voices of the summer night, the crickets, the katydids, far away the
frogs, chirping musically. They stood a while in the silence, and then
they turned, and were talking again.

Marley did most of the talking, and all he said was about himself,
though he did not realize that this was so. He had already told her of
his life in the towns where his father had preached before he came to
Macochee, and of his four years in college at Delaware. He tried to give
her some notion of the sense of alienation he had felt as the son of an
itinerant Methodist minister; for him no place had ever taken on the
warm color and expression of home. He explained that as yet he knew
little of Macochee, having been away at college when his father moved
there the preceding fall. It was so easy to talk to her, and as he told
her of his ambitions, the things he was going to do became so many, and
so easy. He was going to become a lawyer; he thought he should go to
Cincinnati.

"And leave Macochee?" said Lavinia Blair.

Marley caught his breath.

"Would you care?" he whispered.

She did not answer. He heard the crickets, the katydids, the frogs
again; there came the perfume of the lilacs, late flowering that year;
the heavy odor of a shrub almost overpowered him.

"My father is a lawyer," Lavinia said.

They had turned off the path, and were wandering over the lawn. The dew
sparkled on it; and Marley became solicitous.

"Won't you get your feet wet?" he asked.

The girl laughed at the idea, but she caught up her skirts, and they
wandered on in the shade of the tall elms. Marley did not know where
they were. The yard seemed an endless garden, immense, unknown,
enchanted; the dark trees all around him stood like the forest of some
park, and the lawn stretched away to fall over endless terraces; he
imagined statues and fountains gleaming in the heavy shadows of the
trees. The house seemed lost in the distance, though he felt its
presence there behind him.

Once he saw the twinkle of a passing light in an upper story. He could
no longer hear the voices of Mayme and Lawrence, but he caught the
tinkling notes of a banjo, away off somewhere. Its music was very sweet.
They strolled on, their feet swishing in the damp grass, then suddenly
there was a rush, a loud barking, and a dog sprang at them out of the
darkness. Lavinia gave a little cry. Marley was startled; he felt that
he must run, yet he thought of the girl beside him. He must not let her
see his fear. He stepped in front of her. He could feel her draw more
closely to him, and he thrilled as the sense of his protectorship came
to him. He must think of some heroic scheme of vanquishing the dog, but
it stopped in its mad rush, and Lavinia, standing aside, said:

"Why, it's only Sport!"

They laughed, and their laugh was the happier because of the relief from
their fear.

"We must have wandered around behind the house," said Lavinia. "There's
the shed."

They turned, and went back. The enchantment of the yard had departed.
Marley seemed to see things clearly once more, though his heart still
beat as he felt the delicious sense of protectorship that had come over
him as Lavinia shrank to his side at the moment the dog rushed at them.
Nor could he ever forget her face as she smiled up at him in the little
opening they came into on the side lawn. The young moon was just sailing
over the trees. As they approached the veranda, Lawrence's voice called
out of the darkness:

"Well, where have you young folks been stealing away to?"




                               CHAPTER II

                              WADE POWELL


Marley halted at the threshold and glanced up at the sign that swung
over the doorway. The gilt lettering of the sign had long ago been
tarnished, and where its black sanded paint had peeled in many weathers
the original tin was as rusty as the iron arm from which it creaked. Yet
Macochee had long since lost its need of the shingle to tell it where
Wade Powell's law office was. It had been for many years in one of the
little rooms of the low brick building in Miami Street, just across from
the Court House; it was almost as much of an institution as the Court
House itself, with which its triumphs and its trials were identified.
Marley gathered enough courage from his inspection of the sign to enter,
but once inside, he hesitated. Then a heavy voice spoke.

"Well, come in," it said peremptorily.

Wade Powell, sitting with his feet on his table, held his newspaper
aside and looked at Marley over his spectacles. Marley had had an ideal
of Wade Powell, and now he had to pause long enough to relinquish the
ideal and adjust himself to the reality. The hair was as disordered as
his young fancy would have had it, but it was thinner than he had known
it in his dreams, and its black was streaked with gray. The face was
smooth-shaven, which accorded with his notion, though it had not been
shaven as recently as he felt it should have been. But he could not
reconcile himself to the spectacles that rested on Powell's nose, and
pressed their bows into the flesh of his temples--the eagle eyes of the
Wade Powell of his imagination had never known glasses.

When Wade Powell slowly pulled his spectacles from his nose and tossed
them on to the table before him, he bent his eyes on Marley, and their
gaze, under their heavy brows, somewhat restored him, but it could not
atone for the disappointment. Perhaps the disappointment that Marley
felt in this moment came from some dim, unrealized sense that Wade
Powell was growing old. The spectacles, the gray in his hair, the
wrinkles in his face, the looseness of the skin at his jaws and at his
throat--where a fold of it hung between the points of his collar--all
told that Wade Powell had passed the invisible line which marks life's
summit, and that his face was turned now toward the evening. There was
the touch of sadness in the indistinct conception of him as a man who
had not altogether realized the ambitions of his youth or the
predictions of his friends, and the sadness came from the intuition that
the failure or the half-failure was not of the heroic kind.

The office in which he sat, and on which, in the long years, he had
impressed his character, was untidy; the floor was dirty, the books on
the shelves were dusty and leaning all awry; the set of the Ohio reports
had not been kept up to date; one might have told by a study of them at
just what period enterprise and energy had faltered, while the gaps here
and there showed how an uncalculating generosity had helped a natural
indolence by lending indiscriminately to other lawyers, who, with the
lack of respect for the moral of the laws they pretended to revere, had
borrowed with no thought of returning.

Two or three pictures hung crookedly on the walls; the table at which
Powell sat was old and scarred; its ink-stand had long ago gone dry and
been abandoned; a cheap bottle, with its cork rolling tipsily by its
side, had taken the ink-stand's place. The papers scattered over the
table had an air of hopelessness, as though they had grown tired, like
the clients they represented, in waiting for Powell's attention. The
half-open door at the back led into a room that had been, and possibly
might yet be, used as a private office or consulting room, should any
one care to brave its darkness and its dust; but as for Wade Powell, it
was plain that he preferred to sit democratically in the outer office,
where all might see him, and, what was of more importance to him, where
he might see all.

The one new thing in the room was a typewriter, standing on its little
sewing-machine table, in the corner of the room. There was no
stenographer nor any chair for one; Marley imagined Powell, whenever he
had occasion to write, sitting down to the machine himself, and picking
out his pleadings painfully, laboriously and slowly, letter by letter,
using only his index fingers. And this somehow humbled his ideal the
more. Marley almost wished he hadn't come.

"What's on your mind, young man?" said Wade Powell, leaning back in his
chair and dropping his long arm at his side until his newspaper swept
the floor. Marley had seated himself in a wooden chair that was
evidently intended for clients, and he began nervously.

"Well, I--"

Here he stopped, overcome again by an embarrassment. A smile spread over
Wade Powell's face, a gentle smile with a winning quality in it, and his
face to Marley became young again.

"Tell your troubles," he said. "I've confessed all the young men in
Macochee for twenty-five years. Yes--thirty-five--" He grew suddenly
sober as he numbered the years and then exclaimed as if to himself:

"My God! Has it been that long?"

He took out his watch and looked at it as if it must somehow correct his
reckoning. For a moment, then, he thought; his gaze was far away. But
Marley brought him back when he said:

"I only want--I only want to study law."

"Oh!" said Powell, and he seemed somehow relieved. "Is that all?"

To Marley this seemed quite enough, and the disappointment he felt,
which was a part of the effect Wade Powell's office had had on him,
showed suddenly in his face. Powell glanced quickly at him, and hastened
to reassure him.

"We can fix that easily enough," he said. "Have you ever read any law?"

"No," said Marley.

"Been to college?"

Marley told him that he had just that summer been graduated and when he
mentioned the name of the college Powell said:

"The Methodists, eh?"

He could hardly conceal a certain contempt in the tone with which he
said this, and then, as if instantly regretting the unkindness, he
observed:

"It's a good school, I'm told."

He could not, however, evince an entire approval, and so seeming to
desert the subject he hastened on:

"What's your name?"

"Glenn Marley."

"Oh!" Wade Powell dropped his feet to the floor and sat upright. "Are
you Preacher Marley's son?"

Marley did not like to hear his father called "Preacher," and when he
said that he was the son of Doctor Marley, Powell remarked:

"I've heard him preach, and he's a damn good preacher too, I want to
tell you."

Marley warmed under this profane indorsement. He had always, from a boy,
felt somehow that he must defend his father's position as a preacher
from the world, as with the little world of his boyhood and youth he had
always had to defend his own position as the son of a preacher.

"Yes, sir, he's a good preacher, and a good man," Powell went on. He had
taken a cigar from his pocket and was nipping the end from it with his
teeth. He lighted it, and leaned back comfortably again to smoke, and
then in tardy hospitality he drew another cigar from his waistcoat
pocket and held it toward Marley.

"Smoke?" he said, and then he added apologetically, "I didn't think; I
never do."

Marley declined the cigar, but Powell pressed it on him, saying:

"Well, your father does, I'll bet. Give it to him with Wade Powell's
compliments. He won't hesitate to smoke with a publican and sinner."

Marley smiled and put the cigar away in his pocket.

"I don't know, though," Powell went on slowly, speaking as much to
himself as to Marley, while he watched the thick white clouds he rolled
from his lips, "that he'd want you to be in my office. I know some of
the _brethren_ wouldn't approve. They'd think I'd contaminate you."

Marley would have hastened to reassure Powell had he known how to do so
without seeming to recognize the possibility of contamination; but while
he hesitated Powell avoided the necessity for him by asking:

"Did your father send you to me?"

He looked at Marley eagerly, and with an expression of unfounded hope,
as he awaited the answer.

"No," replied Marley, "he doesn't know. I haven't talked with him at
all. I have to do something and I've always thought I'd go into the law.
I presume it would be better to go to a law school, but father couldn't
afford that after putting me through college. I thought I could read law
in some office, and maybe get admitted that way."

"Sure," said Powell, "it's easy enough. You'll have to learn the law
after you get to practising anyway--and there isn't much to learn at
that. It's mostly a fake."

Marley looked at him in some alarm, at this new smiting of an idol.

"I began to read law," Powell went on, "under old Judge Colwin--that is,
what I read. I used to sit at the window with a book in my lap and watch
the girls go by. Still," he added with a tone of doing himself some
final justice, "it was a liberal education to sit under the old judge's
drippings. I learned more that way than I ever did at the law school."

He smoked on a moment, ruminating on his lost youth; then, bringing
himself around to business again, he said:

"How'd you happen to come to me?"

"Well," said Marley, haltingly, "I'd heard a good deal of you--and I
thought I'd like you, and then I've heard father speak of you."

"You have?" said Powell, looking up quickly.

"Yes."

"What'd he say?"

"Well, he said you were a great orator and he said you were always with
the under dog. He said he liked that."

Powell turned his eyes away and his face reddened.

"Well, let's see. If you think your father would approve of your sitting
at the feet of such a Gamaliel as I, we can--" He was squinting
painfully at his book-shelves. "Is that Blackstone over there on the top
shelf?"

Marley got up and glanced along the backs of the dingy books, their
calfskin bindings deeply browned by the years, their red and black
labels peeling off.

"Here's Blackstone," he said, taking down a book, "but it's the second
volume."

"Second volume, eh? Don't see the first around anywhere, do you?"

Marley looked, without finding it.

"Then see if Walker's there."

Marley looked again.

"Walker's _American Law_," Powell explained.

"I don't see it," Marley said.

"No, I reckon not," assented Powell, "some one's borrowed it. I seem to
run a sort of circulating library of legal works in this town, without
fines--though we have statutes against petit larceny. Well, hand me
Swan's _Treatise_. That's it, on the end of the second shelf."

Marley took down the book, and gave it to Powell. While Marley dusted
his begrimed fingers with his handkerchief, Powell blew the dust off the
top of the book; he slapped it on the arm of his chair, the dust flying
from it at every stroke. He picked up his spectacles, put them on and
turned over the first few leaves of the book.

"You might begin on that," he said presently, "until we can borrow a
Blackstone or a Walker for you. This book is the best law-book ever
written anyway; the law's all there. If you knew all that contains, you
could go in any court and get along without giving yourself away; which
is the whole duty of a lawyer."

He closed the book and gave it to Marley, who was somewhat at a loss;
this was the final disappointment. He had thought that his introduction
into the mysteries of the noble profession should be attended by some
sort of ceremony. He looked at the book in his hand quite helplessly and
then looked up at Powell.

"Is that--all?" he said.

"Why, yes," Powell answered. "Isn't that enough?"

"I thought--that is, that I might have some duties. How am I to begin?"

"Why, just open the book to the first page and read that, then turn over
to the second page and read that, and so on--till you get to the end."

"What will my hours be?"

"Your hours?" said Powell, as if he did not understand. "Oh, just suit
yourself."

Marley was looking at the book again.

"Don't you make any entry--any memorandum?" he asked, still unable to
separate himself from the idea that something formal, something legal,
should mark the beginning of such an important epoch.

"Oh, you keep track of the date," said Powell, "and at the end of three
years I'll give you a certificate. You may find that you can do most of
your reading at home, but come around."

Marley looked about the office, trying to imagine himself in this new
situation.

"I'd like, you know," he said, "to do something, if I could, to repay
you for your trouble."

"That's all right, my boy," said Powell. Then he added as if the thought
had just come to him:

"Say, can you run a typewriter?"

"I can learn."

"Well, that's more than I can do," said Powell, glancing at his new
machine. "I've tried, but it would take a stationary engineer to operate
that thing. You might help out with my letters and my pleadings now and
then. And I'd like to have you around. You'd make good company."

"Well," said Marley, "I'll be here in the morning." He still clung to
the idea that he was to be a part of the office, to be an identity in
the local machinery of the law. As he rose to go, a young man appeared
in the doorway. He was tall, and the English cap and the rough Scotch
suit he wore, with the trousers rolled up over his heavy tan shoes,
enabled Marley to identify him instantly as young Halliday. He was
certain of this when Powell, looking up, said indifferently:

"Hello, George. Raining in London?"

"Oh, I say, Powell," replied Halliday, ignoring a taunt that had grown
familiar to him, "that Zeller case--we would like to have that go over
to the fall term, if you don't mind."

"Why don't you settle it?" asked Powell.

Halliday was leaning against the door-post, and had drawn a short brier
pipe from his pocket. Before he answered, he paused long enough to fill
it with tobacco. Then he said:

"You'll have to see the governor about that--it's a case he's been
looking after."

"Oh, well," said Powell, with his easy acquiescence, "all right."

Halliday had pressed the tobacco into the bowl of the pipe and struck a
match.

"Then, I'll tell old Bill," he said, pausing in his sentence to light
his pipe, "to mark it off the assignment."

Marley watched Halliday saunter away, with a feeling that mixed
admiration with amazement. He could not help admiring his clothes, and
he felt drawn toward him as a college man from a school so much greater
than his own, though he felt some resentment because Halliday had never
once given a sign that he was aware of Marley's presence. His amazement
came from the utter disrespect with which Halliday referred to Judge
Blair. Old Bill! Marley had caught his breath. He would have liked to
discuss Halliday with Powell, but the lawyer seemed to be as indifferent
to Halliday's existence as Halliday had been to Marley's, and when
Marley saw that Powell was not likely to refer to him, he started toward
the door. As he went Powell resumptively called after him:

"I'll get a Blackstone for you in a day or two. Be down in the morning."

Marley went away bearing Swan's _Treatise_ under his arm. He looked up
at the Court House across the way; the trees were stirring in the light
winds of summer, and their leaves writhed joyously in the sun. The
windows of the Court House were open, and he could hear the voice of
some lawyer arguing a cause to the jury. Marley thought of Judge Blair
sitting there, the jury in its box, the sleepy bailiff drowsing in his
place, the accustomed attorneys and the angry litigants, and his heart
began to beat a little more rapidly, for the thought of Judge Blair
brought the thought of Lavinia Blair. And in the days to come, when he
should be arguing a cause to a jury, as that lawyer, whose voice came
pealing and echoing in sudden and surprising shouts through the open
windows, was arguing a cause now, would Lavinia Blair be interested?

He had imagined that a day so full of importance for him would be marked
by greater ceremonials, and yet while he was disappointed, he was
reassured. He had solved a problem, he had done with inaction, he had
made a beginning, he was entered at last upon a career. As all the
events of the recent years rushed on him, the years of college life, the
decisions and indecisions of his classmates, their vague troubles about
a career, he felt a pride that he had so soon solved that problem. He
felt a certain superiority too, that made him carry his head high, as he
turned into Main Street and marched across the Square. It required only
decision and life was conquered. He saw the years stretching out
prosperously before him, expanding as his ambitions expanded. He was
glad that he had tackled life so promptly, that he had come so quickly
to an issue with it; it was not so bad, viewed thus close, as it had
been from a distance. He laughed at the folly of all the talk he had
heard about the difficulty of young men getting a start in these days;
he must write to his fraternity fellows at once, and tell them what he
had done and how he was succeeding. They would surely see that at the
bar he would do, not only himself, but them, the greatest credit, and
they would be proud.




                              CHAPTER III

                             GREENWOOD LAKE


The girls, flitting about with nervous laughter and now and then little
screams, had spread long cloths over the table of plain boards that had
served so many picnic parties at Greenwood Lake; the table-cloths and
the dresses of the girls gleamed white in the amber light that streamed
across the little sheet of water, though the slender trees, freshened by
the morning shower that threatened to spoil the outing, were beginning
to darken under the shadows that diffused themselves subtly through the
grove, as if there were exudations of the heavy foliage.

Lawrence, in his white ducks, stood by the table, assuming to direct the
laying of the supper. His immense cravat of blue was the only bit of
color about him, unless it were his red hair, which he had had clipped
that very morning, and his shorn appearance intensified his comic air.
Marley, sitting apart on the stump of a small oak, could hear the
burlesque orders Lawrence shouted at the girls. The girls were convulsed
by his orders; at times they had to put their dishes down lest in their
laughter they spill the food or break the china; just then Marley saw
Mayme Carter double over suddenly, her mass of yellow hair lurching
forward to her brow, while the woods rang with her laughter. The other
men were off looking after the horses.

Lavinia moved quickly here and there, smiling joyously, her face
flushed; though she laughed as the others did at Lawrence's drollery,
she did not laugh as loudly, and she did not scream. Just now she rose
from bending over the table, and brushed her brown hair from her brow
with the back of her hand, while she stood and surveyed the table as if
to see what it lacked. When she raised her hand the sleeve of her muslin
gown fell away from her wrist and showed her slender forearm, white in
the calm light of evening. Marley could not take his eyes from her. She
ran into the pavilion, her little low shoes flashed below her
petticoats, and he grew sad; when she reappeared, all her movements
seemed to be new, to have fresh beauties. Then he suspected that the
girls were laughing at him and he felt miserable.

He thought of himself sitting alone and apart, an awkward, ungainly
figure. He longed to go away, yet he feared that, if he did, he would
not have the courage to come back. He shifted his position, only to make
matters worse. Then suddenly his feeling took the form of a rage with
Lawrence; he longed to seize Lawrence and kick him, to pitch him into
the lake, to humiliate him before the girls. He thought he saw all at
once that Lawrence had been making fun of him, surreptitiously; that was
what had made the girls laugh so.

There was some little consolation in the thought that Lavinia did not
laugh as much as the others; perhaps, if she did not care to defend him,
she at least pitied him. And then he began to pity himself. The whole
evening stretched before him; pretty soon he would have to move up to
the table, and sit down on the narrow little benches that were fastened
between the trees; then after supper they would begin their dancing and
when that came he did not see what he could do.

The only pleasure he had had that afternoon had been on the way out; he
had been alone with Lavinia, and the four miles of pleasant road that
lay between the town and Greenwood Lake were too short for all the
happiness Marley found in them. He could feel Lavinia again by his side,
her hands folded on the thin old linen lap-robe. He could not recall a
word they had said, but it seemed to him that the conversation had
flowed on intimately and tranquilly; she had been so close and
sympathetic; and he would always remember how her eyes had been raised
to his. The fields with the wheat in shock had swept by in the beauty of
harvest time; the road, its dust laid by the morning shower, had rolled
under the wheels of the buggy softly, smoothly and noiselessly; the air
had been odorous with the scent of green things freshened by the rain,
and had vibrated with the sounds of summer.

Then suddenly his reverie was broken. The men were gathering about the
table with the girls; all of them looked at him expectantly.

"Here, you!" called Lawrence. "Do you think we're going to do all the
work? Come, get in the game, and don't look so solemn--this ain't a
funeral."

They all laughed, and Marley felt his face flame, but he rose and went
over to the table, halting in indecision.

"Run get some water," ordered Lawrence, imperatively waving his hand.
"Mayme," he shouted, "hand him the pitcher! Step lively, now. The
men-folks are hungry after their day's work. Has any one got a pitcher
concealed about his person? What did you do with the pitcher, Glenn?
Take it to water your horse?"

They were laughing uproariously, and Marley was plainly discomfited. But
Lavinia stepped to his side, a large white pitcher in her hand. "I'll
show you," she said.

They started away together, and Marley felt a protection in her
presence. A little way farther he suddenly thought of the pitcher, which
Lavinia still was bearing, and he took it from her. As he seized the
handle their fingers became for an instant entangled.

"Did I hurt you?" he asked.

"Oh, no!" she assured him, and as they walked on, out of the sight of
the laughing group behind them, an ease came over him.

"Do you know where the well is?" he asked.

"Oh, yes," she answered. "It's down here. I could have come just as well
as not."

"I'm glad to come," he said; and then he added, "with _you_."

They had reached the wooden pump behind the pavilion. The little sheet
of water curved away like a crescent, following the course of the stream
of which it was but a widening. Its little islands were mirrored in its
surface. The sun was just going down, the sky beyond the lake was rosy,
and the same rosy hue now suffused everything; the waters themselves
were reddened.

It was very still, and the peace of the evening lay on them both.
Lavinia stood motionless, and looked out across the water to the little
Ohio hills that rolled away toward the west. She stood and gazed a long
time, her hands at her sides, yet with their fingers open and extended,
as if the beauty of the scene had suddenly transfixed her. Marley did
not see the lake or the sun, the islands or the hills; he saw only the
girl before him, the outline of her cheek, the down on it showing fine
in the pure light, the hair that nestled at her neck, the curve from her
shoulder to her arms and down to her intent fingers. At last she sighed,
and looked up at him.

"Isn't it all beautiful?" she said solemnly.

"Beautiful?" he repeated, as if in question, not knowing what she said.

Just then they heard Lawrence hallooing, and Marley began to pump
vigorously. He rinsed out the pitcher, then filled it, and they went
back, walking closely side by side, and they did not speak all the way.

Mayme Carter, who, as it seemed, had a local reputation as a compounder
of lemonade, had the lemons and the sugar all ready when Marley and
Lavinia rejoined the group, and Lawrence, as he seized the pitcher,
said:

"I see that, between you, you've spilled nearly all of the water, but I
guess Mayme and I'll have to make it do."

The others laughed at this, as they did at all of Lawrence's speeches,
and then they turned and laughed at Marley and Lavinia, though the men,
who as yet did not feel themselves on terms with Marley, had a subtile
manner of not including him in their ridicule, however little they
spared Lavinia.

The supper was eaten with the hunger their spirits and the fresh air had
given them and Marley, placed, as of course, by Lavinia's side, felt
sheltered by her, as he felt sheltered by all the talk that raged about
him. He wished that he could join in the talk, but he could not discover
what it was all about. Once, in a desperate determination to assert
himself, he did mention a book he had been reading, but his remark
seemed to have a chilling effect from which they did not recover until
Lawrence, out of his own inexhaustible fund of nonsense, restored them
to their inanities. He tried to hide his embarrassment by eating the
cold chicken, the ham and sardines, the potato chips and pickles, the
hard-boiled eggs and sandwiches that went up and down the board in
endless procession, and he was thankful, when he thought of it, that
Lawrence seemed to forget him, though Lawrence had forgotten no one else
there. He seemed to note accurately each mouthful every one took.

"Hand up another dozen eggs for Miss Winters, Joe," he called to one of
the men, and then they all laughed at Miss Winters.

When the cake came, Lawrence identified each kind with some remark about
the mother of the girl who had brought it, and tasted all, because, as
he said, he could not afford to show partiality. The fun lagged somewhat
as the meal neared its end, but Lawrence revived it instantly and
sensationally by rising suddenly, bending far over toward Lavinia in a
tragic attitude and saying:

"Why, Vine, child, you haven't eaten a mouthful! I do believe you're in
love!"

The company burst into laughter, but they suddenly stopped when they saw
Marley. His face showed his anger with them, and he made a little
movement, but Lavinia smiled up at Lawrence, and said:

"Well, Jack, it's evident that _you're_ not."

And then they all laughed at Lawrence, and the girls clapped their
hands, while Marley, angry now with himself, tried to laugh with them.

When they stopped laughing Lawrence produced his cigarettes, and tossing
one to Marley in a way that delicately conveyed a sense of intimacy and
affection, he said:

"When you girls get your dishes done up we'll be back and see if we
can't think up something to entertain you," and then he called Marley
and with him and the other men strolled down to the lake.




                               CHAPTER IV

                               MOONLIGHT


The dance was proposed almost immediately. Marley had hoped up to the
very last minute that something, possibly a miracle, would prevent it,
but scarcely had the men finished their first cigarettes before Howard
was saying:

"Well, let's be getting back to the girls. They'll want to dance."

Howard spoke as if the dancing would be a sacrifice on the part of the
men to the pleasure of the girls, but they all turned at once, some of
them flinging their cigarettes into the water, as if to complete the
sacrifice, and started back. When they reached the pavilion, Payson and
Gallard took instruments out of green bags, Payson a guitar and Gallard
a mandolin, and Lawrence, bustling about over the floor, shoving the few
chairs against the unplastered wooden walls, was shouting:

"Tune 'em up, boys, tune 'em up!"

The first tentative notes of the strings twanged in the hollow room, and
Lawrence was asking the girls for dances, scribbling their names on his
cuff with a disregard of its white polished linen almost painful.

"I'll have to divide up some of 'em, you know, girls," he said. "Jim and
Elmer have to play, and that makes us two men shy. But I'll do the best
I can--wish I could take you all in my arms at once and dance with you."

The girls, standing in an expectant, eager little group, clutched one
another nervously, and pretended to sneer at Lawrence's patronage.

Marley was standing with Lavinia near the door. He was trying to affect
an ease; he knew by the way the other girls glanced at him now and then
that they were speculating on his possibilities as a partner; he tried
just then to look as if he were going to dance as all the other men
were, yet he felt the necessity of confessing to Lavinia.

"You know," he said contritely, "that I don't dance."

She looked up, a disappointment springing to her eyes too quickly for
her to conceal it. She was flushed with pleasure and excitement, and
tapping her foot in time with the chords Payson and Gallard were trying
on their instruments. Marley saw her surprise.

"I ought not to have come," he said; "I've no business here."

The look of disappointment in Lavinia's eyes had gone, and in its place
was now an expression of sympathy.

"It makes no difference," she said. And then she added in a low voice:
"I'll not dance either; there are too many of us girls anyway."

"Oh, don't let me keep you from it," said Marley, and yet a joy was
shining in his eyes. She turned away and blushed.

"I'll give you all my dances," she said; "we can sit them out."

"But it won't be any fun for you," protested Marley. And just then
Lawrence came up.

"Say, Glenn," he said, "if you don't want to dance I'll take Lavinia for
the first number."

The guitar and mandolin, after a long preliminary strumming to get
themselves in tune, suddenly burst into _The Georgia Campmeeting_, and
the couples were instantly springing across the floor.

"Come on, Vine," said Lawrence, his fingers twitching. And Lavinia,
eager, trembling, alive, casting one last glance at Marley, said "Just
this one!" and went whirling away with Lawrence.

Marley moved aside, awkwardly, when the couples, sweeping in a long oval
stream around the little room, whirled past him. Lavinia danced with a
grace that almost hurt him; she was laughing as she looked up into
Lawrence's face, talking to him as they danced. Marley felt a gloom,
almost a rage, settle on him. He looked up and down the room. At the
farther end, through the door by which the musicians sat swinging their
feet over their knees in time to the tune they played, he could see the
man who kept the grounds at the lake, looking on at the dance; his wife
was with him, and they smiled contentedly at the joy of the young
people.

Marley could not bear their joy, any more than he could bear the joy of
the dancers, and he looked away from them. Glancing along the wall he
saw a girl, sitting alone. It was Grace Winters; she was older than the
others, and she sat there sullenly, her dark brows contracted under her
dark hair. Marley felt drawn toward her by a common trouble, and he
thought, instantly, that he might appear less conspicuous if he went and
sat beside her. As he approached, her sallow face brightened with a
brilliant smile of welcome and she drew aside her skirts to make a place
for him, though there was no one else on all that side of the room.
Marley sat down.

"It's warm, isn't it?" he said.

"Yes," Miss Winters replied, "almost too warm to dance, don't you
think?"

Marley tried to express his acquiescence in the polite smile he had seen
the other men use before the dance began, but he did not feel that he
carried it off very well.

"I should think you'd be dancing, Mr. Marley," Miss Winters said. "I
hear you are a splendid dancer. Don't you care to dance this evening?"

"I can't dance," said Marley, crudely.

He was looking at Lavinia, following her young figure as it glided past
with Lawrence. Miss Winters turned away. Her face became gloomy again,
and she said nothing more. Marley was absorbed in Lavinia, and they sat
there together silent, conspicuous and alone, in a wide separation.

Marley thought the dance never would end. It seemed to him that the
dancers must drop from fatigue; but at last the mandolin and guitar
ceased suddenly, the girls cried out a disappointed unisonant "Oh!" and
then they all laughed and clapped their hands. Lavinia and Lawrence were
coming up, glowing with the joy of the dance.

"Oh, that was splendid, Jack!" Lavinia cried, putting back her hair with
that wave of her hand.

Lawrence's face was redder than ever. He leaned over and in a whisper
that was for Lavinia and Marley together he said:

"Lavinia, you're the queen dancer of the town." And then he turned to
Miss Winters.

"Grace," he said, distributing himself with the impartiality he felt his
position as a social leader demanded, "you've promised me a dance for a
long time. Now's my chance."

"Why certainly, Jack," Miss Winters said, with her brilliant smile, and
then she took Lawrence's arm and drew him away, as if otherwise he might
escape.

"Take me outdoors!" said Lavinia to Marley. "Those big lamps make it
_so_ hot in here."

Marley was glad to leave, and they went out on to the little piazza of
the pavilion. Lavinia stood on the very edge of the steps, and drank in
the fresh air eagerly.

"Oh!" she said. "Oh! Isn't it delicious!"

The darkness lay thick between the trees. The air was rich with the
scent of the mown fields that lay beyond the grove. The insects shrilled
contentedly. Marley stood and looked at Lavinia, standing on the edge of
the steps, her body bent a little forward, her face upturned. She put
back her hair again.

"Let's go on down!" she said, a little adventurous quality in her tone.
She ran lightly down the steps, Marley after her.

"Won't you take cold?" he asked, bending close to her.

She looked up and laughed. They were walking on, unconsciously making
their way toward the edge of the little lake. Marley felt the white form
floating there beside him and a happiness, new, unknown before, came to
him. They were on the edge of the little lake. Before them the water
lay, dark now, and smooth. A small stage was moored to the shore and a
boat was fastened to it. They could hear the light lapping of the water
that barely stirred the boat. Presently Lavinia ran out on to the stage.
She gave a little spring, and rocked it up and down; then smiled up at
Marley like a child venturing in forbidden places. Marley stepped
carefully on to the stage.

"Isn't it a perfect night?" Lavinia said, looking up at the dark purple
sky, strewn with all the stars. Marley looked at her white throat.

"The most beautiful night I ever knew!" he said. He spoke solemnly,
devoutly, and Lavinia turned and gazed on him. Marley touched the boat
with the toe of his shoe.

"We might row," he said almost timidly.

"Could we?" inquired Lavinia.

"If we may take the boat."

"Oh, of course--anybody may. Can you row?"

Marley laughed. He had rowed in the college crew on the old Olentangy at
Delaware. His laugh was a complete answer to Lavinia. She approached the
boat, and Marley bent over and drew it alongside the stage.

"Get in," he said. It was good to find something he could do. He helped
her carefully into the boat, and held it firmly until she had arranged
herself in the stern, her feet against the cleats, and her white skirts
tucked about her. Then he took his seat, shipped the oars and shoved
off. He swept the boat out into the deep water, and rowed away up the
lake. He rowed precisely, feathering his oars, that she might see how
much a master he was. They did not speak for a long time. First one,
then the other, of the little islands swept darkly by; the water slapped
the bow of the boat as Marley urged it forward. The lights of the
pavilion on the shore twinkled an instant, then went out behind the
trees. They could hear the distant mellow thrumming of the guitar and
the tinkle of the mandolin.

"Are you too cool?" he asked presently.

"Oh, no, not at all!" said Lavinia.

"Hadn't you better take my coat?" Marley persisted. The idea of putting
his coat about her thrilled him.

"You'll need it," she said.

"No, I'll be warm rowing."

She shook her head, and smiled. They drifted on. Still came the distant
strumming of the guitar and the tinkle of the mandolin. Marley thought
of the young people dancing, and then, noting Lavinia's silence, he
asked, out of the doubt that was his one remaining annoyance:

"Wouldn't you rather be back there dancing?"

"No, no!" she answered softly.

"I'm ashamed of myself."

"Why?" She started a little.

"Because I can't dance!" There was guilt in his tone.

"You mustn't feel that way about it," Lavinia said. "It's nothing."

"Isn't it?"

"No. It's easy to learn."

"I never could learn."

Lavinia was still, and Marley thought she assented to this. But in
another moment she spoke again.

"I--" she began, and then she hesitated.

Marley stopped rowing and rested on his oars. The water lapped the bows
of the boat as it slackened its speed.

"I could teach you," Lavinia went on.

"Could you?" Marley leaned forward eagerly.

"I'd like to." She was trailing one white hand in the water.

"Will you?"

"Yes," she said. "We can do it over at Mayme's--any time. She'll play
for us."

Marley felt a great gratitude, and he wondered how he could pour it
forth upon her.

"You are too good to me," he exclaimed.

Then, suddenly, a change came over the dark surface of the waters. A
mellow quality touched them; they seemed to tremble ecstatically, then
they broke into sparkling ripples; the air quivered with a luminous
beauty and a light flooded the little valley. Marley and Lavinia turned
instinctively and looked up, and there, over the tops of the trees,
black a moment before, now rounded domes of silver, rose the moon. They
gazed at it a long time. Finally Marley turned and looked at Lavinia.
Her white dress had become a drapery, her arms gleamed, her eyes were
lustrous in the transfiguration of the moonlight. He could see that her
lips were slightly parted, and her fingertips, dipped in the cool water
over the gunwale of the boat, trailed behind them a long narrow thread
of silver. They looked into each other's eyes, and neither spoke. They
drifted on. At last, Marley said:

"Lavinia!"

She stirred.

"Do you know--" he began, and then he stopped. "Don't you know," he went
on, "can't you see, that I love you?"

He rested his arms on the oars, and leaned over toward her.

"I've loved you ever since that first night--do you remember? I know--I
know I'm not good enough, but can't you--can't I--love you?"

He saw her eyelids fall, and as she turned and looked over the side of
the boat, she put forth her hand, and he took it.

They were awakened from the dream by a call, and after what seemed to
Marley a long time, he finally remembered the voice as Lawrence's.

"We must go back," he said reluctantly. "How long have we been gone?"

"I don't know," said Lavinia. He heard her sigh.

Marley pulled the boat in the direction whence came the hallooing voice;
he had quite lost all notion of their whereabouts. But presently they
saw the lights of the pavilion, and then the dark figures of the men,
and the white figures of the girls on shore.

As they pulled up and Marley sprang out of the boat to the landing
stage, Lawrence said:

"Well, where have you babes been?"

Marley helped Lavinia out of the boat.

"We've been rowing," he said.

"We thought you'd been drowned," said Lawrence.

Marley and Lavinia drove home together in silence. In the light of the
moon, the road was silver, and the fields with their shocks of wheat
were gold.




                               CHAPTER V

                              THE SERENADE


"I don't know what ails Lavinia," said Mrs. Blair to her husband as he
sat on the veranda after dinner the next day. The judge laid his paper
in his lap, and looked up at his wife over his glasses.

"Isn't she well?" he asked.

"M--yes," replied Mrs. Blair, prolonging the word in her lack of
conviction, "I guess so."

"Don't you know?" the judge demanded in some impatience with her
uncertainty.

"She says she feels all right."

"Well, then, what makes you think she isn't?"

"Oh, I don't know," replied Mrs. Blair, "she seems so quiet, that's
all."

"Lavinia is not a girl given to excitement or demonstration," said the
judge, lapsing easily into the manner of speech he had cultivated on the
bench.

"No, that's so," assented Mrs. Blair. "But she's always cheerful and
bright."

"Is she gloomy?"

"No, I wouldn't exactly call it that, but she seems preoccupied--rather
wistful I should say, yes--wistful." She seemed pleased to have found
the right word.

"Oh, she's all right. That picnic last night may have fatigued her. I
presume there was dancing."

"Yes."

"I don't know that we should let her go out that way." The judge took
off his glasses and twirled them by their black cord while he gazed
across the street, apparently at some dogs that were tumbling each other
about in the Chenowiths' yard. The judge had a subconscious anxiety that
they would get into Mrs. Chenowith's flower beds.

"You and I used to go to them; they never hurt us," argued Mrs. Blair.

"No, I suppose not. But then--that was different."

Mrs. Blair laughed lightly, and the laugh served to dissipate their
cares. She went to the edge of the veranda and pulled a few leaves from
the climbing rose-vine that grew there, and the judge put on his glasses
and spread out his paper.

"I'll take her out for a drive this afternoon," said Mrs. Blair, turning
to go indoors.

"She'll be all right," said the judge, already deep in the political
columns.

That night at supper, the judge looked at Lavinia closely, and after a
while he said:

"You're not eating, Lavinia. Don't you feel well?"

Lavinia turned to her father and smiled.

"Oh, I'm all right."

Her smile perplexed the judge.

"You look pale," he said.

Mrs. Blair glanced warningly at him the length of the table.

"My girl's losing her color," he forged ahead.

Lavinia dropped her eyelids, and a look of pain appeared in her face,
causing it to grow paler.

"Please don't worry about me, papa," she said.

Mrs. Blair divined Lavinia's dislike of this personal discussion. She
tried to catch her husband's eye again, but he was looking at Lavinia
narrowly through his glasses.

"Did you go riding this afternoon?" he asked as if he were examining a
witness whom counsel had not drawn out properly.

"Yes," Mrs. Blair hastened to say. "We drove out the Ludlow a long way."

"She was riding last night, too," said Connie.

"Who with?" demanded Chad, turning to Connie with the challenge he
always had ready for her.

"Who with?" retorted Connie. "Why, Glenn Marley, of course. Who else?"

"Well, what of it?" demanded Chad. "What's it to you?"

"Oh, children, children!" protested Mrs. Blair, wearily. "Do give us a
little peace!"

"Well, she began it," said Chad.

Connie was eating savagely, but she whirled on Chad, speaking with
difficulty because her mouth was filled with food:

"You shut up, will you?"

Chad laughed with a contempt almost theatrical, waved his hand lightly
and said:

"Run away, little girl, run away."

Mrs. Blair asked the judge why he did not correct his children, and
though the sigh he gave expressed the hopelessness, as it seemed to him,
of bringing the two younger members of his train into anything like
decorous behavior, he laid his knife and fork in his plate.

"This must cease," he said. "It is scandalous. One might conclude that
you were the children of some family in Lighttown."

"It is very trying," said Mrs. Blair, acquiescing in her husband's
reproof. "They are just like fire and tow." She said this quite
impersonally and then turned to Connie: "If you can't behave yourself,
I'll have to send you from the table."

"That's it!" wailed Connie. "That's it! Blame everything on to me!"

Mrs. Blair looked severely at her, and Connie's face reddened. She
glanced angrily at her mother and began again:

"Well, I--"

The judge rapped the table smartly with his knuckles.

"Now I want this stopped!" he said. "And right away. If it isn't I'll--"
He was about to say if it wasn't he would clear the room, as he was fond
of saying whenever the idle spectators in his court showed signs of
being human, but he did not finish his sentence. Chad was subdued and
decorous, and Connie drooped her head, and began to gulp her food. Her
eyes were filling with tears and the tears began to fall, slowly, one by
one, splashing heavily into her plate.

Lavinia was trembling; she tried to control herself, tried to lift her
glass, but when she did, her hand shook so that the water was likely to
spill. This completed the undoing of her nerves, her eyes suddenly
flooded with tears, and she snatched her handkerchief from her lap, rose
precipitately, and hurried from the room, dropping her napkin as she
went. They heard her going up the stairs, and presently the door of her
room closed.

Connie had followed Lavinia with her misty eyes as she left the table
and now she too prepared to leave. She felt a sudden pity springing from
her great love of her older sister, and her great pride in her, and she
felt a contrition, though she tried to convict Chad, as the latest
object of her fiery and erratic temper, by glowering at him.

"I'll go to her," she said, "_I_ can comfort her!"

"No, stay where you are," said her mother. "Just leave her alone."

The evening light of the summer day flooded into the dining-room;
outside a robin was singing. In the room there was constraint and heavy
silence, broken only by the slight clatter of the silver or the china.
But after a while the judge spoke:

"Did Lavinia go to the picnic with young Marley?" he asked. He regretted
instantly that he had revived the topic that had given rise to the
difficulty, but as it lay on the minds of all, it was impossible, just
then, to escape its influence.

"I believe so," said Mrs. Blair. "He really seems like a nice young
man."

The judge scowled.

"I don't know," he said. "He's in the office of Wade Powell--I suppose
he is the one, isn't he?" He thought it unbecoming that a judge should
show an intimate knowledge of the relations of young men who were merely
studying law.

"Yes, sir," said Chad, maintaining his own dignity.

"Everybody seems to speak well of him," said Mrs. Blair.

"But I can't quite reconcile that with his selecting Wade Powell as a
preceptor. I would hardly consider his influence the best in the world,
and I would imagine that Doctor Marley would hold to the same opinion."

Judge Blair spoke with a certain disappointment in Doctor Marley. He had
gone to hear him preach once or twice, and found, as he said, an
intellectual quality in his utterances that he missed in the sermons Mr.
Hill had been preaching for twenty years in the Presbyterian church.

"Perhaps he doesn't know Wade Powell," said Mrs. Blair. "Doctor Marley
is comparatively a stranger here, you know."

"Yes, I presume that explains it. But--" he shook his head. He could not
forgive any one who showed respect for Wade Powell. "Powell has little
business except a certain criminal practice, and now and then a personal
injury case."

"Is there anything wrong in personal injury cases?" asked Mrs. Blair.

The judge looked at his wife in surprise.

"Well, I suppose you know, don't you," he said, "that such cases are
taken on contingent fees?" He spoke with the natural judicial contempt
of the poor litigant.

"Of course, dear," she replied, "I shall not undertake to defend Mr.
Powell. He's a wild sort."

"Yes; a drunkard, practically," said Judge Blair, "and an infidel
besides. The moral environment there is certainly not one for a young
man--"

"Is he really an _infidel_?" asked Mrs. Blair, abruptly dropping her
knife and fork.

"Well," replied the judge with the judicial affectation of fairness,
"he's at least a free-thinker. Perhaps agnostic were the better word.
That is one reason why I can not understand Doctor Marley's permitting
his son to be associated with him. It seems to me to argue a weakness,
or a lack of observation in the doctor, as it does a certain depravity
of taste in his son."

They discussed Marley until the meal was done, and Connie and Chad had
gone out of doors. Judge Blair followed his wife into the sitting-room.

"I'm worried, I'll admit," said the judge. "What could it have been that
so distressed her?"

"Oh well, the children's little quarrels were too much for her nerves."

"I suppose so."

They were silent and thoughtful, sitting together, rocking gently in
their chairs as the twilight stole into the room.

"It's too bad he's going to study law," the judge said after a while.

He shook his gray head dubiously.

"But you always say that about any one who's going to study law," Mrs.
Blair argued. "You even said it about George Halliday when his father
took him into partnership."

"Well, it's bad business nowadays unless a young man wants to go to the
city, and it's hard to get a foothold there."

"But you began as a lawyer," she urged, as though he had finished as
something else.

"It was different in my day."

"And you've always done well in the law," Mrs. Blair went on, ignoring
his distinction.

"Oh yes," the judge said in a tone that expressed a sense of individual
exception. "But I went on the bench just in time to save my bacon.
There's no telling what might have become of us if I had remained in the
practice."

They were silent long enough for him to feel the relief he had always
found in his salaried position, and then he said:

"You don't suppose--"

"Oh, certainly not!" his wife hastened to assure him.

"Well, I think it would be well, perhaps, to watch her closely. I don't
just like the notion."

"But his father is--"

"Yes, but after all, we really know nothing about him."

"That is true."

"And then Lavinia's so young."

"Yes."

"I'd go to her."

"After a while," Mrs. Blair said.

They heard steps on the veranda, and then the voices of Mr. and Mrs.
Chenowith who had run across, as Mrs. Chenowith said, when Mrs. Blair
met them in the darkness that filled the wide hall, to see how they all
were. The Chenowiths begged Mrs. Blair not to light the gas; they
preferred to sit out of doors. The Chenowiths remained all the evening.
When they had gone, the judge drew the chairs indoors, while Mrs. Blair
rolled up the wide strip of red carpet that covered the steps of the
veranda. And when they had gone up to their room, Mrs. Blair stole
across to Lavinia, softly closing the door behind her.

She found the girl stretched on her bed, her face buried in the pillows,
which were wet with her tears.

"What is troubling my little girl?" she asked. She sat down on the side
of the bed, and lightly stroked Lavinia's soft hair. The girl stirred,
and drew herself close to her mother. Mrs. Blair did not speak, but
continued to stroke her hair, and waited. Presently Lavinia cried out:

"Oh, mama! mama!"

And then she was in her mother's arms, weeping on her mother's breast.

"I've never kept anything from you before, mama," Lavinia cried.

"No," Mrs. Blair whispered. "Can't you tell mama now?"

And then with her mother's arms about her Lavinia told her all. When she
had finished she lay tranquilly. Mrs. Blair was relieved and yet her
troubles had but grown the more complicated. She saw all the intricate
elements with which she would have to deal, and she quailed before them,
realizing what tact would be required of her.

"The coming of love should be a time of joy, dear," she said presently.
Even in the darkness, she could see the white blur of Lavinia's face
change its expression. A smile had touched it.

"It should, shouldn't it, mama?"

"Yes, indeed."

"But I never kept anything from you before."

Mrs. Blair laughed.

"But you kept this only a day, dear. That doesn't count."

"It was a long day."

"I know, sweetheart." The mother kissed her, and they were silent a
while.

"I do love him so," said Lavinia, presently. "And you'll love him too,
mama, I know you will."

"I'm sure of that, dear."

"But what of papa?"

Mrs. Blair felt the girl grow tense in her arms.

"That will all come right in time," said Mrs. Blair.

"Will you tell him?"

"Not just now, dear. We'll have this for a little secret of our own.
There's plenty of time. You are young, you know, and so is Glenn."

"I love to hear you call him Glenn."

Mrs. Blair remained with Lavinia until she had tucked her into her bed.

"Just my little child," the mother whispered over the girl. "Just my
little child."

"Yes, always that," said Lavinia. And her mother kissed her again and
again, and left her in the dark.

When Mrs. Blair rejoined her husband, he laid down the book he always
read before retiring, and looked up with the question in his eyes.

"She's just a little nervous and tired," Mrs. Blair said. "She'll be all
right in the morning. I think it best not to notice her."

"Do you think we'd better have Doctor Pierce see her?"

"Oh, not at all!" Mrs. Blair laughed, and the judge, reassured, went
back to his book.

They were awakened from their first doze that night by voices singing.

"It's some of the darkies from Gooseville," said Mrs. Blair. "They're
out serenading."

"Yes," said the judge. "It is sweet to fall asleep by."

At the sound of the singing Lavinia had crept from her bed and crouched
in her white night-dress before the open window; the shutters were
closed. She heard the melody from far down the street. The singing
ceased, then began again, drawing nearer and nearer. Presently she heard
the fall of feet on the sidewalk before the house, and the low tones of
voices in hurried consultation. And then a clear baritone voice rose,
and she heard it begin the song:

           "Oh the sun shines bright in my old Kentucky home,
           'Tis summer, the darkies are gay."

She knew the voice. Her heart swelled and the tears came again and there
alone in the fragrant night she opened her arms and stretched them out
into the darkness.




                               CHAPTER VI

                             LOVE'S ARREARS


The days following the picnic had been no easier for Marley than they
had been for Lavinia. As he looked back on that night, a fear took hold
of him; the whole experience, the most wonderful of his life, grew more
and more unreal. Much as he longed to see Lavinia again, he was afraid
to go to her home; he wondered whether he should write her a note;
perhaps she would think him false, perhaps she would think he had
already forgotten her; the idea tormented him; he did not know what to
do. He had seen her but once, and then at a distance; the Blairs'
well-known surrey had stopped in the middle of the Square, and George
Halliday stood leaning into the carriage chatting with Lavinia. Marley
had but a glimpse of Lavinia's face, pink in the shadow of the
surrey-top. As they drove away she had turned with a smile and a nod at
Halliday. The sight had affected Marley strangely.

He felt himself so weak and incapable in this affair that he longed to
discuss it with some one, and on Sunday afternoon he found his mother at
her window with the _Christian Advocate_, which replaced, in her case,
the nap nearly every one else took at that hour.

"How old was father when you were married, mother?" he began.

He spoke out of that curious ignorance of the lives of their parents so
common to children; he had never been able to realize his parents as
having separate and independent existences before his own. Mrs. Marley
laid her paper by, and a smile came to her face.

"He was twenty-two," she said.

"Just my age," observed Marley.

Mrs. Marley looked up hastily.

"You're not thinking of getting married, are you, Glenn?" she asked.

"No." he said with a laugh.

"My goodness! You're just a boy!"

"But I'm as old as father was."

"Y--es," said Mrs. Marley, "but then--"

"But then, what?"

"That was different."

Marley smiled.

"Had father entered the ministry yet?" he said presently.

"Yes, we were married in his first year. He had been teaching school,
and the fall he was admitted to the conference he was sent out to the
Gibsonburg circuit in Green County. We were married in the spring."

Her face flushed, and she turned the pages of her paper with a dreamy
deliberation.

"Ah, but your father was a handsome young man, Glenn!" she said
presently.

"He's handsome yet," Marley replied with the pride he always felt in his
father. And then he asked:

"Did he have any money?"

"Yes," she said, and she laughed, "just a hundred dollars!"

"A hundred dollars! Well, he had nerve, didn't he? And so did you!"

"We had more than that," said Mrs. Marley, solemnly.

Marley looked at his mother suddenly. Her face seemed for an instant to
be transfigured in the afternoon glow.

He might have told her then; he was on the point of it, but a footfall
on the brick walk outside caused him to look up, and he saw Lawrence
coming into the yard. Lawrence beckoned him and he went out.

"Come on," said Lawrence. "Let's go out to Carters'."

Marley looked a question at him, and the smile which Lawrence never
could repress long at a time was twitching at the corners of his large
mouth.

"She'll be there."

"How do you know?" asked Marley.

Lawrence smiled a little more significantly.

When they got to the Carters' they found Mayme and Lavinia together in
the yard, strolling about in apparent aimlessness, yet with an
expectancy in their manner that belied its quality of mere idleness. In
the look Lavinia gave him all of Marley's perplexities vanished.
Lawrence stood by with a grin on his red face, and Mayme Carter's eyes
danced. She and Lawrence assumed almost immediately an elder, paternal
manner, and looked on at the lovers' meeting as from far heights that
were to be reached only after all such youthful experiences had long
since become possible in retrospect alone. Still smiling, they edged
away, and left the lovers alone.

"Is it really true?" Marley asked.

Lavinia colored a little as she smiled up at him.

"And you are happy?" he asked.

"So happy!" she said.

And then all at once a cloud came over her eyes. She closed them an
instant.

"What is it?" he asked in alarm.

"Nothing."

"Tell me."

"It's nothing." She was smiling again, as if to show that her happiness
was complete. "See?" Her eyes were blinking rapidly.

"I'm glad," he said.

As they turned and walked across the yard Marley looked at her
nervously.

"Do you know," he said, "that I couldn't remember what color your eyes
were?" He spoke with all the virtue there is in confession.

"What color are they?" she asked, suddenly closing her eyes.

"They're blue," Marley replied, saying the word ecstatically, as if it
had a new, wonderful meaning for him.

"Connie says they're green."

"Connie?"

"Yes, don't you know? She's my younger sister."

"Oh." He did not know any of her family, and the baffling sense of
unreality came over him again.

"You'll know her," said Lavinia, and added thoughtfully: "I hope she'll
like you. Then there's Chad, my little brother."

Marley was growing alarmed at the intricacies of an introduction into a
large family, the characters of which were as yet like the characters in
the first few chapters of a novel, but he thought it would not reflect
on him to admit that he did not know Chad, seeing that he was merely a
little brother.

"He admires you immensely," said Lavinia.

"Does he?" said Marley, eagerly, instantly loving Chad. "How does he
know me?"

"He says you were a football player at college."

Marley laughed a modest deprecation of his own prowess.

"But I knew your voice," said Lavinia.

"Did you? When did you hear it?"

"As if you didn't know!"

"Honestly," he protested. "Tell me."

"Why, that night that you serenaded me."

He was regretting that she had outdone him in observation, but she
suddenly looked up and said:

"Oh, Glenn! What a beautiful voice you have!"

It was the first time she had ever called him Glenn, and it produced in
him a wonderful sensation.

They had come to a little bench, and, sitting there, they could only
look at each other and smile. Marley noticed that a little line of
freckles ran up over the bridge of Lavinia's nose. They were very
beautiful, he thought, and yet he had never heard of freckles as one of
the elements of a woman's beauty. Then he leaned back and looked about
the yard.

He had always thought of it as it seemed that first night, enormous,
enchanted, with wide terraces and fountains, and white statues gleaming
through the green shrubbery. But now he saw no terraces, no statuary, no
fountains, and no wide lawns; nothing but a cramped little yard crowded
with bushes and trees, and surrounded by a weathered fence that had lost
several pickets. He looked around behind the house where he had fancied
long stables with big iron lamps over the doors, but now he saw nothing
but an old woodshed and a barn on the rear end of the lot. The cracks in
the barn were so wide that he could see the light of day between them as
through a kinetoscope. He heard a horse stamping fretfully at the flies.

"It was here," he said, "that I first saw you." He did not speak his
whole thought.

"Yes," she answered. "I remember."

"That was a wonderful night, the most wonderful of my life, except the
one at the lake."

He drew close to her. "I loved you at first sight," he whispered.

"Did you?" She looked at him in reverence.

"Yes,--from the very first moment. When you came into the room, I knew
that--"

"What?"

"That you were the woman I had always loved and waited for; that I had
found my ideal. And yet they say we never discover our ideals in this
life!"

He laughed at this philosophical absurdity.

"What did you think then?" he asked.

She cast down her eyes, and probed the turf with the toe of her little
shoe.

"I loved you then too."

He gazed at her tenderly, rapturously.

"Isn't it wonderful?" he said presently, "this love of ours? It came to
us all at once!"

She looked at him suddenly. Her short upper lip was raised.

"It _was_ love at first sight, wasn't it?"

"Yes. We were intended for each other."

They sat there, and went over that first night of their meeting and that
other night at Greenwood Lake, finding each moment some new and
remarkable feature of their love, something that proved its divine and
providential quality, something that convinced them that no one before
had ever known such a remarkable experience. They marveled at the
mystery of it.

But at last they must return to practical questions, and they resumed
the account of their family relations. Marley told Lavinia about his
father and mother, about his sister who had died, and then about his
grandparents, and his uncles and aunts. He told her even of Dolly,
behind whom she had driven to Greenwood Lake, and of his father's love
for fast horses, a love which sometimes drew upon his father the
criticism parishioners ever have ready for their pastor. And he told her
about his home, and how frequently his mother had to entertain transient
ministers, and how the church laid missionary work upon her, until he
feared the heathen would unwittingly break her down.

He was not conscious of it, but he felt it necessary to bring up all at
once the arrears of her knowledge of him and his family, of all his
affairs. Meeting as they had so strangely, so romantically, and falling
in love at first sight, according to the prearrangement of the ages,
they could excuse this otherwise strange ignorance of each other's
lives. They bemoaned all the years they had been compelled to live
without knowing each other, and their one quarrel with fate was that
they had had to wait until so late in life before meeting; and yet they
finally consoled themselves for this deprivation by discovering that
they had really always known and loved each other. They were now able to
compare strange experiences of soul and, in the new light they
possessed, to identify them as communings of their spirits across time
and space.

"I've always believed somehow in the Sweden-borgians," Lavinia said,
"but I never really understood before what they meant by affinities."

They looked at each other in a silence that became somber, and was
broken at last by Lavinia.

"I've told mama," she said.

"You have?" Marley gasped.

"Yes."

"And she--?"

"She was sweet about it. She will love you, I know."

Marley felt a sudden love for Lavinia's mother. And then his fear
returned at Lavinia's sinister,

"But--"

"But what?"

"She says we must wait."

"Oh!" Marley said with a relief. He felt their present happiness so
great that he could afford to waive any claim on the future. And yet he
was troubled; he felt that somehow a depression lay on Lavinia. He
wondered what its cause could be. Presently it came to him suddenly.

"And your father?" he asked.

"He doesn't know--yet."

"Will he--?"

"He's very--" she hesitated, not liking to seem disloyal to her father.
Finally she said "peculiar," and then further qualified it by adding
"sometimes."

The sadness that lies so near to the joy in lovers' hearts came over
them, and yet they found a kind of joy in that too.

"I'll go to him, of course," Marley said presently.

"Oh, you're so brave!"

But this tribute did not tend to reassure Marley. It rather suggested
terrors he had not thought of. Yet in the necessity of maintaining the
manly spirit he forced a laugh.

"Of course," he continued, "I'll go to him. I meant to from the first."

"But not just yet," she pleaded.

"Well," he yielded, not at all unwillingly, "it shall be as you say."

He could not dispel her sadness, nor could he conquer his own. A little
tremor ran through her, and he felt it electrically along his arm.

"What is it, sweetheart?" he pleaded. "Tell me, won't you? We must have
no secrets, you know."

"Oh, Glenn," she broke out, "I'm afraid!"

She spoke with intuitive apprehension.

"Of what?"

"Our happiness!"

He tried to laugh again.

"Do you think it will ever be?" she asked.

"I know it," he said earnestly. "I have nothing but faith--our love is
strong enough for anything!"

"You comfort me," she said simply.

Lavinia spent the night with Mayme Carter, and the house sounded until
long after midnight with the low, monotonous drone of their confidential
voices.




                              CHAPTER VII

                       AN UNNECESSARY OPPOSITION


Marley heard on Monday evening that Judge Blair had gone to Cincinnati,
and the news filled him with a high if somewhat culpable joy. He found
Lavinia and her mother on the veranda, and Lavinia said, with a grave
simplicity:

"Mama, this is Glenn."

"I'm very glad to have you come," said Mrs. Blair, trying instantly to
rob the situation of the embarrassment she felt it must have for the
young man.

Marley could not say a word, but he put all his gratitude in the
pressure he gave Mrs. Blair's hand. The light that came from the hall
was dim, and though Mrs. Blair could see that Marley was straight and
carried himself well, his face was blurred by the shadows. She turned to
Lavinia.

"Will you bring out another chair, dear, or would you prefer to go
indoors?"

Then, seeing an advantage in this latter alternative, she decided for
them:

"Perhaps we'd better go in, I fear it's cool out here."

She held back the screen door and Lavinia whisked excitedly into the
hall. Mrs. Blair led the way to the parlor and sent Lavinia for a match.
Then, turning to Marley, waiting there in the darkness, she said:

"She has told me, Glenn."

Marley felt something tender, maternal in her voice; the way she spoke
his name affected him.

"But she is young, very young; she is just a girl. We wish, of course,
for nothing but her happiness, and you must be patient, very patient. It
must not be, if it is to be, for a long time. What does your own mother
think of it?"

"I haven't told her."

"You haven't!"

"No. I felt I hardly had the right yet--not before I spoke to Judge
Blair, you know. I think I shall speak to him just as soon as he gets
home." He spoke impulsively; until that moment he had been thrusting the
thought from him, but Mrs. Blair's manner led him into confidences. In
the immediate fear that he had been precipitant, he looked to her for
help; she seemed the sort of woman to wish to save others all the
trouble she could, one whose life was full of sacrifices, none the less
noble, perhaps, because she made so little of them herself. But a
perplexity showed in her eyes and before she could reply, Lavinia was
back. With an intimate, domestic impulse Lavinia pressed the match into
Marley's hand, and said:

"You do it; I can't reach."

Marley groped with his upheld hand, and when Lavinia guided him to the
middle of the room, he lighted the gas. Mrs. Blair looked at him for a
moment and Lavinia, standing by, as if awaiting her decision, glowed
with happiness. Mrs. Blair's smile completed the fond, maternal
impression Marley had somehow felt when she was standing by him in the
darkness. Her full matronly figure, even in the tendency to corpulence
of her middle years, had preserved its graceful lines; and Marley
regretted the disappearance of this wholesome, cheerful woman as she
passed out of the room.

Judge Blair got home from Cincinnati on Sunday morning, worn by his
work, and maddened by the din of the city to which he was so
unaccustomed. Walking up the familiar streets, he had been glad of their
shade and that pervading sense of a Sunday that still remains a Sabbath
in Macochee. He had been a little piqued, at first, because his wife had
not met him at the train, though she had not, to be sure, known that he
was coming. She had gone to Sunday-school, and Connie gave him his
breakfast--that is, she sat at the table with him, watching him eat and
answering the questions he put to her about the happenings in Macochee
while he had been away.

It was not strange that Connie should talk mostly, after she yielded to
the gnawing temptation to tell him at all, of the nightly visits Marley
had made to the house. She did this in a certain resentment she felt
with Lavinia, a resentment that came from an annoying jealousy she was
beginning to have of Marley, as if, in installing himself in her
sister's heart, he had evicted all other affections from it.

The judge, with his constant affectation of what he considered the
judicial attitude of mind, tried to weigh Connie's somewhat prejudiced
evidence impartially, but he was troubled and annoyed that the peace he
had been looking forward to all the week should be jeopardized
immediately on his coming home.

It was not until afternoon that he had an opportunity to question his
wife, and he began with a severity in his attitude that had as its
fundamental cause, as much as anything else, her failure to meet him at
the train that morning, and her remaining to church after Sunday-school.

"What do you know about this business between Lavinia and that young
Marley?" he asked. "It seems to have developed rapidly during my
absence."

"Oh, Connie has been talking to you, I suppose!" laughed Mrs. Blair.
"You know that Connie is apt to be sensational."

Judge Blair eyed his wife narrowly. Connie was his favorite child,
though he would not, of course, admit as much, and he was ever ready to
spring to her defense.

"She has very bright eyes," he said.

"Oh, now, dear," said Mrs. Blair, "don't overestimate this thing.
Lavinia's nothing but a child."

"That's just the point. Has the young man been here much?"

"Yes, he was here quite often--several evenings, in fact."

"Humph! He seems to have taken advantage of the sunshine of my absence
to make his hay."

"Don't do him an injustice. He didn't meet Lavinia until just about the
time you went away."

"Well, we'll see about it," said the judge, darkly.

"Now see here, Will, don't make the matter serious by an unnecessary
opposition; don't drive the children into a position where they will
consider themselves persecuted lovers."

Mrs. Blair had not until that instant thought of this argument, and she
was so pleased with it, as justifying her own course with the children,
as she had artfully called them, that she pressed it.

"No, don't do that. Just let them alone. They're as likely as not to
outgrow it; that is, if there is anything between them to outgrow.
They'll probably imagine themselves in love a dozen times before either
of them is married."

"Don't talk of marriage!" said the judge, with a little shudder.

Mrs. Blair, who had so well dispelled her own fears, could laugh at her
husband's.

"Just let them alone," she said; "or leave it to me."

"Yes," said the judge peevishly, "leave it to you. You'd probably aid
and abet them." And then, instantly regretting his ill humor, he added
hastily: "You're so kind-hearted."

Mrs. Blair kissed his white hair gently and gave his cheek a little pat.

"You'd better take a nap," she said.




                              CHAPTER VIII

                          A JUDICIAL DECISION


The judge refused to take a nap, though when he sat down on the veranda
he did take one, lying back in his chair with one of the many sections
of the Sunday paper spread over his face. It was from this somewhat
undignified posture that he was aroused by a step; he started up
hastily.

"I beg your pardon," said the young man, who stood on the steps twirling
his straw hat round and round in his hands. The young man went on with
an anxious smile:

"This is Judge Blair, I presume? My name is Marley--Glenn Marley."

If Marley had known that there were men then in the Ohio penitentiary
serving terms that were longer by years than they would have been had
Judge Blair digested his breakfast, or been allowed to finish his
afternoon nap, he would have chosen another hour to press his suit. But
he had youth's sublime confidence, and its abiding faith in the abstract
quality of justice. He had dreaded this moment, but it had forced itself
upon his keen conscience as a duty, and when he heard that morning that
Judge Blair had returned he resolved to have it out at once.

"May I have a word with you?" he asked, advancing a little.

The judge nodded, but slightly, as if it were necessary for him, as a
fattening man advanced in middle life, to conserve his energies. His nod
seemed to include not only an assent, however reluctant, but a
permission as well, to take the other chair that stood, all ready to
rock comfortably, on the veranda. Marley took the chair but he did not
rock, nor did he yield himself to it, but sat somewhat tensely on its
very edge.

"It's warm this afternoon, isn't it?" he said, trying to keep up his
smile. He felt hopeless about it, but the thought, darting through his
mind, that Lavinia was near, braced his purpose. The judge sat hunched
in his chair, with his short white hair tumbled rather picturesquely,
and his chin low in his collar. His lips were set firmly, his brows
contracted. He breathed heavily, and on his strong aquiline nose, Marley
could see tiny drops of perspiration.

"I have come," said Marley, "to speak to you, Judge Blair, on a matter
of, that is, importance. That is, I have come to ask you if I
might--ah--pay my addresses to your daughter."

Marley thought this form of putting it rather fine, and he was glad that
that much of it, at least, was over. And yet, much as he liked this
old-fashioned formula about paying his addresses, he instantly felt its
inadequacy, and so nerved himself to do it all over.

"I mean Lavinia," he said hurriedly, as if to correct any error of
identification he might have led the judge into. "I want to marry her."

The judge, still breathing heavily, looked at Marley out of his narrowed
eyes.

"You know," Marley said, in an explanatory way, "I love her."

He waited then, but the judge was motionless, even to the hand that hung
at his side over the arm of his chair, still holding his paper. Now and
then, at what seemed to be long, unequal intervals, his eyelids fell
slowly in heavy winks.

"How long have you and Lavinia known each other?" he asked finally.

"I met her several weeks ago, out at Captain Carter's. But I did not see
her again, that is to speak to her, until about a week ago. In one way I
have known her, you might say, but a week; yet I feel that I have known
her a long time, always, in fact. I--I--well, I loved her at first
sight." Marley dropped his face at this speech, for it seemed that he
had made it too sentimental; he had a feeling that the judge so regarded
it. He sat and picked at the braids of straw in his hat.

"And have you spoken to her?" asked the judge.

"Oh yes!" said Marley, looking up quickly.

"And she--?"

"She loves me."

The judge closed his eyes as if in pain. Then he stirred, the paper
dropped from his fingers, and he drew himself up in his chair, as if to
deal with the matter.

"How old are you, Mr. Marley?" he inquired.

"I am twenty-two," said Marley, confidently, as if this maturity must
incline the judge in his favor. "I cast my first vote for McKinley." He
thought this, too, would help matters, and possibly it did.

"You have completed your education?"

"I graduated this summer from the Ohio Wesleyan."

"And what are you doing now, or proposing to do?"

"Just now, I am studying law," he announced. "I'm going to make the law
my profession."

Marley looked up with a high faith in this final appeal, but even that
did not impress the judge as Marley felt a tribute thus delicately
implied should affect him.

"You are reading with a preceptor, I take it?"

"Yes, sir, in Mr. Powell's office."

Judge Blair looked at Marley as if he were deciding what to do with him.
After he had looked a while he gazed off across the street, drumming
with his finger-tips on the arm of his chair. Presently, without
turning, and still gazing abstractedly into the distance--and in that
instant Marley remembered that he had seen the judge stare at the
ceiling of the court room in exactly the same way while sentencing a
culprit--he began to speak.

"Lavinia is yet very young, Mr. Marley," he said, "with no knowledge of
the world, and, perhaps, little of the state of her own mind. You too,
are young, very young, and as yet without an occupation. You are, it is
true, studying law, but it will be three years before you can be
admitted, and many years after that before you can command a practice
that would warrant you in marrying. In this day, the outlook for the
young lawyer is not encouraging. I do not think I would wish a son of
mine to choose that profession; the great changes that have transpired,
and are transpiring in our industrial development, have greatly reduced
the chances of the young lawyer's success. The practice in the smaller
county-seats, like our own, for instance, has almost entirely vanished.
The settlement of titles to real estate, so lucrative a branch of the
law in the early days of my own practice, has deprived the later
practitioners of that source of revenue; the field of criminal law has
become narrowed, unremunerative and almost disreputable. The corporation
work can be handled by one or two firms in each town, and all that seems
to be left is the prosecution of personal injury suits, and that is a
work that hardly appeals to the man of dignity and self-respect. The
large cities have a wider, I might say, the only field, but there the
young lawyer must spend years of the hardest, most unremitting toil
before he can come to anything like success."

The judge paused. He had not intended to speak at such length, but the
habit of the courts was on him, and once started, he found his own
didacticism so pleasing to himself, that it was with reluctance that he
paused at all. He might not have stopped when he did, but gone on almost
indefinitely, as he did when he delivered what were always spoken of as
his beautiful charges to juries, had he not recalled, with something
like a pang of resentment, that the happiness of his own, instead of
another's child, lay at the bottom of all this. He turned then to face
Marley. The young man was sitting there, his eyes wide, and his face
long. The color that flamed in it when he first appeared, was now quite
gone. It was gray and cold instead.

"You will see, Mr. Marley," the judge resumed, "that you are hardly in a
position to ask for my daughter's hand. Of course," the judge allowed a
smile to soften somewhat the fixity of his lips, "I appreciate your
manliness in coming to me, and I do not want to be understood as making
any reflections upon, or in the least questioning, your character, your
worth, or the honor of your intentions. But in view of your youth and of
Lavinia's, and in view of your own, as yet, unsettled position in life,
you must see how impossible it is that anything like an engagement
should subsist between you. I say this because I wish only for Lavinia's
happiness. I may say that I am not unmindful of your happiness, too, and
I esteem it my duty to reach the conclusions I have just presented to
you."

"And I--I can not even see her?" stammered Marley, in his despair.

"I have not said that," the judge said. "I shall always be pleased to
extend to you the hospitality of my house, of course; but I would not
consider it necessary for you to see her regularly, or intimately, and I
certainly would not want you to monopolize her society to the exclusion
of other young men with whom she has been in the habit of associating."

Marley sat there, after this long harangue, with his head downcast. He
sat and turned his hat round and round. At last he did look up with an
appeal in his eyes, but when he saw that the judge was sitting there, as
he had at first, sunk in his chair, breathing heavily and looking at him
out of those sluggish eyes, he arose. He stood a moment, and looked off
across the street somewhere, anywhere. Then he smote one hand lightly
into the other, turned, and said:

"Well--good afternoon, Judge Blair."

"Good afternoon, Mr. Marley," the judge replied. He watched Marley go
down the walk and out of the gate.




                               CHAPTER IX

                            A FILIAL REBUKE


"Father!"

Judge Blair turned and saw Lavinia standing in the wide front door. Her
face was red, her eyes were flashing, her arms hung straight and tense
at her sides.

The judge stirred uneasily in his chair.

"Oh!" she cried, rigidly clenching her little fists. "What have you
done! You have sent him away!"

"Come here, my daughter," he said.

Lavinia moved toward him, halting each moment, then taking a few nervous
steps forward. At last she stood before him, challenging, defiant.

"Sit down, Lavinia, and listen," implored the judge.

"You have sent him away!" she repeated. "You were harsh and cruel and
unkind to him!"

"Lavinia!" cried the judge, flushing with the anger parents call by
different names. There was now a peremptory quality in his tone. But the
girl did not heed him.

"Oh, how could you!" she went on, "how could you! Think how you must
have wounded him! You not only reproached him with being poor, but you
discouraged him as to his prospects! Do you think I cared for that? Do
you think I couldn't have waited? Do you think I can't wait anyhow? What
had you when you proposed to mama? You were poor--you had no prospects;
you had no more right--"

"Lavinia! Lavinia!" the judge commanded, grasping the arms of his chair
in an effort to rise. "You are beside yourself! You don't know what you
are saying!"

"And you pretended to be doing it all for my happiness, too! Oh! oh!
oh!" Her anger vented itself impotently in these exclamations, and then
her mother, white and alarmed, appeared in the doorway behind her.

"Lavinia," she said quietly.

The girl trembled violently, then whirled about, pressed her hands to
her face, and ran in, brushing by her mother in the doorway. Mrs. Blair
glanced after her irresolutely. Then she went to her husband.

"Be calm, dear," she said.

The judge sank back in his chair and looked at her in amazement.

"What has happened?" She drew the empty chair up and sat down in it. She
leaned forward and took one of his hands, and pressed it between both of
her own. She waited for the judge to speak.

"I hardly know," he began. "I never heard Lavinia break out so."

"You must remember how excited and overwrought she is," Mrs. Blair
exclaimed. "You must make allowances."

"I didn't know the girl had such spirit," he continued.

Mrs. Blair smiled rather wanly, and stroked her husband's hand. It was
very cold and moist, and it trembled.

"I had no idea it was so serious," he went on, as if summing up the
catalogue of his surprises.

"Tell me how it all came about," said Mrs. Blair.

"Marley was here, first," the judge began. He had to pause, for he
seemed to find it difficult to catch his breath. "It was a great
surprise to me; it was very painful."

The judge withdrew his hand and wiped his brow. Then he gazed again as
he had done before, across the street. Mrs. Blair, though eying him
closely and with concern, waited patiently.

"I didn't wish to wound him," the judge resumed, speaking as much to
himself as to her. "I hope I said nothing harsh; he really was quite
manly about it."

He paused again.

"I presume I may have seemed cold, unfeeling, unsympathetic," he went
on; and then as if he needed to reassure and justify himself, he added,
"but of course it was impossible, utterly impossible."

After another pause, he drew a deep breath, and as if he had already
outlined his whole interview with Marley, continued:

"And then Lavinia appeared; she must have heard it all, standing there
in the hall."

The judge leaned heavily against the back of his big chair; his face was
drawn, his wrinkles were deeper than they had been, and he wore an
aspect of weariness and pain. His form, too, seemed to have shrunk, and
he sat there in an almost helpless mass, limp and inert.

"I am only afraid, dear," Mrs. Blair said quietly, "that we have taken
this thing too seriously."

"Possibly," he said. "But it is serious, very serious. I don't know what
is to be done."

"We must have patience," Mrs. Blair counseled. "It will require all our
delicacy and tact, now."

"Perhaps you had better go in to her," the judge said presently. "Poor
little girl; she is passing through the deep waters. And I tried to act
only for her interest and happiness."

Mrs. Blair arose.

"She will see that, dear, in time."

"I hope so," said the judge. Mrs. Blair went up to Lavinia's room, and
listened for a moment at the closed door. She heard a voice, low and
indistinct, but she knew it for the voice of Connie, and she could tell
from its tone that the little girl was trying in her way to comfort and
console her sister. So she stepped away, silently, almost stealthily,
going on tiptoe.

The judge sat on the veranda all the afternoon. He scarcely moved, and
never once did he pick up the Sunday paper. Now and then he bowed, in
his dignified way, to some acquaintance passing in the street. The
Chenowiths came out on to their front porch, evidently hot and stupefied
from their Sunday afternoon naps and ready now for the cool refreshment
of the evening breeze they could usually rely on in Macochee with the
coming of the evening. The judge bowed to them, and he tried to put into
his bow an indolent unconcern, lest the Chenowiths should penetrate his
manner and discover the trouble that lay on his heart. The Chenowiths
had gone to the end of their porch, and the judge could hear their
laughter. He thought it strange and unnatural that any one should laugh.

He decided that he would review this whole affair of Lavinia's love
calmly and judicially. He went back to the beginning of Marley's visit,
trying to see wherein he himself had been in the wrong, then he went
over the hot scene with Lavinia. He could not recover from his surprise
at this; that Lavinia, who was usually so gentle, so mild, so unselfish,
should have given way to such anger was incomprehensible. He had always
said that she had her mother's disposition. He could see her, all the
time, distinctly, as she had stood there, in a rage he had never known
her to indulge before, and yet, as he looked at the image of her that
was in his mind, and recalled certain expressions, certain attitudes,
certain tones of voice, it came over him all at once that she was
exactly as her mother had been at her age, though he could not reconcile
Lavinia's mood with the resemblance. Then he went back to his own days
of courtship, with their emotions, their uncertainties, their doubts and
illusions. They seemed a long way off.

He was trying to think calmly and logically, but he found that he could
not then control his mind, for suddenly he saw Lavinia as a little girl,
with her mother kneeling before her, shaking out and straightening her
starched frock. And with this thought came the revelation, sudden,
irresistible, that Lavinia was no longer a child as, with the habit of
the happy years, he had thought of her, up to that very afternoon, in
fact, until an hour ago, and he bowed before the changes that hour had
wrought. He accepted the conviction now that he himself had grown old.
He forgot his purpose to probe to its first cause this unhappiness that
had come to him; he saw that what he mourned was the loss of a child,
the loss of his own youth.

He glanced across at the Chenowiths again, and they seemed remote from
him, of another generation in fact, though but a few moments before he
had looked on them as contemporaries. And then suddenly there came to
him the fear that Mr. Chenowith might run over to chat with him, as was
his habit, and the judge hastily rose, and almost surreptitiously went
off the end of the porch and around into the side yard. Under the new
impression of age that he had grown into, he walked slowly, with a
senile stoop, and dragged his feet as he went. He wandered about in the
yard for a long while, looking at the shrubs and bushes and trees he had
planted himself so long ago, when he was young. It occurred to him that
here in this garden he would potter around, and pass his declining
years.

He remained in the yard until his wife came to call him in to the supper
she had prepared, in the Sunday evening absence of the hired girl, and
with an effort he brought himself back from the future to the present.

"How is she?"

"Oh, she's all right," said Mrs. Blair, in her usual cheery tone. "I
didn't go to her, I thought it best to leave her alone."

The judge looked at his wife, with her rosy face, and her full figure
still youthful in the simple summer gown she wore. He looked at her
curiously, wondering why it was she seemed so young; a width of years
seemed all at once to separate them. Mrs. Blair noted this look of her
husband's. She noted it with pity for him; he looked older to her.

"I think it would be nice for you to take Lavinia with you when you go
to Put-in-Bay to the Bar Association meeting," she said.

It seemed strange and anomalous to Judge Blair that he should still be
attending Bar Association meetings.

"I'll see," he said; and then he qualified, "if I go."

"If you go?" his wife exclaimed. "Why, you're down for a paper!"

"So I am," said the judge.

They turned toward the house, and the judge took his wife's arm, leaning
rather heavily on it.

"Will!" she said, after they had gone a few steps in this fashion. "What
is the matter with you! You walk like an old man!"

She shook his arm off, and said:

"Hurry up now. The coffee will be getting cold."

Indoors, they passed Connie going through the hall; she had just come
down the stairs, and the sight of her girlish figure, and her short
skirts just sweeping the tops of her shoes, gladdened the judge's heart,
and he smiled. He could rely on Connie, anyway, for sympathy. But the
girl gave him a sharp reproachful stare from her dark eyes, and the
judge felt utterly deserted.

Lavinia did not come down to her supper, though her mother, knowing she
would want it later, kept the coffee warm on the back of the kitchen
stove. Chad had gone away with one of the Weston boys. So the three, the
judge, Mrs. Blair and Connie, ate their supper alone.

After supper, Mrs. Blair and Connie went immediately to Lavinia and the
judge had a sense of exclusion from the mysteries that were enacting up
there, an exclusion that seemed to proceed from his own culpability. He
went to his library and tried to read, but he could only sit with his
head in his hand, and stare before him. But finally he was aroused from
his reveries by a stir in the hall, and glancing up he saw Lavinia in
the door. She came straight to him, and said:

"Forgive me, papa, if I was rude and unkind."

He seized her in his arms, hugging her head against his shoulders, and
he said again and again, while stroking her hair clumsily:

"My little girl! My little girl!"




                               CHAPTER X

                               PUT-IN-BAY


The little steamer for the islands rolled out of Sandusky Bay with
Lavinia sitting by the forward rail. She had yielded to her father's
wishes with an easy complaisance that made him suspicious, and yet, as
he stood solicitously by, he was persistent in his determination to
realize for her all the delights he had so extravagantly predicted for
the journey. He tried to rouse her interest by pointing out Johnson's
Island, but it did not possess for her, as the place where the
Confederate prisoners were confined during the war, the interest an old
soldier was able to discover in it, and though he tried his best, with
an effort at entertainment that was well-nigh pathetic, she only smiled
wanly.

He left her, after a while, her chin in her hands, looking over into the
light green waters, watching the curve of the waves the steamer tossed
away from its sharp prow. The lake was in one of its most smiling and
happy moods, though they were then at a point where storms easily lash
its shallow depths into billows that might satisfy the rage of the North
Atlantic. The lighthouse on the rocks at Marblehead had a fascination
for Lavinia; it seemed waiting for her humor, and she watched it until
the steamer had gone far on toward Kelly's Island, and left the
lighthouse behind, a white spot gleaming in the sun.

When they entered the little archipelago of the Wine Islands, with their
waters a deeper green than those out in the lake and overcast in strange
ways by mysterious shadows and cool weird reflections of the green of
the islands all about, Judge Blair came back to her and asked if she had
been seasick and how she had enjoyed the little journey. As she met him
with her strange perplexing smile, he began to doubt her again;
something assured him that she still clung to her purpose of love, and
he found himself almost wishing that she had kept to her defiant temper
of the Sunday afternoon that now seemed so far away.

When they had reached Put-in-Bay and bounded on the trolley across the
island to the huge hotel, they had their dinner and Lavinia perplexed
the judge further by retiring to her room. She said she would rest,
though she had persisted all the morning that she was not tired.

As soon as she had closed the door on her father, leaving him in doubt
and confusion, she began a long letter to Marley. She described her trip
in detail, jealous of every trifle of experience that had befallen her;
she told him of the bridal couple she had seen board the train at Clyde,
and of the showers of rice that had been thrown by the laughing bridal
party, though she omitted the lone father of the bride standing apart on
the platform craning his head anxiously for another sight of his
daughter, and trying to smile. But she gave him a sense of the romance
that had stirred in her at the sight of the lighthouse on its lonely
point of rocks and the stone towers that made the wine-cellars on
Kelly's Island look like castles.

After supper Lavinia left her father to the pleasure of renewing
acquaintance with the lawyers who thronged the lobby, and stole down to
the rocks that marked the shelving shore of the island. She saw stately
schooners, with white sails spread, and she watched, until its black
banner of smoke was but a light wraith, a big propeller towing its
convoy of grain barges across the far horizon. This calm serene passing
of the life of the lakes soothed her, filled her with a thousand
fancies, and stirred her emotions with deep, hidden hints of the mystery
of all life. As she sat there and gazed, now and then tears came to her
eyes. The waters were spread smoothly before her under the last
reflection of the sun, the twilight was coming across the lake; and as
the light followed the sun and the darkness crept behind, she looked
toward the south in the direction, as she felt, of Macochee, and thought
of her home and of her mother, of Connie and of Chad, and then she
thought of Glenn.

Far out in the lake a cluster of yellow lights moved swiftly along--one
of the big passenger steamers that nightly ply between Detroit and
Buffalo, and she read in that moving girdle of light new meanings; then
suddenly a fear seized her, a fear that was part of the ache in her
heart, and she ran into the hotel and up to her room. Then she took up
her letter again and poured out all her new sensations, her longings,
and her fears in a lengthy postscript. When she had finished, she began
to address the envelope; and she wrote on it, with pride:

"Mr. Glenn--"

And then she paused. She did not know whether he spelt his name "Marly,"
or "Marley," or "Marlay." She tried writing it each way, dozens of
times, but the oftener she tested it the less able she was to decide. It
was too ridiculous; she became exasperated with herself; then humiliated
and ashamed. When she heard her father's step in the hall, she hastily
locked her letter in her little traveling bag. The judge greeted her
warmly; he was flushed and happy, and in the highest spirits. During the
afternoon he had been meeting lawyers from all over Ohio; the evening
boats from Cleveland and Toledo had brought more of them to the island;
they were all eminent, respectable, rich, the attorneys of big
corporations. The judges of the Supreme Court and of the Circuit Courts
were there, and the excitement had reached its height when the boat from
Cleveland brought an associate justice of the United States Supreme
Court to deliver the chief address of the meeting.

Judge Blair reveled in meeting all these distinguished men; he enjoyed
the flattery in their way of addressing and introducing him. But his
conscience smote him when he saw Lavinia. He drew up a chair and sat
beside her, holding his cigar at arm's length. It was an excellent
cigar, better than he ordinarily smoked, and the thin thread of smoke
that wavered up from it filled the room almost instantly with its
delicate perfume.

"Did my little girl think her father had deserted her?" he said,
speaking of her in the third person, after the affectionate way of
parents. "He must pay better attention to her. She must come down and
meet the lawyers; they will be delighted; a justice of the Supreme Court
has just come on from Washington! She will want to meet him!"

The judge paused and twisted his head about for a puff at his cigar, and
then waited for Lavinia to glow at the prospect. But when she looked at
him, and tried to smile again, he saw the glint of tears in her eyes.

"Why come, come, dear!" he said. "What's the matter? Aren't you having a
good time? Never mind, when this meeting's over we'll go to Detroit, and
maybe up the lakes for a little trip. That'll bring the roses back!"

He pinched her cheeks playfully, but she did not respond; she looked at
him pleadingly.

"Why, Lavinia," he cried, "you aren't homesick?"

She winked bravely to stem the flood of tears and then nodded.

"Well!" he said, nonplussed. "You know, dear, we can't--"

The tears were brimming in her blue eyes, and he left his sentence
uncompleted to go on:

"So you're homesick, eh? For mama, and Connie?"

She nodded, and he studied her closely for a moment, and then he could
not resist the question that all along had been torturing him.

"And for--?"

She confirmed his fear, with quick decisive little nods. She got out her
handkerchief and hastily brushed her tears away, and then with an effort
to control herself, she looked at him and said, as if she were ready to
have it all out then:

"Yes, father, I haven't treated him right. I came away without telling
him."

Judge Blair scowled and turned away, and bit the end of his cigar. Then
he sat and studied it. Lavinia waited; she was ready for the final
contest. Presently the judge arose.

"Well, dear," he said. "Well--we'll see; of course, we can't go back
just yet--I have my address to read to-morrow, and besides, some of the
boys are talking of me for president of the Bar Association. And I had
thought, I had thought, that a little trip over to Detroit, and maybe up
to Mackinac--"

"Father," said Lavinia, looking at him now calmly, "I don't want to go
to Detroit or up to Mackinac. I'll do, of course, as you say; I'll wait
until the Bar meeting is over, but I want to go home. You might as well
know now, father--we might as well understand each other--it can be no
other way."

Judge Blair looked at his daughter a moment, and she kept her eyes
directly and firmly in his.

"Oh well," he said with a sigh, "of course, dear, if you say. I'd like
to stay until after the election though. Will you?"

"Of course," she consented.




                               CHAPTER XI

                                MACOCHEE


Marley had not learned of Lavinia's departure until Monday afternoon; he
had the news from Lawrence, who had it from the hackman who had taken
Judge Blair and Lavinia to the train; for whenever any of the quality go
away from Macochee they always ride to the station in the hack, though
at other times they walk without difficulty all over the town. When
Marley reached the office, and found Wade Powell, as he usually found
him, sitting with his feet on his table, smoking and reading a
Cincinnati paper, the lawyer looked up casually, but when he saw
Marley's expression he suddenly exclaimed:

"Hello! What's the matter?"

Marley shook his head.

"Something's troubling you," said Powell.

Marley shook his head again, and Powell looked at him as at a witness he
was cross-examining.

"I know better," he said.

Marley affected to busy himself at his desk, but after a while, he
turned about and said:

"Something is troubling me, Mr. Powell; my--prospects." He had been on
the point of confessing his real trouble, but with the very words on his
lips, he could not utter them, and so let the conversation take another
turn.

"Oh, prospects!" said Powell. "I can tell you all about prospects; I've
had more than any man in Gordon County. When I was your age, opinion was
unanimous in this community that my prospects were the most numerous and
the most brilliant of any one here!"

Powell laughed, a little bitterly.

"If I'd only been prudent enough to die then, Glenn," he went on, "I'd
have been mourned as a potential judge of the Supreme Court, senator and
president."

"It'll be three years before I can be admitted, won't it?" asked Marley.

"Yes," said Powell; "but that isn't long; and it isn't anything to be
admitted."

"Well, it takes time, anyway," said Marley, "and then there's the
practice after that--how long will that take?"

"Well, let's see," said Powell, plucking reflectively at the flabby skin
that hung between the points of his collar. "Let's see." His brows were
twitching humorously. "It's taken me about thirty years--I don't know
how much longer it'll take."

Powell smoked on for a few moments, and then added soberly:

"Of course, I had to fool around in politics for about twenty-five
years, and save the people."

"Do you think," Marley said, after a moment's silence that paid its own
respect to Powell's regrets, "that there's an opening for me here in
Macochee?"

"No, Glenn, I'll tell you. There's no use to think of locating in
Macochee or any other small town. The business is dead here. It's too
bad, but it's so. When I began there was plenty of real estate law to
do, and plenty of criminal law, but the land titles are all settled
now--"

"That's what Judge Blair said," interrupted Marley.

"So you've been to him, have you?"

Marley blushed.

"Well, not exactly," he said. "I heard him say that."

"Yes," mused Powell. "Well, he feathered his nest pretty well while they
were being settled. But as I was saying--the criminal business has died
out, or rather, it has changed. The criminals haven't any money any
more, that is, the old kind of criminals; the corporations have it all
now--if you want to make money, you'll have to have them for clients. Of
course, the money still goes to the criminal lawyer just as it used to."

"I like Macochee," said Marley, his spirits falling fast.

"Well, it's a nice old town to live in," Powell assented. "But the devil
of it is how're you going to live? Of course, you can study here just as
well as anywhere; better than anywhere, in fact; you have plenty of
time, and plenty of quiet. But as for locating here--why, it's utterly
out of the question for a man who wants to make anything of himself and
has to get a living while he's doing it--and I don't know any other kind
that ever do make anything out of themselves."

"I had hoped--" persisted Marley, longing for Powell to relent.

"Oh, I know," the lawyer replied almost impatiently, "but it's no use,
there's nothing in it. No one with ambition can stay here now. The town,
like all these old county-seats, is good for nothing but impecunious old
age and cemeteries. It was nothing but a country cross-roads before the
railroad came, and since then it's been nothing but a water-tank; if it
keeps on it'll be nothing but a whistling-post, and the trains won't be
bothered to stop at all. Its people are industrious in nothing but
gossip, and genuine in nothing but hypocrisy; they are so mean that they
hate themselves, and think all the time they're hating each other. Just
look at our leading citizen, Brother Dudley, over there in his bank; he
owns the whole town, and he thinks he's a bigger man than old Grant.
Sundays he sits in his pew with a black coat on, squinting at the
preacher out of his sore little eyes, and waiting for him to say
something he can get the bishop to fire him for, and he calls that
religion. Mondays he goes back to his business of skinning farmers and
poor widows out of their miserable little pennies, and he calls that
business; Does he ever look at a flower or a tree, or turn round in the
street at the laugh of a child? He's the kind of man that runs this
town, and he makes the rest of the people like it. Well, he don't run
me! God! If I'd only had some sense twenty years ago I'd have pulled out
and gone to the city and been somebody to-day."

It pained Marley to hear Powell berate Macochee; he had never heard him
rage so violently at the town, though he was always sneering at it. To
Marley the very name of Macochee meant romance; he liked the name the
Indian village had left behind when it vanished; he liked the old
high-gabled buildings about the Square; he longed to identify himself
with Macochee, to think of it as his home.

"But I'll tell you one thing," Powell went on, his tone suddenly
changing to one of angry resolution as he flung his feet heavily to the
bare floor and struck his desk a startling blow with his fist, "I'll
tell you one thing, I'm through working for nothing; they've got to pay
me! I'm going to squeeze the last cent out of them after this, same as
old Dudley does, same as old Bill Blair did before he went on the bench;
that's what I'm going to do. I'm getting old and I've got to quit
running a legal eleemosynary institution."

Powell's eyes flamed, but a shadow fell in the room, and Powell and
Marley glanced at the door.

"Well, what do you want?" said Powell.

An old woman, bareheaded in the hurry of a crisis, was on the threshold.

"Oh, Mr. Powell," she began in a wailing voice, "would you come quick!"

"What for?"

"Charlie's in ag'in."

"Got any money?" demanded Powell, in the angry resolution of a moment
before. He clenched his fist again on the edge of his table. Marley
glanced at him in surprise, and then at the old woman.

The woman hung her head and stammered:

"Well, you know--I hain't just now, but by the week's end, when I get
the money for my washin'--"

"Oh, that's all right," said Powell, getting to his feet, "that's all
right. We won't talk of that now. I beg your pardon. We'll walk down to
the calaboose and see the boy; we can talk it over with him and see
what's to be done."

He picked up his slouch hat and clapped it on his head.

"What's he been doing this time?" he said to the old woman as they went
out the door.

Marley watched them as they passed the open window and disappeared. A
smile touched his lips an instant, and then he became serious and
depressed once more.

He had had no word from Lavinia, and her going away immediately after
his scene with Judge Blair confused him. He tried to think it out, but
he could reach no conclusion save that it was all at an end. Lavinia's
sudden, unexplained departure proved that. And yet he could not, he
would not, think that she had changed; no, her father had borne her
away--that was it--forcibly and cruelly borne her away. For a long while
he sat there finding a certain satisfaction in the melancholy that came
over him, and then suddenly he was aroused by the boom of the town
clock. The heavy notes of the bell rolled across to him, and he counted
them--five. It was time to go. And Powell had not returned. It was not
surprising; Powell often went out that way and did not come back, and,
often, somehow to Marley's chagrin, men and women sat and waited long
hours in the dumb patience of the poor and then went away with their
woes still burdening them. They must have been used to woes, they
carried them so silently.

Marley was walking moodily down Main Street, feeling that he had no part
in the bustling happiness of the people going home from their day's
work, when, lifting his head, he saw Mrs. Blair in her surrey. Instantly
she jerked the horse in toward the curb and beckoned to him.

"Why, Glenn! I'm so glad I met you!" she said, her face rosy with its
smile. "I have something for you."

She raised her eyebrows in a significant way and began fumbling in her
lap. Presently she leaned out of the surrey and pressed something into
his hand.

"Just between ourselves, you know!" she said, with the delicious mystery
of a secret, and then gathering up her reins, she clucked at her lazy
horse.

He looked after her a moment, then at the thick envelope he held in his
hand. On it was written in the long Anglican characters of a young girl,
these words:

"For Glenn."




                              CHAPTER XII

                        A CONDITIONAL SURRENDER


Judge Blair and Lavinia returned home Saturday.

"I guess it's no use," the judge said to Mrs. Blair when she had
followed him up stairs, where he had gone to wash off the dust he had
accumulated during the six hours the train had consumed in jerking
itself from Sandusky to Macochee.

"No, I could see how relieved she was to get home," replied Mrs. Blair,
musing idly out of the window. She was not so sure that she was pleased
with the result she had done her part to accomplish.

"I guess you were right," the judge said.

"I?" asked Mrs. Blair, suddenly turning round.

"Yes--in saying that it would be best not to dignify it by too much
notice. That might only add to its seriousness."

Mrs. Blair looked out of the window again.

"Of course," the judge went on presently, "I wouldn't want it considered
as an engagement."

"Of course not," Mrs. Blair acquiesced.

"You'd better have a talk with her," he said. She saw that he was
seeking his usual retreat in such cases, and she was now determined not
to take the responsibility. Spiritually they tossed this responsibility
back and forth between them, like a shuttlecock.

"But wouldn't that make it look as if we were taking too much notice of
it?"

"Well," the judge said, "I don't know. Do just as you think best."

"Didn't you talk to her about it when you were away?" Mrs. Blair asked.

"M-m yes," the judge said slowly.

"And what did she say?"

"Nothing much, only--"

"Only what?"

"Only that she would not give him up."

"Oh!"

Mrs. Blair waited, and the judge dawdled at his toilet. Some compulsion
she could not resist, though she tried, distrusting her own weakness,
drove Mrs. Blair to speak first, and even then she sought to minimize
the effect of her surrender.

"Of course, Will," she said, "I want to be guided by you in this matter.
It's really quite serious."

"Oh, well," he said, "you're capable of managing it."

"You said you knew his father, didn't you?" she asked after a while.

"Slightly; why?"

"I was just wishing that we knew more of the family. You know they have
not lived in Macochee long."

"That's true," the judge assented, realizing all that the objection
meant.

"And yet," Mrs. Blair reassured him, though she was trying to reassure
herself at the same time, "his father is a minister; that ought to count
for something."

"Yes, it ought, and still you know they say that ministers' sons are
always--"

"But," Mrs. Blair interrupted, as if he were wholly missing the point,
"ministers' families always have a standing, I think."

They were silent, then, until Mrs. Blair began:

"I suppose I really ought to call on Mrs. Marley."

"Why?"

"Well, it seems, you know--it seems to me that I ought."

"But wouldn't that--?"

"I considered that, and still, it might seem more so if I didn't, don't
you see?"

The judge tried to grasp the attenuated point, and expressed his failure
in the sigh with which he stooped to fasten his shoes. Then he drew on
his alpaca coat, and just as he was leaving the room, his wife stopped
him with:

"But, Will!"

He halted with his hand on the door-knob. For an instant his wife looked
at him in pleasure. He was rather handsome, with his white hair combed
gravely, his ruddy face fresh from his shaving, and his stiff, white
collar about his neck.

"What did you say?" he asked, recalling her from her reverie of him.

"Oh!" she said; "only this--maybe he won't feel like coming around here
any more. You know you practically sent him away."

The judge gave a little laugh.

"I guess that will work itself out. Anyway I'll leave it to you--or to
them."

Still smiling at his own humor, he turned the door-knob, and then
hesitated. His smile had vanished.

"She's so young," he said with a regret. "She's so young. How old did
you say you were when we were married?"

"Eighteen," Mrs. Blair replied.

"And Lavinia can't be more than--"

"Why, she's twenty," said Mrs. Blair.

"So she is," said the judge. "So she is. But then you--"

Mrs. Blair had come close to him, and stood picking a bit of thread from
his shoulder.

"It was different with us, wasn't it, dear?" she said, looking up at
him.

He kissed her.




                              CHAPTER XIII

                                 SUMMER


The dust lay thick in Ward Street, sifting its fine powder on the leaves
of the cottonwoods that grew at the weedy gutter. The grass in the yard
grew long, and the bushes languished in the heat. Judge Blair's beans
clambered up their poles and turned white; and Connie's sweet peas grew
lush and rank, running, as she complained, mostly to leaves. The house
seemed to have withdrawn within itself; its green shutters were closed.
In the evening dim figures could be seen on the veranda, and the drone
of voices could be heard. At eleven o'clock, the deep siren of the
Limited could be heard, as it rounded the curve a mile out of town.
After that it was still, and night lay on Macochee, soft, vast,
immeasurable. The clock in the Court House tower boomed out the heavy
hours. Sometimes the harmonies of the singing negroes were borne over
the town.

And to Marley and Lavinia those days, and those evenings of purple
shadows and soft brilliant stars, were but the setting of a dream that
unfolded new wonders constantly. They were but a part of all life, a
part of the glowing summer itself, innocent of the thousand artificial
demands man has made on himself. Lavinia went about with a new
expression, exalted, expectant; a new dignity had come to her and a new
beauty; all at once, suddenly, as it were, character had set its noble
mark upon her, and about her slender figure there was the aureola of
romance.

"Have you noticed Lavinia?" Mrs. Blair asked her husband.

"No, why?" he said, in the alarm that was ever ready to spring within
him.

"She has changed so; she has grown so beautiful!"

One morning the judge saw a spar of light flash from her finger, and he
peered anxiously over his glasses.

"What's that, Lavinia?" he asked, and when she stood at his knee, almost
like a little girl again in all but spirit, he took her finger.

"A ring," she said simply.

"What does it mean?"

"Glenn gave it to me."

"Glenn?"

"Yes."

"But I thought there was to be no engagement?" The judge looked up, as
if there had been betrayal. But Lavinia only smiled. The judge looked at
her a moment, then released her hand.

"I wouldn't wear it where any one could see it," he said.

The summer stretched itself long into September; and then came the still
days of fall, moving slowly by in majestic procession. With the first
cool air, a new restless energy awoke in Marley. All the summer he had
neglected his studies; but now a change was working in him as wonderful
as that which autumn was working in the world. He looked back at that
happy, self-sufficient summer, and, for an instant, he had a wild,
impotent desire to detain it, to hold it, to keep things just as they
were; but the summer was gone, the winter at hand, and he felt all at
once the impact of practical life. He faced the future, and for an
instant he recoiled.

Lavinia was standing looking up at him. She laid her hand on his
shoulder.

"What is it, Glenn?"

"I was just thinking," he said, "that I have a great assurance in asking
you to marry me."

"What do you mean?"

"Why, dear, just this: I can't get a practice in Macochee; I might as
well look it in the face now as any time. I have known it all along, but
I've kept it from you, and I've tried to keep it from myself. There's no
place here for me; everybody says so, your father, Wade Powell,
everybody. There's no chance for a young man in the law in these small
towns. I've tried to make myself think otherwise. I've tried to make
myself believe that after I'd been admitted I could settle down here and
get a practice and we could have a little home of our own--but--"

"Can't we?" Lavinia whispered the words, as if she were afraid utterance
would confirm the fear they imported.

"Well--that's what they all say," Marley insisted.

"But papa's always talking that way," Lavinia protested. "I suppose all
old men do. They forget that they were ever young, and I don't see what
right they have to destroy your faith, your confidence, or the
confidence of any young man!" Lavinia blazed out these words
indignantly. It was consoling to Marley to hear them, he liked her
passionate partizanship in his cause. He longed for her to go on, and he
waited, anxious to be reassured in spite of himself. He could see her
face dimly in the starlight, and feel her figure rigid with protest
beside him.

"It's simply wicked in them," she said presently. "I don't care what
they say. We can and we will!"

"I like to have you put it that way, dear," said Marley. "I like to have
you say 'we'!"

She drew more closely to him.

"And you think we can?" he said presently.

"I know it."

"And have a little home, here, in one of these quiet streets, with the
shade, and the happiness--"

"Yes!"

"And it wouldn't matter much if we were poor?"

"No!"

"Just at first, you know. I'd work hard, and we could be so happy, so
happy, just we two, together!"

"Yes, yes," she whispered.

"I love Macochee so," Marley said presently. "I just couldn't leave it!"

"Don't! Don't!" she protested. "Don't even speak of it!"




                              CHAPTER XIV

                           ONE SUNDAY MORNING


It was Sunday morning and Marley sat in church looking at a shaft of
soft light that fell through one of the tall windows. From gazing at the
shaft of light, he began to study the symbols in the different windows,
the cross and crown, the lamb, the triangle that represented the
Trinity, all the Roman symbols that Protestantism still retains in its
decorations. Then he counted the pipes in the organ, back and forth,
never certain that he had counted them correctly. All about him the
people were going through the service, but it had lost all meaning for
Marley, because he had been accustomed to it from childhood.

Having been reassured by Lavinia, he felt that he should be happy, yet a
strong sense of dissatisfaction, of uncertainty, flowed persistently
under all his thoughts, belying his heart's assurance of its happiness.
When Doctor Marley, advancing to the pulpit, buttoned his coat down
before him, pushed aside the vase of flowers the ladies' committee
always put in his way, and stood with his strong, expressive hand laid
on the open Bible, Marley's thoughts fixed themselves for a moment in
the pride and love he had always had for his father. There swept before
him hundreds of scenes like this when his father had stood up to preach,
and then suddenly he realized that his father had grown old: he was
white-haired and in his rugged, smooth-shaven face deep lines were
drawn--the lines of a beautiful character.

He remembered something his father had said to the effect that the
pulpit was the only place in which inexperienced youth was desired,
showing the insincerity of what people call their religion, and then he
remembered the ambitions he had dimly felt in his father in his earlier
days; it had been predicted that his father would be a bishop. But he
was not a bishop, and now in all probability never would be one; he was
not politician enough for that. And Marley wondered whether or not his
father could be said to have been successful; he had come to know and to
do high things, he had lived a life full of noble sacrifice and the
finest faith in humanity and in God; but was this success? He heard his
father's voice:

"The text will be found in the third chapter of the Lamentations of
Jeremiah."

But Marley never listened to sermons; now and then he caught a phrase,
or a period, especially when his father raised his voice, but his
thoughts were elsewhere, anywhere--not on the sermon. The men and women
sitting in front of him kept shifting constantly, and he grew tired of
slipping this way and that and craning his neck in order to see his
father. And then the constant fluttering of fans hurt his eyes, and they
wandered here and there, each person they lighted on suggesting some new
train of thought.

Presently they fell on a girl in a white dress, and in some way she
suggested Lavinia. And instantly he felt that he should be perfectly
happy when thinking of Lavinia, but, as suddenly, came that subconscious
uncertainty, that deep-flowing discontent. He went over his last
conversation with Lavinia, in which he had found such assurance, but now
away from her he realized that he had lulled himself into a sense of
security that was all false; and the conviction that Macochee had no
place for him, at least as a lawyer, came back. He tried to put it away
from him, and think of something else.

His eyes fell on old Selah Dudley, sitting like all pillars of the
church, at the end of his pew. Dudley's back was narrow, and rounded out
between the shoulders so that Marley wondered how he could sit
comfortably at all; his head was flat and sheer behind, and Marley could
see with what care the old banker had plastered the scant hair across
his bald poll--the only sign of vanity revealed in him, unless it were
in the brown kid gloves he wore. Marley looked at Dudley with the
feeling that he was looking at the most successful man in Macochee, and
yet he had a troubled sense of the phariseeism that is the essential
element of such success. He remembered what Wade Powell had said;
immediately he saw Dudley in a new light; the old man sat stolid,
patient and brutal, waiting for some heterodoxy, or something that could
be construed as heterodoxy, theological or economic, like a savage with
a spear waiting to pierce his prey, and glad when the moment came.

But Marley, seeing the young girl in the white dress, again thought of
Lavinia, who would be sitting at that very moment with her father and
mother and Connie and Chad over in the Presbyterian church. How long
would it be before he could sit there beside her, as her husband? Then
with a flash it came to him that they would, in all likelihood, be
married in that very church. Instantly he saw the spectators gathered,
he saw the pulpit and the chancel-rail hidden in flowers, he saw his
father with his ritual in his hands, waiting; and then while the organ
played the wedding march, Lavinia coming down the aisle, her eyes
lowered under her veil. His heart beat faster, he felt a wave of
emotion, joyous, exciting.

But there was much to do before that moment could come--the long days
and nights of study; the examination looming like a mountain of
difficulties, then months and years of waiting for a practice. He tried
to imagine each detail of the coming of a practice, but he could not; he
could not conceive how it was possible for a practice to come to any
one, much less to him. There were many lawyers in Macochee now, and all
of them were more or less idle. There was certainly no need of more.
Judge Blair and Wade Powell and every one had told him that, and
suddenly he felt an impatience with them all, as if they were
responsible for the conditions they described; they all conspired
against him, men and conditions, making up the elements of a harsh,
intractable fate.

And Marley grew bitter against every one in Macochee; they all gossiped
about him, they were all determined to drive him away; well, let them;
he would go; but he would come back again some day as a great,
successful lawyer, looking down on them and their little interests, and
they would be filled with envy and respect. But what of Lavinia?

What right had he to ask her to marry him? What right had he to place
her in the position he had? He realized it now, clearly, he told
himself, for the first time. She had given up all for him. She would go
out no more, she had foregone her parties, calls, picnics, dances,
everything; in her devotion she had estranged her friends. He had given
her parents concern, he had placed her in a false, impossible position.
He must rescue her from it. But how? By breaking the engagement? He
blushed for the thought. By going away quietly, silently, without a
word? That would only increase the difficulty of her position. By
keeping her waiting, year after year, until he could find a foothold in
the world? Even that was unfair.

No, he could not give up Lavinia and he could not go away from Macochee,
hence it followed that he must give up the law. He must get some work to
do, and at once; something that would pay him enough to support a wife.
He began to canvass the possibilities in Macochee. He thought of all the
openings; surely there would be something; there were several thousand
persons in Macochee, and they lived somehow. He did not wish to give up
the law; not that he loved it so, but because he disliked to own himself
beaten. But it was necessary; he could suffer this defeat; he could make
this sacrifice. There was something almost noble in the attitude, and he
derived a kind of morbid consolation from the thought.

His father was closing the Bible--sure sign that the sermon was about to
end. There was another prayer, then a hymn, and while the congregation
remained standing for the benediction, he heard his father's voice:

"The peace of God which passeth all understanding--"

The words had always comforted him in the sorrows he was constantly
imagining, but now they brought no peace.

In another moment the congregation was stirring joyously, in unconscious
relief that the sitting was over. The hum of voices assumed a pleasant
social air, as friend and acquaintance turned to greet one another. The
people moved slowly down the aisle. He caught a glimpse of his father,
smiling and happy--happy that his work was done--passing his
handkerchief over his reddened brow and bending to take the hands of
those who came to speak to him and to congratulate him. Just then Selah
Dudley gave his father his hand; the sight pleased Marley; and suddenly
an idea came to him.




                               CHAPTER XV

                            A SAINT'S ADVICE


On Monday morning Marley found Dudley at his post in the First National
Bank. He halted at the little low gate in the rail that ran round
Dudley's desk until Dudley looked up and saw him, and then Marley
smiled. Dudley, conceiving it to be the propitiatory smile of the
intending borrower, narrowed his eyes as he regarded him.

"Well?" he said.

Marley went in and sat down on the edge of the hard chair that was
placed near Dudley.

"I wish to have a little talk with you, Mr. Dudley," he said. He waited
then for Dudley to reply, thinking perhaps he would be interested in the
son of his pastor. Dudley had turned his chair a little, and seemed to
have sunk a little lower in its brown leather cushions, worn to a hard
shine during the long years he had sat there. The lower part of him was
round and full and heavy, while his shoulders were narrow and sloping,
and his chest sunken, as if, from sitting there so many years, his
vitals had settled, giving him the figure of a half emptied bag of
grain. His legs were thin, and his trousers crept constantly up the legs
of the boots he wore; the boots were blackened as far as the ankles,
above the ankles they were wrinkled and scuffed to a dirty brown.

Marley noted these details hurriedly, for it was the face of the man
that held him. A scant beard, made up of a few harsh, wiry hairs, partly
covered the banker's cheeks and chin; his upper lip was clean-shaven,
and his hair, scant but still black, was combed forward at the temples,
and carefully carried over from one side of his head to the other,
ineffectually trying to hide the encroaching baldness. His nose was
large; his eyes narrow under his almost barren brows and red at the
edges of the lids that lacked lashes.

"What do you want?" said Dudley, never moving, as if to economize his
energies, as he economized his words and every other thing of value in
his narrow world.

Marley did not know just what reply to make: this was a critical moment
to him, and he must make no mistake.

"I came," he began, "to--to ask you for a little advice."

Dudley, at this, settled a little more into his chair, possibly a little
more comfortably; he seemed to relax somewhat, and his eyes were not
quite so narrow as they had been. But he blinked a moment, and then
cautiously asked:

"What about?"

"Well, it's just this," Marley began, smiling persistently; "you see
I've begun the study of law; I had intended to be a lawyer."

"We've got plenty o' lawyers," said Dudley.

"That's just the conclusion I have come to, and I was thinking somewhat
of making a change. And so I thought I'd come and ask you, that is, your
advice."

Dudley, still cautious, made no reply, and Marley almost despaired of
getting on easy terms. He began to wish he had not come; he might have
known this, he said to himself, and his smile and the confidence with
which he had come began to leave him. But he must make another effort.

"You see, Mr. Dudley," he said, "I thought, as things are nowadays, I
would have to wait years before I could really do anything in the law,
and as I have my own way to make in the world, I thought, you know, I
might get into something else."

"What, for instance?" asked Dudley.

"Well, I didn't exactly know; I had hardly thought it out,--that's why I
came to you, knowing you to be a man of large affairs."

Dudley had an instant's vision of his bank, of his stocks, and of the
many farms all over Gordon County on which he held mortgages, but he
checked his impulse; these very possessions must be guarded; people
envied him them, and while this envy in one way was among the sources of
his few joys, it nevertheless gave rise to covetousness which was
prohibited by the tenth commandment.

"So you want my advice, eh?" he asked, looking hard at Marley.

"Yes, sir."

"And that's all?" he asked suspiciously.

"Well--any suggestions," Marley said.

Dudley still hesitated. He continued to study Marley out of his little
eyes. Presently he inquired, as if by way of getting a basis to start
on:

"You been to college, ain't you?"

"Yes, sir," Marley answered promptly; "I graduated in June."

"How long was you there?"

"Why," Marley replied in some surprise, "the full four years."

"Four years," Dudley repeated. "How old?"

"Twenty-two."

"Well, that's that much time wasted. If a young man's going to get along
these times, and make anything of himself, he has to start early, learn
business ways and habits. He's got to begin at the bottom, and feel his
way up." The banker was speaking now with a reckless waste of words that
was surprising. "The main thing at first is to work; it ain't the money.
Now, when I come to Macochee, forty-seven years ago, I hadn't nothing.
But I went to work, I was up early, and I went to bed early; I worked
hard all day, I 'tended to business, and I saved my money. That's it,
young man, that's the only way--up early, work hard, and save your
money." Dudley leaned back in his chair to let Marley contemplate him.

"But what did you work at? At first, I mean."

"Why," said Dudley, as if in surprise, "at anything I could get. I wan't
proud; I wan't 'fraid o' work."

Marley leaned forward with his elbows on his knees and began twirling
his hat in his hands. Then, thinking the attitude lacking in respect, he
sat up again.

"Then, I was careful of my habits," Dudley went on. "I never touched a
bit o' tobacco, nor tasted a drop o' liquor in my life."

He paused, and then:

"Do you use tobacco?" he asked.

"Sometimes," Marley hesitated to confess.

"Cigarettes?"

"Now and then."

"Humph! Learned that at college, I suppose." Marley made no reply.

"Well, you've started wrong, young man. That wan't the way I made
myself. I never touched a drop of liquor nor tasted tobacco. I worked
hard and God prospered me--yes, God prospered me."

Dudley's voice sank piously.

"Now, I'll tell you." He seemed to be about to impart the secret of it
all. "When I was your age, I embraced religion, and I promised God that
if he'd prosper me I'd give a tenth of all I made to the church; a
tenth, yes, sir, a full tenth." The banker paused again as if making a
calculation, and a trouble gathered for an instant at his hairless
brows, but, as if by an effort, he smoothed them so that they became
meek and submissive. And then he went on, as if he had found a species
of relief:

"But it was the best bargain I ever made. It paid; yes, it paid; I kep'
my word, and the Lord kep' His; He prospered me."

He had folded his hands, and sat blinking at Marley.

"So my advice to you, young man, is to give up tobacco and all your
other bad habits, to be up early in the morning, to work hard, and
remember God in all your ways, and He shall direct thy paths."

Dudley stirred, and moved his swivel chair a little, as if it were time
to resume work. But Marley sat there.

"That's my advice to you, young man," Dudley repeated, "and it won't
cost you a cent." He said this generously, at the same time implying a
hint of dismissal. Still Marley did not move, and Dudley eyed him in
some concern. Marley saw the look and forced a smile.

"I thank you, Mr. Dudley," he said, "for your advice. I am sure it is
good. I was wondering, though," he went on, with a reluctance that he
knew impaired the effect of his words, "if you wouldn't have something
here in your bank for me--"

At this Dudley suddenly seemed to shrink in size. His eyes became small,
mere inflamed slits beneath his hairless brows, and he said:

"I thought you said you wanted advice?"

"Well, I did," Marley explained, "but I thought maybe--"

He did not finish the sentence. He rose and stood, still twirling his
hat in his hand. "And you have nothing, you know of nothing?"

Dudley slowly shook his head from side to side, once or twice, having
resumed his economical habits.

"Good morning," Marley said, and left.

As he went out, the cashier and the assistant cashier looked at him
through the green wire screen. Then they lifted their heads from their
tasks cautiously and exchanged surreptitious glances.




                              CHAPTER XVI

                           LOVE AND A LIVING


Marley was not surprised by the result of his visit to Selah Dudley. He
made an effort to convince himself that there was truth in what Dudley
had said to him, even if he could not remember exactly what it was that
Dudley had said. He tried to put down the instinctive feeling of dislike
he had for the old banker; he told himself that such a feeling was
unworthy of him, if not unworthy of Dudley, and in thinking the matter
over he tried to clear himself of all suspicion of envy or jealousy of
Dudley's success. The whole town considered Dudley its leading man, and
Marley tried so to consider him; and he tried to consider him in this
light because he was a good man and not because he was a rich man, just
as the town pretended to do. He wanted to talk about Dudley with some
one, but he did not want to talk about him with Lavinia, because he felt
a shame in his failure with Dudley that he feared Lavinia might share.
He did talk with his father about him, but his father did not seem to be
interested; he smiled his tolerant smile, but made no comment. And when
Marley pressed him for an opinion of Dudley his father said:

"They make broad their phylacteries."

And that was all.

However, Marley found Wade Powell willing to talk of Selah Dudley, as he
was willing to talk of almost anything. Marley did not tell Powell that
he had been to Dudley to ask for a position; he merely let it be
understood that he had met the old man in the course of the day and
talked with him casually.

"By the way," he asked, as if the thought had just come to him, "how did
Selah Dudley make his money?"

"He didn't make it," Powell answered.

"He didn't? Did he inherit it?"

"No."

"Then how did he get it?"

"He gathered it."

"Gathered it? I don't know what you mean."

Powell laughed.

"You don't? Well, there's a difference."

"He wasn't in the army, was he?"

"In the army! Great God!" Powell threw into his voice the contempt he
could not find the word to express. "You think he'd risk his hide in the
army? Well, I should say not! Though he would have been perfectly
safe--" Powell said it as a parenthetical afterthought--"no bullet could
ever have pierced his hide, and he had no blood to shed."

Powell bit the end from his cigar and spat out the damp little pieces of
tobacco viciously.

"No, I'll tell you, Glenn," he said, "he stayed at home and got his
start, as he calls it, by skinning the poor. Widows were his big game
and he gathered a little pile that has been growing ever since. To-day
he owns Gordon County."

"He seems to be a prominent man in the church," ventured Marley.

"He'll be a prominent man in hell," said Powell, angrily. And then he
added thoughtfully: "My one regret in going there myself is that I'll
have to see him every day."

The most curious effect of Marley's visit to Dudley, however, was one he
did not observe himself. Having been defeated in his plan to secure a
place in the bank, he felt at first, with a certain consolation, that he
still had the law to fall back on, and he returned to his studies. But
he made little headway; once having decided to give up the law, the
decision remained, and his mind was constantly occupied with schemes for
securing a foothold in some other occupation. He considered, one after
another, every possibility in Macochee, and as fast as he thought of
some opening, he went for it, but invariably to find it either no
opening at all, or else, if it were an opening, one that closed at his
approach. Gradually he gave up his studies altogether, and sat idle, his
book before him; but one day Powell said to him:

"Say, Glenn, you're not getting along very fast, are you?"

Marley started, and flushed with a sense of guilt.

"Well, no," he admitted.

"What's the matter, in love?"

Marley blushed, from another cause this time, though the guilt remained
in his face. But Powell instantly was gentle.

"I beg your pardon," he said, "I was just joking, of course; I didn't
mean to be inquisitive. You mustn't mind my boorishness."

Marley looked at him gratefully and Powell, to whom any show of
affection was confusing, turned away self-consciously. But Marley
whirled his chair around toward Powell.

"I am in love," he said. "I've wanted to tell you, but I--you know who
she is."

"Lavinia Blair?"

"Yes. And that's what's troubling me," Marley went on. "I want to get
married, and I can't. I can't," he repeated, "the law's too slow; I've
realized it for a long while, but I tried to keep the fact away, I tried
not to see it. But now I have to face it. Why," he said, rising to his
feet, "it'll take a thousand years to get a practice in this town, and
I'm not even admitted yet."

He walked to and fro, his brows pinched together, his lower lip thrust
out, his teeth nipping his upper one. Powell glanced at him, but said
nothing. He knew human nature, this lawyer, and the fact made every one
in the county tremble at the thought of his cross-examinations;
sometimes he carried too far his love of laying souls bare, and as often
hurt as helped his cause. He never had been able to turn his knowledge
to much practical account; in a city he would have had numerous
retainers as a trial lawyer, though few as a counselor. In Macochee he
was out of place, and he chafed under a semi-consciousness of the fact.
He waited, knowing that Marley would burst forth again.

"I'll have to get a job," Marley said at that moment, bitterly, "and go
to work; that's all." And then he laughed harshly. "Humph, get a
job--that's the biggest job of all. What can I get here in Macochee, I'd
like to know?"

He halted and turned suddenly, fiercely, almost menacingly on Powell, as
if he were the cause of his predicament.

"I've told you already it's no place for you," said Powell, quietly.

"But where'll I go?" Marley held out his hands with a gesture that was
pleading, pathetic. Thus he waited for Powell's reply.

Powell smoked thoughtfully for a moment and then began:

"When I was going to the law school in Cincinnati, there was a young
fellow in my class--a great friend of mine. He was poor, and I was
poor--God! how poor we were!" Powell paused in this retrospect of
poverty. "That was why we were such friends,--our poverty gave us a
common interest. This fellow came from up in Hardin County; he was tall,
lean and gawky, the worst jay you ever saw. When we had graduated, I
supposed he would go home, maybe to Kenton--that was his county-seat.
When we were bidding each other good-by--I'll never forget the day, it
was June, hot as hell; and we had left the old law school in Walnut
Street and were standing there by the Tyler-Davidson fountain in Fifth
Street. I said, 'Well, we'll see each other once in a while; we won't be
far apart.' He looked at me and said, 'I don't know about that.' 'Why?'
I asked. 'Well,' he said, 'I'm going to Chicago.' I looked at him in
surprise. He was out at the elbows then, and had hardly enough money to
get home on. Then the ridiculousness of it struck me, and I laughed.
'Why, you'll starve to death there!' I said. He only smiled." Powell
paused, to whet Marley's appetite, perhaps, for the foregone denouement.

"That jay," Powell said, when he had allowed sufficient time to elapse,
"that jay I laughed at is Judge Johnson, of the United States Circuit
Court."

The story saddened Marley. With his faculty of conceiving a whole drama
at once, he caught in an instant the trials Judge Johnson had gone
through before he won to his station of ease and honor; he saw the
privations, the sacrifices, the hardships, the endless strivings,
plottings, schemings; it wearied and depressed him; his frightened mind
hung back, clung to the real, the present, the known, found a relief in
picturing the seeming security of a man like Wade Powell, in a town
where he knew everybody and was known by everybody. He shrank from
hearing more of the judge; he wished to stay with his thought in
Macochee.

"How _do_ young men get a start in places like Macochee?" he asked, and
then he added in despairing argument: "They _do_ stay, they _do_ get
along somehow, they make livings, and raise families; the town grows and
does business, the population increases, it doesn't die off."

"Well," said Wade Powell, approaching the problem with the generalities
its mystery demanded, "some of them marry rich women, but that industry
is about played out now; the fortunes are divided up; some of them, most
of them, are content to eke out small livings, clerking in stores and
that kind of thing; about the only ones that get ahead any are traders;
they barter around, first in one business, then in another; they run a
grocery, then sell it out and buy a livery-stable; then they dabble in
real estate a while; finally they skin some one out of a farm and then
they go on skinning, a little at a time; by the time they're old, people
forget their beginnings and they become respectable; then they join the
church, like Selah Dudley."

Powell stopped a moment, then he began again.

"The lawyers get along God knows how; the doctors, well, they never
starve, for people will get sick, or think they're sick, which is better
yet; then there are a few preachers who are supported in a poor way by
their congregations. When a man fails, he goes into the insurance
business."

Powell smoked contemplatively for a few moments.

"Sometimes," he resumed presently, "I feel as if I were tottering on the
verge of the insurance business myself."

Marley looked at Powell, who had relapsed into silence, his head
lowered, his eyes fixed in the distance, and there was something
pathetic in the figure, or would have been, but for the humor that saved
every situation for Powell. There was, however, something appealing, and
something to inspire affection, too. Marley's gaze recalled Powell, and
he glanced up with a smile.

"I reckon you've gathered from my remarks," said Powell, "that I
consider success chiefly from a monetary standpoint, but I don't. The
main business of life is living, and the trouble with the world is that
it is too busy getting ready to live to find the time for life; it has
tied itself up with a thousand chains of its own forging and it has had
to postpone living from time to time until most people have put the
beginning of life at the gateway of death; meanwhile they're busy
gathering things, like magpies, and those that gather the most are
considered the best; they have come to think that people are divided
into two classes, good and bad; the good are those who own, the bad
those who don't, and the good think their business is to put down the
bad. Now, here in Gordon County, we have about everything a man needs;
the spring comes and the summer, and the autumn and the winter; the rain
falls and the winds blow and the sun shines, and I've noticed that
Lighttown gets about as much rain as Main Street, and Gooseville about
as much wind as Scioto Street; the sun seems to shine pretty much alike
on the niggers loafing in Market Space and on old Selah Dudley and Judge
Blair, bowing like Christians to each other in the Square. The trees are
the same color wherever they grow, and I don't see any reason why people
shouldn't be happy if they'd only let one another be happy. Now, I would
have lived, but I didn't have time. I thought when I began that I'd have
to do as the rest were doing, get hold of things, and I saw that if I
did, I'd have to get my share away from them; well, I made a failure of
that, being too soft inside someway; that was all right too, but
meanwhile I was wasting time, and putting off living--now it's too
late."

Marley looked at him in perplexity, not knowing how to take him.

"I know," he said presently. "But what am I going to do? I can live all
right, but I have to do better than that; I want to get married."

"Married," mused Powell, "married! Well, I got married."

Marley was interested. He had never heard Powell speak of his wife, and
he feared what he was about to say; for that instant Powell's standing
in his estimation trembled.

"And that was the only sensible thing I ever did."

Marley felt a great relief.

"But I don't know that I did right by Mary; I didn't do her any good, I
reckon; still, she's borne up somehow; I wish I had a sky full of
sunlight to pour over her."

Powell walked to his window, and looked across into the Court-House yard
where the leaves were falling slowly from the Maple-trees. Marley hoped
that he would go on, and say more of his wife, but he was silent.
Presently he turned about.

"Well, Glenn," he said; "I see you're stuck on staying in Macochee, and
I don't blame you; and you want to get married, and that's all right.
Maybe I can help you do it."

"How?" said Marley, eagerly.

"I've got a scheme."

"What is it?"

"Well, maybe it'll work, maybe it won't. I'd better wait till I see
whether it will or not before I tell you."

He stood and smiled at Marley a moment, and then said: "You wait here."

And he turned and left the office. Marley watched Powell's fine figure
as he walked across the street toward the Court House, a great love of
the man surging within him. He felt secure and safe; a new warmth spread
through him. At the door of the Court House Marley saw him stop and
shake hands with Garver, the sheriff. The two talked a moment, then
turned and went down toward the big iron gate in Main Street, and
disappeared. Marley waited until noon and then he went home to his
dinner. He returned, but Powell did not come back to the office all the
afternoon.




                              CHAPTER XVII

                            THE COUNTY FAIR


Marley did not see Wade Powell again for four days; a Sunday intervened,
and Powell did not come back to the office until Monday morning. He came
in with a solemn air upon him, and a new dignity that made impressive
the seriousness with which he set to work at the pile of papers on his
desk, as if he were beginning a new week with new resolutions. He was
freshly shaved, and his hair had been cut; it was shorter at the sides
and, against his rough sunburnt neck, showed an edge of clean white
skin. His newly cropped hair gave him a strange, brisk appearance; his
black clothes were brushed, his linen fresh.

He spoke to Marley but a few times and then from the distant altitude of
his new dignity. Once he sent Marley on an errand to Snider's drug store
to buy a large blank book; he said he was going to keep an office docket
after that. He worked on his new docket half the morning, then he
carried the docket and the bundle of papers over to Marley's table,
flung them down and asked Marley if he would not continue the work for
him. He explained the system he had devised for keeping a record of his
cases; it was intricate and complete, but in many of his cases the
numbers and in some instances the names of opposing parties were
missing; Powell told Marley to go over to the Court House and get the
missing data from the clerk.

"I've got to go out for a while," Powell explained. Then he hurried
away; he seemed to be glad to escape from the office and the drudgery of
the task he had set for himself.

Powell's absence weighed on Marley; he was lonesome in the deserted
office, and found himself wondering just where Powell was at each
moment; he pictured him with his companions, Colonel Devlin, Marshall
Scarff, Sheriff Garver, old man Brockton and Doc Hall; lately it had
been rumored that George Halliday had been admitted to the merry group,
and that they played poker nightly in a room in the Coleman Block. Then
Marley would picture to himself Wade Powell's wife; he had never seen
her, but he had an idea of her appearance, formed from no description of
her, but created out of his own fancy. He pictured her as a graceful
little woman, with a certain droop to her figure; but try as he would,
he could not see her face; it was a blur to him, yet it gave somehow a
certain expression of sweetness and patience; sometimes, by an effort,
he could see her brow, and the hair above it; the hair was dark, and
parted in the middle with some gray in its rather heavy mass.

Marley could never discuss Wade Powell with any kind of satisfaction
with Lavinia. When he spoke of him, she would smile and affect an
interest, but he could detect the affectation, and he could detect,
also, a certain distance in her attitude toward Wade Powell or the
thought of him, which he ascribed to the influence of Judge Blair's
dislike. Marley saw that Lavinia never would accept Wade Powell, and he
had ceased to mention him except in a casual manner. For some like
reason he had ceased to mention Wade Powell at home; he found that he
had many views which he could not share with those nearest him, and his
inner life at that time was somewhat lonely and aloof.

He had not told Lavinia of Wade Powell's offer of assistance, nor had he
spoken of it at home. In those four days he had thought much of it and
built countless hopes upon it; he had thought of all the possibilities,
and taken a fine delight in examining each one, working it out to its
logical end in its effect upon Lavinia and him and upon their fortunes.
He was disappointed when Wade Powell failed to refer to the subject
again; he would have liked to discuss the disappointment with Lavinia;
usually, out of her youthful optimism and faith in the life of which she
was so innocent, she could reassure him; but of late he had had so many
disappointments and had drawn so heavily on Lavinia's resources of
comfort and hope that he had grown wary, almost superstitiously wary, of
making any further drafts.

When Monday came and Powell did not renew the subject, nor even say what
his scheme had been, Marley concluded that Powell had forgotten all
about it, and so he relinquished the hope with a sigh, and tried to
forget it himself. He took up his studies once more; but he made poor
headway; he saw with chagrin that he had not read ten pages of law in as
many days, and what he had read he could not remember. When he tried to
review it, the words had no meaning for him, nor could he wrest any from
them, even though he ground his elbows in the table with the book
between them and dug his fists into his hair.

That was the week of the Gordon County fair. For a month every fence
along the white pikes in the country had borne the bills, flaming from
afar in red ink the date, "Oct. 15-31." There were, too, lithographs
everywhere--on boards at the monument, at the Court House, on the town
hall, on the covered bridge over Mad River--lithographs picturing the
exciting finish of a trotting race, and a sedate concourse of fat
cattle. The fair opened Monday, but it was understood that that day
would be devoted to preparing and arranging the exhibits; the fair would
not begin in earnest until Tuesday; the big day would be Thursday.

Marley was glad that fair week had come, for the chance of novelty which
it offered, and, too, for the excuse it gave him; he would not study
that week, but in the general festivity try to forget the problem that
so oppressed him. He would have liked to go to the fair every day, but
he could not, for the expense, insignificant as it seemed to be to every
one else in the county, was not insignificant to him. He went, however,
on Wednesday with his father, who, with the love of horses he had
inherited from the saddle-bag days of Methodism, recklessly attended the
races. Marley thought that this visit would be his last, but on Thursday
morning he met Lawrence in the Square.

"Just the man I'm looking for!" said Lawrence.

He was brisk, alert, important, and had an official air which was
explained when Marley observed, on the lapel of his coat, the badge of
blue ribbon that proclaimed an officer of the fair.

"I have charge of the tickets this year," he said. "Want to go? I'll
pass you in."

Marley was glad enough to accept.

"I'll have to go around to the office and tell Powell," he said. "I was
away all day yesterday."

"Oh, nonsense," replied Lawrence, "that won't make any difference; he's
been full for two days. This is his big time."

Marley had a pang as he saw with what small seriousness Lawrence
regarded his relation to the law; it reflected, doubtless, the common
attitude of the community toward him and his efforts.

"I've got to hurry," Lawrence went on; "I've got a rig waiting here; you
can ride out with me."

It was one of the incomparable afternoons that autumn brings to Ohio;
the retreating sun was flashing in the high, blue sky; the air was fresh
and Marley felt it full of energy and hope. Lawrence drove rapidly
through the throng of hurrying vehicles that crowded the road to the
fair-grounds, stirring up a cloud of dust that covered everything with
its white powder.

Lawrence left him at the gate, being too full of business to engage in
the weary search for pleasure, and Marley set out alone across the
scorched and trampled turf for the grand stand, black with people for
the races. He could hear the nervous clamor of the bell in the judges'
stand, the notes of the hand-organ at the squeaking merry-go-round, the
incessant thumping of the bass drum that made its barbaric music for the
side-show, and the cries of venders, dominating all the voices of the
thousands bent in their silly way on pleasure. Once, calling him back to
the real, to the peace of the commonplace, he heard the distant tones of
the town clock in the tower that stood, a mile away, above the autumnal
trees.

He pressed into the space between the grand stand and the whitewashed
fence that surrounded the track; through the palings he could see the
stoop-shouldered drivers, bent over the heavily breathing trotters they
jogged to and fro; above him, in the grand stand, he could distinguish
cries and laughs, now and then complete excited sentences, sometimes
voices he knew. All around him the farmers, clumsy in their ready-made
clothes and bearing their buggy whips as some insignia of office,
solemnly watched the races and talked of horses.

The sense of kinship with the crowd that had unerringly drawn Marley
left him the moment he was in the crowd, and a loneliness replaced the
sense of kinship. He looked about for some one he knew. He began, here
and there, to recognize faces, just as he had recognized voices in the
din above him; he began to analyze and to classify the crowd, and he
laughed somewhat cynically when he saw numbers of politicians going
about among the farmers, shaking their hands, greeting them effusively,
calling them by their Christian names. Then suddenly he saw Wade Powell.
The crowd at the point where Powell stood, nucleated with him as its
center; by the way the men were laughing, and by the way Powell was
trying not to laugh, Marley knew that he had been telling them one of
his stories, and from the self-conscious, guilty expressions on certain
of the faces, Marley knew that the story was probably one that should
not have been told. Several countrymen hung on the edge of the group,
not identifying themselves with it, yet anxious to have a look at Wade
Powell, who enjoyed the fame of the county's best criminal lawyer.

When Powell saw Marley he called to him, and when Marley drew near, he
introduced him, somehow mysteriously, almost surreptitiously, to the man
at his elbow. Powell's face was very red, and his eyes were brilliant.
The mystery he put into his introduction was but a part of his manner.

"This is Mr. Carman, of Pleasant Grove Township, Glenn," he said,
bending over, as if no one should hear the name; and then he added, in a
husky whisper: "He's our candidate for county clerk, you know."

Marley saw something strange, forbidding, in Carman's face, but he could
not tell what it was. It was a red, sunburnt face, closely shaven, with
a short mustache burned by the sun; the smile it wore seemed to be fixed
and impersonal. Plainly the man had spent his days out of doors, though,
it seemed, not healthfully, for his skin was dry and hardened, and his
neck thin and wrinkled; he seemed to have known the hard work and the
poor nourishment of a farm. Marley wondered what was the matter with
Carman's face. But Powell was drawing them aside.

"Come over here," he was saying, "where we can be alone."

He led them to a corner of the little yard; no one was near; they were
quite out of the crowd which was pressing to the whitewashed picket
fence, attracted by the excitement of the race for which the horses were
just then scoring.

"Now, Jake," Powell began, speaking to Carman, "this is the young man I
was talking to you about."

Carman, still smiling his dry meaningless smile, turned his face half
away.

"I reckon," Powell went on, "that I might be able to do you some good,
if I took off my coat." Powell spoke with a pride in his own influence;
Marley had never known him to come so near to boasting before.

Carman was looking away; and Powell, his own eyes narrowed, was watching
him closely. Once he winked at Marley, and Marley was mystified; he did
not know what play was going on here; he looked from Carman to Powell,
and back to Carman again. There was some strange fascination about
Carman; Marley felt a slight relief when he discovered that there was
something peculiar about Carman's eyes.

"I haven't said anything to Marley about the matter, Jake," Powell said.
"Maybe I'd better tell him. Hell! He might not want it--I don't know."

Carman turned suddenly; his face had been in the shadow; now it came
into the sunlight, and Marley saw that while the pupil of Carman's right
eye contracted suddenly, the pupil of his left eye remained fixed; it
was larger than the pupil of the right eye, which had shrunk to a
pin-point in the sharp light of the sun. Marley looked closely, the left
eye seemed to be swimming in liquid; it almost hurt Marley's eyes to
look at it.

"I've been telling Carman, Glenn," Powell was explaining, "that if he is
elected--and gets into the Court House--"

Marley looked at Powell expectantly.

"I want him," Powell went on, "to make you his deputy."

Marley saw it all in a flash; this was what Powell had meant that day a
fortnight ago; he felt his great affection for Powell glow and warm;
Lavinia would appreciate Powell after this. It meant salary, position, a
place in which he might complete his law studies at his leisure; it
meant a living, a home, marriage, Lavinia! He looked all his gratitude
at Powell, who smiled appreciatively.

Carman had turned his face away again, he was still smiling, and
plucking now at his chin; Marley waited, and Powell finally grew
impatient.

"Well, Jake, what do you say?"

Carman waited a moment longer, then slowly turned about. Marley watched
him narrowly, he saw the pupil of his right eye contract, the pupil of
the watery left eye remained fixed; then, for the first time, Carman
looked steadily at Marley and for the first time he spoke.

"Well," he said, and he stopped to spit out his tobacco, "you know I'm
always ready to do a friend a good turn."

Powell looked Carman over carefully a moment, and then he said,

"All right, Jake."

Just then there was a rush of hoofs, a shock of excitement, and they
heard a loud yell:

"Go!"

And they rushed to the fence of the whitewashed palings.




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                           THE ROAD TO MINGO


Lavinia sat rocking quietly back and forth, and stitched away with her
colored silks on her tambourine frames, while Marley told her of the
fortune Wade Powell had brought them. He told the story briefly, and he
tried to tell it simply; he did not comment on Powell's kindness or
generosity, but let his deeds speak for themselves in Powell's behalf.
When he had done, Marley waited for Lavinia's comment, but she rocked on
a moment and then held her tambourine frames at arm's length to study
the sweet pea she was making. When she had done so, she dropped her
sewing suddenly into her lap, and looking up, said:

"He thinks everything of you, doesn't he?"

"I believe he likes me," Marley said, as modestly as he could put it.

"Who could help it?"

Lavinia looked at Marley, and he leaned over, and took her hands.

"I am glad you can't, sweetheart," he said.

"Do you know," she went on, "I think it is because you have been kind
and good to him--just as you are kind and good to every one. His life is
lonely; he is an outcast, almost; no one cares for him, and he
appreciates your goodness."

Pity was the utmost feeling she could produce for Wade Powell out of her
kindly heart. But Marley, though he could accept her homage to the full
without embarrassment, could not acquiesce to this length, and he
laughed at her.

"Nonsense, Lavinia," he said. "You have the thing all topsy-turvy. It is
Wade Powell who has been kind to me; it is he and not I who is good to
every one. He has a heart brimful of the milk of human kindness. You
have no idea, and no one has, of the good he does in a thousand little
ways. He tries to hide it all; he acts as if he were ashamed of it, but
there are hundreds of people in Macochee who worship him, and would be
ready to die for him, if it would help him any. Don't think he has no
friends! He has them by the score--of course, they are all poor; I
reckon that's why they are generally unknown."

"But isn't he cruel?"

Marley's eyes widened in astonishment.

"I mean," Lavinia said correctively, "isn't he kind of sarcastic?"

"Well," Marley admitted, "he is that at times. I think he tries to hide
his better qualities; I think he tries to cloak his finer nature with a
rough garb. Perhaps it is because he is really so sensitive. But he is,
to my mind, a truly great man. He is a sort of tribune of the people."

"But, Glenn, what about his drinking?"

"Well, that's the trouble," Marley said, shaking his head. "If he had
let liquor alone he'd have been away up."

Lavinia was silent a moment, her brow was knit in little wrinkles.

"Glenn," she said presently, "I have been thinking."

"Well?"

"That with your influence you might reform him--out of his liking for
you, don't you know?"

She raised her blue eyes. He laughed outright, and then took her face
between his two hands.

"You dear little thing!" he said, with the patronage of a lover.

Lavinia regained her dignity.

"But couldn't you?" she demanded.

"Why, dear heart," Marley said, "he would think it presumption. I
wouldn't dare."

Lavinia shook her head in the hopelessness of the reformer, and took up
her tambourine frames again with a sigh.

"It's a pity," she said, relinquishing the subject with the hope, "it's
such a pity."

"But you haven't told me what you think of the scheme."

"You know, dear, that whatever you think best I think best."

Marley was disappointed.

"You don't seem to be very enthusiastic over the prospect," he
complained. "I thought you'd be glad as I to know that I can at last
make a place for myself in the world--and a home and a living for you."

Lavinia looked up.

"I never had any doubt of that, Glenn," she said simply.

He saw the trust and confidence she had in him, a trust and a confidence
he had never felt himself, and had never before been wholly aware of in
her. He saw that she had never shared those fears which had so long
oppressed him, and into his love there came a devout thankfulness. He
felt strong, hopeful, confident, victorious. He had a sudden fancy that
it would be like this when they were married; he would sit at his own
hearth, with a fire crackling merrily, and the rain and wind beating
outside--for the first time he could indulge such a fancy; it allowed
him, now that his future was assured, to come up to it and to take hold
of it; it became a reality.

The judge was not at home that night. Now and then Marley could hear
Mrs. Blair speak a word to Connie and Chad, over their lessons in the
sitting-room; school had commenced, and Connie having that year entered
the High School had taken on a new dignity, in consequence of which she
was treating Chad with a divine patience that brought its own peace into
the Blair household.

They talked for a long time of their plans. Marley would take his new
place in December when the new county clerk went into office, and he
told Lavinia all the advantages of the position. It would extend his
acquaintance, it would give him a familiarity with court proceedings
that otherwise he could not have acquired in years. He meant to study
hard, and be admitted to the bar. They could have a little cottage and
live simply and economically; he would save part of his salary, and when
he hung out his shingle he would have enough money laid by to support
them, modestly, until he could establish himself in a practice. He laid
it all before her plainly, convincingly. He was charmed with the
practicability of the plan, with its conservatism, its common sense.
They might as well be married.

"Can't we?" he asked. He trembled as he asked; his happiness had never
come so close before.

Lavinia dropped her embroidery frames into her lap and looked up at him.
The question in her eyes was almost born of fear.

"Right away?" exclaimed Lavinia.

"Well, almost right away," Marley answered. "Sometime this winter,
anyway."

"This winter! So soon?"

"So soon!" Marley repeated her words, almost in mockery.

"But we mustn't be married in the winter," she said, "we've always
planned to be married in June--our month, you know."

"What's the use of waiting?"

"But papa and mama--"

This quick rushing to the parental cover, this clinging to the habit of
years struck a jealousy through Marley's heart. His face fell and he
looked hurt.

"Can't we, dear?" he pleaded.

Lavinia looked at him, and she said shyly:

"If you say so, Glenn."

They were solemn in their joy and made their plans in detail. They would
be married quietly, Lavinia said, and at home. Doctor Marley would
perform the ceremony, and Marley was touched by this recognition of his
father.

The fall worked a new energy in Marley, and, with the assurance that his
labors were now soon to bear fruit, he found that he could study better
than ever before. He worked faithfully over his books every morning, and
he worked so hard that he felt himself entitled to a portion of each
afternoon. He would leave the office at four o'clock. Lavinia would be
waiting for him, and they would try to get out of sight before Connie
returned from school. She might be expected any moment to come slowly
down Ward Street entwined with one of her school-girl friends. They did
not like, somehow, to meet Connie. The smile she gave them was apt to be
disconcerting. They met smiles in the faces of others they encountered
in their walks, but they were of a quality more kindly than Connie's
smile.

They had walked one afternoon to the edge of town where Ward Street
climbed a hill and became the road to Mingo. At their feet lay the
little fields, in the distance they could see a man plowing with two
white horses; off to the right lay the water-works pond, gleaming in the
afternoon sun.

"What are you thinking of?" Marley said.

"I was thinking that it would be nice to live in the country."

"I was thinking that very thing myself!" exclaimed Marley. Their eyes
met, and they thrilled over this unity in their thoughts. It was
marvelous to them, mysterious, prophetic.

"Some day I could buy a farm," Marley said; "out that way."

"Yes," Lavinia replied, "away off there, beyond those low trees. Do you
see?"

She pointed, but Marley did not look in the direction of the trees; he
looked at her finger. It was so small, so round, so white. He bent
forward, and kissed the finger.

"Oh, but you must look where I'm pointing," said Lavinia.

They drew closely together. Marley took Lavinia's hand and they stood
long in silence.

"We could have a country home there," Marley said after a while, "with a
hedge about it and stables and horses and dogs. It would be close to
town; I could go in in the morning and out again in the afternoon."

"And I could drive you in, and then come for you in the afternoon--when
court adjourned."

"Oh, I would have a man to drive me," said Marley.

"But couldn't I ride in beside you?"

"Yes; you could sit beside me, on the back seat; we'd have an open
carriage."

"A victoria!" exclaimed Lavinia. "It would be the only one in Macochee!"

"Is that what they call them?"

"Victorias?"

"Yes."

"You know, with a low seat behind and a high seat for the driver. You
have a green cushion for your feet. You would look so handsome in one,
Glenn. You would sit very erect and proud, with your hands on a cane.
You would have white hair then."

"We would be old?" he asked in some dismay.

"No, no," said Lavinia, trying to reconcile her dreams, "not old
exactly. But I dote on white hair. It's so distinguished for a lawyer
with a country home. Of course we'll have to get old sometime."

"We'll grow old together, dear."

"Yes," she whispered, "and think of the long years of happiness!"

They stood and gazed, looking down the long vista of years that
stretched before them as smooth and peaceful as the white road to Mingo.

A subtile change was passing over the face of the road; shadows were
stealing toward it, and it was growing gray. The trees that still were
green were darkening to a deeper green, but the colors of those that had
changed flamed all the brighter. The sun shone more golden on the shocks
of corn, the sky was glowing pink in the west, the water-works pond was
glistening as the sun's shafts struck it more obliquely. A fine powder
hung in the peaceful air.

"How beautiful the fall is!" said Lavinia.

"Yes, I love it," said Marley. "But do you know, dear, that I never
liked it before? It always seemed sad to me. But you have taught me to
love many things. You don't know all that you have done for me!"

She stood in her blue dress, with her hands folded before her. Marley
looked at her hands, and at her white throat, and at her hair, its brown
turned to a golden hue by the clear light; then he looked into her eyes.
A sudden emotion, almost religious in its ecstasy, came over him. He
bent forward.

"Oh!" he exclaimed. "Do you know how beautiful you are! I worship you!"

"Don't, Glenn," she said, "don't say that!" The reflection of a
superstitious fear lay in her eyes.

"Why?" he said defiantly. "It's all true. You are my religion."

"You frighten me," she said.

Marley laughed.

"Why!" he exclaimed, "there's nothing to fear. Isn't our future assured
now?"




                              CHAPTER XIX

                                 WAKING


Carman was inducted into office the first Monday in December, quietly,
as the _Republican_ said, as though it reflected credit on the new
county clerk as a man who modestly avoided the demonstration that might
have been expected under such circumstances. Marley, in the hope of
seeing his own name, eagerly ran his eyes down the few lines that were
devoted to the occurrence, but his name was not there, the
_Republican's_ reporter, as he felt, being a man who lacked a sense of
the relative importance of events.

Marley had taken no part in the campaign, though Wade Powell wished him
to, and suggested every now and then that he speak at some of the
meetings that were being held in the country schoolhouses. Powell said
it would be good practice for him in a profession where so much talking
has to be done, and he found other reasons why Marley should do this, as
that it would extend his acquaintance, and give him a standing with the
party; but, though Marley was always promising, he was always
postponing; the thought of standing up and speaking to the vast
audiences his imagination was able to crowd into a little school-room
filled him with fear, and he never could bring himself to consent to any
definite time. Besides this, he could not find an evening he was willing
to spend away from Lavinia.

When election was over, he expected that he would hear from Carman, but
he had no word from him. Several times he was on the point of mentioning
the subject to Wade Powell, but somehow, with a reticence for which he
reproached himself, he could not bring himself to do it. He watched the
papers closely, but he found it quite as hard to find in them any
information about Carman as on any other subject, except, possibly, the
banal personalities of the town as they related themselves to the coming
and going of the trains.

But at last, on the day it had occurred to the reporter to chronicle the
fact that Carman had been inducted into office, the little item struck
Marley sadly; he felt a sense of detachment from Carman; he could not
altogether realize that intimate relationship to Carman in his new
official position that he felt belonged to one who was to be Carman's
deputy. In his imagination he saw Carman shambling about in the dingy
room where the county clerk kept the records of the court, his knees
unhinging loosely at each step, his shoulders bent, his hands in his
trousers pockets, his right eye squinting here and there observantly,
the left fixed, impervious to light and shadow, to all that was going on
in the world. He wondered if Carman, as he looked about, had been
thinking in any wise of him or had seen him as a part of the place where
his life was to be lived for the next three years.

Marley read the paper at supper time; in the evening he went to see
Lavinia. She too had read the paper.

"I know," she said simply, and he was grateful for her quick intuition.
"Have you seen him?"

"No."

"Are you going to?"

"Would you?"

"Why, certainly, at once."

Marley went to the Court House the first thing in the morning. He feared
he might have arrived too early, but Carman had the virtue that goes
farther perhaps than any other in the affections and approval of men, he
rose early. He had been at his office since long before seven o'clock.

Marley found the new county clerk at his desk, obviously ready for
business. The desk was clean, with a cleanness that was rather a
barrenness than an order. The ink-wells, the pens, with their shining
new steel points, the fresh blotters, all were laid on the clean pad
with geometrical exactness. The pigeon holes were empty, but they were
all lettered as if the mind of the new county clerk had grappled with
the future, come off victorious, and provided for every possible
emergency, though there were certain contingencies that had impressed
him as "Miscellaneous."

Carman looked up with the obliging expression of the new public
official, but Marley's heart instantly sank with a foreboding that told
him he might as well turn about then and go. It was plain that Carman
saw nothing in the call beyond a mere incident of the day's work.

Marley took a chair near Carman's desk. He looked at Carman once, and
then looked instantly away; the eye that lacked the power of
accommodation was fixed on him, and it made him nervous.

"Do you remember me, Mr. Carman?" asked Marley; and then fearing the
reply he hastened to add: "I'm Glenn Marley; Mr. Powell introduced me to
you out at the fair-grounds last fall."

"Yes, I remember," said Carman.

"I suppose you know what I came for?"

Carman's right eye widened somewhat in an expression of mild surprise.

"You know," urged Marley, "the clerkship."

"What clerkship was that?"

"Why, don't you know? The chief clerkship, I reckon."

"Here?"

"Why, yes. Don't you remember?"

Carman's right eye wore a puzzled look.

"Don't you remember?"

"Well, you've got me," said Carman, with a little laugh of apology.

"Why, I understood," Marley went on, "that in the event of your election
I was to have a position here."

"What as?"

"Why--as chief deputy."

That right eye of Carman's was fixed on him questioningly.

"Chief deputy?" he said finally. "Here--in my office?"

"Why, yes," said Marley. "Don't you remember?"

The question in the right eye had given way to a surprise that was
growing in Carman's mind, and spreading contagiously to a surprise,
deeper and more acute, in Marley's mind. The eye had something
reproachful in its steady stare. Marley leaned over impulsively.

"Why, surely you haven't forgotten--that day out at the fair-grounds,
when Mr. Powell introduced me to you? I understood, I always understood
that I was to have the place. I never mentioned it to you afterward, I
didn't like to bother you, you know. I waited along, feeling that
everything was all right. But when election was over--and afterward,
when you took your office, and I didn't hear anything--I thought I'd
come around and see you."

Despite the sinister left eye, Marley leaned close to Carman and waited.
Carman was long in bringing himself to speak. Even then he did not seem
to be sure of the situation he was dealing with.

"You say you understood you was to have a job under me as chief clerk?"

"Why, yes," replied Marley.

"Who'd you understand it from, me or Wade Powell?"

"Well--" Marley hesitated, "I thought I understood it from you; I
certainly understood it from Mr. Powell."

"You say you got the idea from something I said out at the
fair-grounds?"

"Yes, sir, at the fair-grounds."

Carman turned away and knitted his brows.

"At the fair-grounds," he said presently, as though talking more to
himself than to Marley. "The fair-grounds, h-m. Yes, I do remember--"

Marley's heart stirred with a little hope.

"I do remember seeing you there, and talking to you. But I don't
remember making you any promises. Did you ask me?"

"No; Mr. Powell did that."

"And what did I say?"

"Well," Marley answered, "I can't recall your exact words, but I got the
impression, and so did Mr. Powell, I'm sure, that it was all right, I--I
counted on it."

"Well, say, Glenn," he said; "I'm awfully sorry, honest I am. I remember
now, come to think of it, that Wade did say something like that, and
maybe I said something to lead you to think I'd do it; I don't say I
didn't--I don't just remember. But I reckon you've banked more on what
Wade told you than on what I did. Course, I reckon I didn't turn you
down--a feller never does that in a campaign, you know. But Wade takes a
lot o' things for granted in this life."

He smiled indulgently, as if Powell's weaknesses were commonly known and
understood.

"I reckon you relied too much on what Wade told you," Carman went on.
His right eye was fixed on Marley, but Marley did not return the look.
He had turned half-way round and thrown his arm over the back of his
chair. He looked out the window, his eyes vacant and sad. He was
thinking of Lavinia, of their hopes and plans, of the little home that
had become almost a reality to them; the trees in the Court-House yard
held their gaunt limbs helplessly up against the cold December day; the
ugly clouds were hurrying desperately across the sky; he thought of the
little law office across the street, with the dusty law books lying on
the table, and the hopelessness of it all overwhelmed him. But there
beside him Carman still was speaking:

"It's like Wade," he was saying. "I'm sorry, derned if I hain't."

Marley scarcely heard him. He was looking ahead. How many years--

"He hadn't ought to of done it," Carman was going on; "no, sir, he
hadn't ought."

How many years, Marley was thinking, would they have to wait now? Would
Lavinia be lost with all the rest? Ought he to ask her to wait any
longer? But Carman kept on:

"I've got all my arrangements made now, you see."

He swept his arm about the office where the few clerks were bending over
the big records in which they were copying the pleadings they could not
understand. Marley did not see; he saw nothing but the ruin of all his
hopes. It was still in there; the atmosphere held the musty odor of a
public office; the clock ticked; once a stamping machine clicked sharply
as a clerk marked a filing date on some document. And then a great
disgust overwhelmed him, a disgust with himself for being so fatuous, so
credulous. He had taken so much for granted, he had acted as a child,
not as a man, and he felt a hatred for himself, he felt almost like
striking himself.

"I guess I've been a fool," he said suddenly, rising from his chair.

"No, you haven't neither," said Carman, "but Wade Powell has; he had no
business--"

Marley did not wait to hear Carman finish his sentence. Shame and
mortification were the final aspects of his defeat; he put on his hat,
drew it down over his eyes and stalked away. Carman looked at him as he
disappeared through the lofty door. The pupil of his right eye widened
as he looked, and when Glenn had passed from his sight he turned to his
desk, and began to rearrange the tools to which he was so unaccustomed.




                               CHAPTER XX

                             HEART OF GRACE


Marley sighed in relief when he went up the steps of the Blair house
that evening. Somehow he had got through the long, desolate day. He was
sore from his great defeat, but the worst, at any rate, was over; the
pang had been sharp, but now the pain had been dulled. He had spent the
day in the office. Wade Powell had been in and out, but never once had
he spoken of the clerkship, and Marley was too deep in humiliation to
mention it. His one consolation was in the fact that he had never told
any one of his prospect, not even his own mother; it had been a secret
which he and Lavinia had shared luxuriously; though, as Marley now
looked back on their joy, he realized that what had kept him from
telling any one was a prudent skepticism, a lack of faith in the
possibility of human happiness, an inherited dread of the calamity that
stalks every joy.

Lavinia flung the hall door wide for him before he could ring the bell.

"What is the matter?"

"How did you know anything was?" he asked.

"Why," she exclaimed, "I could tell the minute I heard your step. Tell
me--what is it?"

Marley, ever sensitive to atmospheres, instantly felt the peace of the
household. The glow from the living-room, a quiet voice speaking a
commonplace word now and then, told him that Mrs. Blair was there with
Connie and Chad, and he knew the children were at their lessons; he
caught the faint odor of a cigar, and he knew that Judge Blair was in
his library reading peacefully of the dead and silent past, whose men
had left all their troubles in the leaves of printed books; all round
him life was flowing on, unconsciously, and normally; the tumult and
strife in his own soul were nothing to the world. All this flashed on
him in an instant--and there was Lavinia, standing before him, her white
brow knit in perplexity.

"Tell me," she was saying, "what it is."

"Well, I don't get the job, that's all."

He felt a momentary savage pleasure in the pain he inflicted, justifying
it in the thought that he eased his own suffering by giving it to
another. Then as quickly he repented, and felt ashamed.

"Is that all?" she said. She had come close to him, smiling in her
sympathy, and then lifting a hand to his forehead.

"Don't do that," she said, as if she would erase the scowl.

When they were seated he gave her the details of his meeting with
Carman, and with the recital of his disappointment its sharpness was
repeated. He leaned over, his elbows on his knees, and clutched his hair
in his fists. For an instant a kind of relief came to Lavinia, a relief
that a crisis in her life had been postponed, a crisis from which,
instinctively, she had shrunk. Her life could go on for a while as it
had always gone on; change, which mortals dread, was delayed. Then in
another moment her sympathy went out to him; she was on the floor at his
knees, her arms about him.

"Don't, dear, don't," she pleaded. "Why, it is nothing. What does it
matter? What does anything matter, so long as we have each other?"

She stroked his hair, she called him by all her endearing names. She
tried to take his hands from his face, that she might get him to look at
her. But he resisted.

"No," he said. "I'm no good; I'm a failure; I'm worse than a failure.
I'm a fool, a poor, weak, silly fool."

"Hush, Glenn, hush!" she whispered, as if he were uttering blasphemies.
"You must not, you must not!"

She shook him in a kind of fear.

"Look at me!" she said. "Look at me!"

He remained obdurate, slowly shaking his head from side to side.

"Look at me!" Lavinia repeated. "Don't you see--don't you see that--I
love you?"

A change came over him, subtile, but distinct. Slowly he raised his
head, and then he put his arms about her and held her close, and
gradually a comfort stole over him,--a comfort so delicious that he felt
himself hardly worthy, because he now saw that all through the day he
had had a subconsciousness that it would come to him at evening, and
that he had somehow exaggerated his own grief in order to make this
certain comfort the sweeter when it came.

It seemed to Marley, after he and Lavinia had sat there for a while,
that he had come out of some nightmare; sanity returned, things assumed
once more their proper proportions and relations to each other. He found
himself smiling, if not laughing just yet, and with Lavinia's hope and
confidence the future opened to him once more. Now and then, of course,
his disappointment would roll over him as a great wave, and once he said
ruefully:

"But think of the little home we were going to have!"

"But we're going to have it," Lavinia replied, smiling on him, "we're
going to have it, just the same!"

"But we'll have to wait!"

"Well, we're young," said Lavinia, "and it won't be so very long."

"But I wanted it to be in the spring."

"May be it will be, who knows?" Lavinia could smile in this reassurance,
now that she knew it could not be in the spring.

They discussed their future in all its phases, with the hope that
Lavinia could so easily inspire in him; Marley was to keep on with his
law studies; there was nothing else now to do--unless something should
turn up--there was always that hope.

"And it will, you'll see," said Lavinia.

They discussed, too, Carman and Wade Powell. Marley thought that Lavinia
might return to her old severity with Powell; when he expected her to do
this, he was preparing to defend Powell; when she did not, but was
generous with him, and urged Marley to reflect that he had done all he
had done out of a spirit of kindness, Marley was disposed to be severe
with Powell himself. Carman, they agreed, had acted handsomely; they
could not find cause to blame him.

"No," said Marley, "he treated me all right; I believe he was really
sorry for me."

And then, at the thought of Carman's having pity for him, his rebellion
flamed up again.

"It's humiliating, that's what it is. Wade Powell had no business making
a monkey of me in that way; though it doesn't take much to make a monkey
of me; I had the job almost completed myself, just waiting for some one
to come along and put the finishing touches on. And Wade Powell did
that!"

Marley spoke in the sardonic humor the wounded and beaten spirit likes
to employ in dealing with itself. But Lavinia hushed him.

"You just can not talk that way about yourself, Glenn," she declared
with her finest air of ownership. "I won't let you."

"Well, it's so humiliating," he said.

"Why, no, it can't be that," Lavinia argued. "You can not feel
humiliated. You have done nothing that need cause you any humiliation.
We are the only ones who can humiliate ourselves; nothing but our own
actions can humiliate us; no one else can."

Lavinia had a smiling little triumph in her own philosophy, but she
quickly compromised it by an inconsistency.

"Besides, no one else knows about it."

"No," Marley agreed thoughtfully, and without noticing her
inconsistency. "No one else knows anything about it. We have that to be
thankful for, anyway."




                              CHAPTER XXI

                             CHRISTMAS EVE


Lawrence was arranging for a grand ball in the Odd Fellows' Hall, on
Christmas Eve, and he had, as he came around to the office one day to
assure Marley, counted him and Lavinia in. Marley, glad enough to close
the law-book he was finding more and more irksome, listened to
Lawrence's enthusiasm for a while, but said at last:

"I'm afraid I can't go."

"Why not? Lavinia will want to go; she always does."

"I know that," Marley admitted, "but I can't, that's all."

Lawrence looked at him intently for a moment.

"Say, Glenn, what's the matter with you?" he said. "Anything been going
wrong lately? You look like you were in the dumps."

Marley shook his head with a negative gesture that admitted all Lawrence
had said.

"You ain't fretting over that job, are you?"

"What job?"

Marley looked up suddenly.

"Why, with Carman."

"How'd you know?"

"Oh, everybody knows about that," Lawrence replied with a light air that
added to Marley's gloom; "but what of it? I wouldn't let that cut me up;
come out and show yourself a little more! You don't want to keep Lavinia
housed up there, away from all the fun that's going on, do you? Mayme
and I were talking about it the other night; you and Lavinia haven't
been to a thing for months; it isn't right, I tell you."

Marley looked sharply at Lawrence for a minute, and Lawrence marking the
resentment in his eyes, hastened on:

"Don't get mad, now; I don't mean anything. I'm only saying it for your
good. I think you need a little shaking up, that's all."

"Lavinia can do as she likes," Marley said with dignity. "I shall not
hinder her; I never have."

"Well, don't get sore now, old man; I didn't mean to hurt your feelings.
The holidays are here and you want to cut into the game; it's a time to
forget your troubles and have a little fun; you've only got one life to
live; what's the use of taking it so seriously?"

Marley looked at Lawrence with a genuine envy for an instant, as at a
man who never took anything in life very seriously; he looked at the new
overcoat Lawrence held over his knee, showing its satin lining; and
then, reflecting that Lawrence's father had left with his estate a block
of bank stock which had given Lawrence his position in the bank,
Marley's impatience with him returned and he said:

"Oh, it's easy enough for you to talk; if you were in my place you might
find it different."

"That's all right," Lawrence went on, a smile on his freckled face. "You
just come to the party; it'll cost you only five, and Lavinia would like
it. I know that. So do you."

Marley did know it; and he felt a new disgust with himself that remained
with him long after Lawrence had put on his new overcoat and left. He
reproached himself bitterly, and he told himself that the best thing he
could do would be to go away somewhere, and not tell Lavinia, or
anybody.

"I'm only in her way, that's all," he thought as he opened his law-book,
and bent it back viciously, so that it would stay open.

Ever since the fiasco of his plans as to a place with Carman, he had
been seeking consolation in a new resolution to keep on patiently in the
law; but it was a consolation that he had to keep active by a constant
contemplation of himself as a young man who was making a brave and
determined fight against heavy odds. It was difficult to sustain this
heroic attitude in his own eyes and at the same time maintain that
modesty which he knew would become him best in the eyes of others. The
approach of the holiday season, the visible preparations on every hand
and the gay spirits everywhere apparent had isolated him more than ever,
and he had felt his alienation complete whenever he went to see Lavinia
and found the whole Blair family in an excitement over their own
festival. Marley would have liked to make Lavinia handsome gifts, but
his debts were already large, relatively, and he rose to heights of
self-denial that made him pathetic to himself, when he decided that he
could give her nothing. Now that Lawrence was getting up a ball to which
he knew Lavinia would like to go, as she had always gone to the balls
that were not so frequent in Macochee as Lawrence wished they might be,
he felt his humiliation deeper than ever. He put the matter honestly to
Lavinia, however, and she said promptly:

"Why, I wouldn't think of going."

She looked up at him brightly, and then in an instant she looked down
again. She relished the nobility of the attitude she had so promptly
taken, but the woman in her prevailed over the saint, and told what a
moment before she had determined not to tell:

"I've already declined one invitation."

She saw the look of pain come into Marley's eyes, and instantly she
regretted.

"You have?" he said.

"Why, yes." She looked at him with her head turned to one side; her face
wore an expression he did not like to see.

It was on Marley's lips to ask who had invited her, but his pride would
not let him do that; somehow a sense of separation fell suddenly between
them. He examined with deep interest the arm of his chair.

"Well," he began presently, "I wouldn't have you stay away on my
account, you know." He looked up suddenly. "Please don't stay away,
Lavinia. I'd like to have you go."

There was contrition in her voice as she almost flew to reply:

"Why, you dear old thing, it was only George Halliday who asked me; and
when I told him I wouldn't go he was actually relieved; he said he
didn't want to go himself; he hates our little functions out here, you
know, and has ever since he came back from Harvard. I suppose he was
used to so much more in Cambridge!" Lavinia had a sneer in her tone, and
it took on a shade of irritation as she added: "He asked me only because
he was sorry for me."

"Yes, sorry for you," Marley repeated bitterly. "That's another thing
I've done for you."

"Please don't, dear," said Lavinia, "don't let yourself get bitter.
It'll be all right. We'll spend Christmas Eve here at home and have ever
so much more fun by ourselves."

Mrs. Blair told Marley that she wished Lavinia might go to the ball; her
father wished it, too. Mrs. Blair told him that she could easily get
George Halliday to take her,--their lifelong intimacy with the Hallidays
permitted that. Marley assured her that he wished Lavinia to accept
Halliday's invitation, but that she would not do so.

"I'd take her myself," he added, "only I can't dance, and--I have no
money. I'd like to have her go, if it would give her pleasure."

"I know you would, you dear boy," said Mrs. Blair, laying her hand on
his shoulder in her affectionate way.

Mrs. Blair urged Lavinia to go, and so did Marley, and when he saw that
she was determined not to go, he urged her all the more strongly,
because, now that he was sure of her position, he could so much more
enjoy his own disinterestedness and magnanimity. They desisted when
Lavinia complained that they were making her life miserable.

Though Marley could deny Lavinia the dance, he found, after all, that he
could not deny himself the distinction of giving her a Christmas
present. His heroic attitude gradually broke under the temptation of
Hoffman's jewelry store, glittering with its holiday display. Marley
already owed Hoffman for Lavinia's ring, but like most of the merchants
in Macochee, Hoffman had to do business on an elastic credit, if he
wished to do any business at all, and Marley, after many pains of
selection, did not have much difficulty in inducing Hoffman to let him
have the pearl opera-glasses he finally chose in the despair of thinking
of anything better.

The opera-glasses might have atoned for the deprivation of the ball, had
Marley been able to think of them with any comfort. The delight Lavinia
expressed in a gift she could never use in Macochee, and the enthusiasm
with which Connie admired them, made him nervous and guilty. Connie had
temporarily foregone her claims to young-ladyhood, and was a child again
for a little while. Her excitement and that of Chad should have made any
Christmas Eve merry, but it was not a merry Christmas Eve for Marley.

As Lavinia and he sat in the parlor they caught now and then, or
imagined they caught, the strains of the orchestra that was playing for
the dancers in the Odd Fellows' Hall, and they were both conscious that
life would be tolerable for them only when the music should cease and
the ball take its place among the things of the past, incapable of
further trouble in the earth.

"It's very trying," said Judge Blair to his wife that night. "I wish
there was something we could do."

"So do I," his wife acquiesced.

"I don't like to see Lavinia cut off this way from every enjoyment. The
strain must be very wearing."

"I suppose it is very wearing with most lovers," said Mrs. Blair. "I
don't see how they ever endure it; but they all do."

"Have you talked with her about it?" The judge put his question with a
guarded look, and was not surprised when his wife quickly replied:

"Gracious, no. I'd never dare."

"No, I presume not. I don't know who would, unless it might be Connie."

Mrs. Blair was silent for a while in the trouble that was all the more
serious because they dared not recognize its seriousness, and then she
asked:

"Couldn't you help him to something?"

"I don't know what," the judge replied. "There's really no opening in a
little town."

"If you were off the bench and back in the practice--"

"Great heavens!" he interrupted her. "Don't mention such a thing!"

"I meant that you might take him in with you."

"I'd be looking around for some one to take me in," the judge said. "I'm
glad I haven't the problem to face." He enjoyed for a moment the snug
sense he had in his own position and then he sighed.

"He's young, he has that, anyway. He'll work it out somehow, I suppose,
though I don't know how. As for us, all we can do is to have patience,
and wait."

"Yes, that's all," said Mrs. Blair. "I don't believe in long
engagements."

"How long has it been?" he asked.

"Nearly a year now."

"I thought it had been ten."

Mrs. Blair laughed as she said: "Connie was wishing this morning that
he'd marry her and get it over with."




                              CHAPTER XXII

                      AN ADVERTISEMENT OF DESTINY


The first days of spring contrasted strongly with Marley's mood. Because
of some mysterious similarity in the two seasons he found the melancholy
suggestion of fall in this spring, just as, with his high-flown hopes,
he had found some of the joyous suggestion of spring in the autumn
before. But as failure followed failure, he began to feel more and more
an alien in Macochee; he had a sense of exile among his own kind, he was
tortured by the thought that here, in a world where each man had some
work to do and where, as it seemed, all men had suddenly grown happy in
that work, there was no work for him to do.

He was young, healthy, and ambitious; he had given years to what he had
been taught was a necessary preparation, and then suddenly, just as he
felt himself ready for life, he found that there was no place in life
for him. As he went about seeking employment there was borne in on him a
sense of criticism and opposition, and he was depressed and humiliated.
By the end of the winter he disliked showing himself anywhere; he no
longer stopped in the McBriar House of an afternoon to watch Lawrence
and Halliday at the billiards they played so well; he thought he
detected a coolness in Lawrence's treatment of him. He felt, or
imagined, this coolness in everybody's attitude now, and finally began
to suspect it in the Blairs.

"What's the matter?" asked Powell, one morning. "You ain't sick, are
you?"

Marley shook his head.

"Well, something ails you. I can see that." He waited for Marley to
speak. "Is there anything I can do for you?"

"No," said Marley, "thank you. I've just been feeling a little bit blue,
that's all."

"What about?"

"Oh, I don't know. I'm kind o' discouraged. It seems to me that I'm
wasting time; I'm not making any headway and then everybody in town
is--"

"I wouldn't mind that," said Powell, divining the trouble at once.
"They've had me on the gridiron for about forty years, and they never
get tired of giving it a twist. It doesn't bother me much any more, and
I don't see why you should let it bother you, especially as all they say
about you is a damn lie."

The speech touched Marley, and he lost himself in an impulse of sympathy
for Powell, but he could not put his sympathy before Powell in the way
he would like and his mind soon returned to himself.

"I've got to do something," he said. "I wish I knew what."

"Well," said Powell, "you know what I've always told you. I know what
I'd do if I were your age. Of course--"

Powell did not finish his sentence. He was looking out the window again,
lost in introspection.

Powell's reiteration of his old advice expressed the very thought that
had been nebulous in Marley's mind for days, and while he was conscious
of it, he feared the consciousness, and struggled to prevent it from
positing itself. But now that Powell had voiced it for him, he could
escape it no longer, and it filled him with a fear. He went about all
the day with this fear appalling him; more and more under its perverse
influence he felt himself an alien, and the people he met in the street
seemed unreal and strange, outlandish persons whom he had never known.
They came upon him as ghosts, or if they did something to prove their
reality, he seemed to be some ghost himself.

In the afternoon he received a note from Lavinia; she said that she was
going that evening with George Halliday to a concert in the Opera House.
She did not want to go a bit, she said, but her mother, and especially
her father, had urged her to go; arguing that she now went out so seldom
that it must do her good, and besides, they had urged her so often that
she felt it to be her duty in this instance; she had held out as long as
she could, and then had yielded.

Marley tried to look upon the note reasonably; he could see the
influence that had compelled Lavinia to go, and he knew he had no right
to blame her, and yet, try as he would, he could not escape a feeling of
bitterness. When he went home at evening his mother instantly noticed
his depression, and implored him for the reason. He did not answer for a
while, that is, it seemed a while to Mrs. Marley, but at last he said:

"Mother, I've got to leave."

"Leave?" she repeated, pronouncing the word in a hollow note of fear.

"Yes, leave."

"But what for?"

"Well, you know I'm no good; I'm making no headway; there's no place for
me here in Macochee; I've got to get out into the world and _make_ a
place for myself, somewhere."

"But where?"

"I don't know--anywhere."

Marley moved his hand in a wide gesture that included the whole world,
and yet was without hope of conquest.

"But you must have some plans--some idea--"

"Well, I've thought of going to Cincinnati; maybe to Chicago."

"But what will you do?" Mrs. Marley looked at him with pain and alarm.

"Do!" he said, his voice rising almost angrily. "Why, anything I can get
to do. Anything, anything, sweeping streets, digging ditches, anything!"

Mrs. Marley looked at her son, sitting there before her with his head
bowed in his hands. In her own face were reflected the pain and trouble
that darkened his, and yet she felt herself helpless; she vaguely
realized that he was engaged in a battle that he must after all fight
alone; she could not help him, though she wished that she knew how to
impart to him the faith she had that he would win the battle, somehow,
in the end.

"Poor boy!" she said at length, rising; "you are not yourself just now.
Think it all over and talk to your father about it."

It was the first evening in months that Marley had not spent with
Lavinia, and his existence being now so bound up with hers, he found
that he could not spend the evening as the other young men in town spent
their evenings. However, he went down to the McBriar House and there a
long bill hanging on the wall instantly struck his eye. The bill
announced an excursion to Chicago. It took away his breath; he stood
transfixed before it, fascinated and yet repelled; he read it through a
dozen times. The cheerful way in which the railroad held out this trip
intensified his own gloom; he wondered how he might escape, but there
was no way; it was plainly the revelation of his destiny, prophetic,
absolute, final, and he bowed before it as to a decree of fate; he knew
now that he must go.

As he went home, as he walked the dark streets in the air that was full
of the balm of the coming spring, he felt as one to whom a great sorrow
had come. He thought of leaving Macochee, of leaving his father and
mother, and then, more than all, of leaving Lavinia, and his throat
ached with the pain of parting that, even now, before any of his plans
had been made, began to assail him. His plans were nothing now; they had
become the merest details; the great decision had been reached, not by
him, but for him; the destiny toward which all the lines of his
existence for months had been converging, was on him, the moment had
arrived, and he had a sense of being the mute and helpless victim of
forces that were playing with him, hurrying him along to a future as
dark as the moonless night above him.

He told his father of the excursion, though he gave him no notion of it
as an expression of his fate, and he was all the more distressed at the
calm way in which his father acquiesced in what he put before him as a
decision he would have liked to have appear as less final. His father in
his mildness could not object to his trying, and he would provide the
money for the experiment. It gave Marley a moment's respite to have his
father speak of it as an experiment, for that included the possibility
of failure, and hence of his return home, but this meager consolation
was immediately dissipated in the surer sense he felt that this was the
end--the end of Macochee, the end of home, and the beginning of a new
life.




                             CHAPTER XXIII

                               THE BREAK


Marley went to Lavinia the next morning, and told her as they sat there
on the veranda in the spring sunlight. She looked at him with distress
in her wide blue eyes.

"When?" she asked.

"To-night!"

"Tonight? Oh Glenn!"

Her eyes had filled with tears, and she was winking hard to keep them
back.

"To-night."

She repeated the word over and over again.

"And to think," she managed to say at last, "to think that the last
night I should have been away from you! How can I ever forgive myself!"

Her lip trembled, and the tears rolled down her cheeks. She drew out her
handkerchief and said:

"Let's go in."

All that day Marley went about faltering over his preparations. Wade
Powell was the only one of the few who were interested in him that was
enthusiastic over his going, and he praised and congratulated him, and
pierced his already sore heart by declaring that he had known all along
it was what Marley would be compelled to do. He would give him a letter
to his old friend, Judge Johnson, he said; the judge would be a great
man for him to know, and Powell sat down at once, with more energy and
enterprise than Marley had ever known him to show, and began to
elaborate his letter of introduction.

Marley dreaded saying good-by; he wished to shirk it as to Powell as he
intended to shirk it in the cases of his few friends; he was to return
to the office a last time in the afternoon to get the letter; and then
he would bid Powell good-by. He had the day before him, but that thought
could give him no comfort. He would see Lavinia again in the afternoon;
he would see her once more, for the last time, in the evening, and in
the meantime he would see his father and his mother, and his home; he
had still two meals to eat with them, but it was as if he had already
gone; there was no reality in his presence there among them; the blow
that fate had decreed had fallen, and all that was to be was then
actually in being; all about him the men and women of Macochee were
pursuing their ordinary occupations just as if he were not so soon to go
away and be of this scene no more; a few hours, and another day, and
they would be going on with their concerns just the same, and he would
have disappeared out of their lives and out of their memories.

He looked at everything that had been associated with his life, and
everything called up some memory,--the little office where he had tried
to study law, the Court House, and the blind goddess of justice holding
aloft her scales, the familiar Square, the cloaked cavalryman on the
monument, every tree, every fence, every brick in the sidewalk somehow
called out to him--and he was leaving them all. He looked up and down
Main Street, wide and ugly, littered with refuse, ragged with its
graceless signs; he thought of the people who had gossiped about him,
the people whom he had hated, but now he could not find in his heart the
satisfaction he had expected in leaving them. He felt tenderly, almost
affectionately, toward them all. But it was worse at home. He wandered
about the house, looking at every piece of furniture, at every trinket;
he went into the woodshed, and the old ax, the old saw, everything he
had known for years, wrung his heart; he went to the barn, he looked at
the muddy buggy in which he had driven so often with his father; he
reproached himself because he had not kept the buggy cleaner for him; he
went into the stall and patted the flank of Dolly, finally he put his
arms about her warm neck, laid his face against it, and the tears rolled
down his cheeks.

One of the preachers that were always dropping in on them was there to
dinner, and in the blessing he invoked on the temporalities, as he
called them, he prayed with professional unction for the son who was
about to leave the old roof-tree, and this made the ordeal harder for
them all. Doctor Marley spoke to the preacher of little things that he
was to do within the next few days and Marley wondered how he could
mention them, for they were to be done at a time when he would be there
no more. Because he conceived of life, as all must conceive of it,
solely in its relation to himself, he could not imagine life going on in
Macochee without him.

The afternoon wore on, he passed his hour with Lavinia; they were to
meet then but once again; he returned home, his mother had packed his
trunk; it was waiting. He was tender with his mother, and he wondered
now, with a wild regret, why he had not always been tender with her; he
was tender now with all things; a tenderness suffused his whole being;
it seemed as if it might dissolve in tears.

Still he shrank back; there was one thing more to do; he was to go
up-town and get his ticket, and the letter to Judge Johnson, and bid
Wade Powell good-by. A wild hope leaped in his heart; perhaps--but no,
it was irrevocable now. He went, and got his letter, but Powell refused
to bid him good-by; he said he would be at the train to see him off. He
bought his ticket and went home. Old man Downing had been there with his
dray and hauled away his trunk; it was settled. He could only wait and
watch the minutes tick by.

It seemed to Marley that all things that evening conspired to accentuate
all that he was leaving behind, and to make the grief of parting more
poignant. His mother, who was then in that domestic exigency described
by the ladies of Macochee as being without a girl, had prepared an
unusually elaborate supper, and while there was no formal observance of
the fact, it was eaten, so far as any of them could eat that evening,
under a sense of its significance as a parting ceremonial. They talked,
or tried to talk, indifferently of commonplace things, and Doctor Marley
even sought to add merriment to their feast by a jocularity that was
unusual with him. Marley, who knew his father so well, could easily
detect the heavy heart that lay under his father's jokes, and he
suffered a keener misery from the pathos of it. Then he would catch his
mother looking at him, her eyes deep and sad, and it seemed to him that
his heart must burst.

Marley's train was to leave at eleven o'clock; he had arranged to go to
Lavinia's and remain with her until ten o'clock; then he was to stop in
at his home for his last good-by. Those last two hours with Lavinia were
an ordeal; into the first hour they tried to crowd a thousand things
they felt they must say, and a thousand things they could only suggest;
when the clock struck nine, they looked at each other in anguish; they
did little after that but mentally count the minutes. The clock ticked
loudly, aggressively, until in the soul of each, unconfessed, there was
a desire to hasten the moments they felt they would like to stay; the
agony was almost beyond endurance; it exhausted them, beat them down,
and rendered them powerless to speak. Finally the clock struck the
half-hour; they could only sit and look at each other now; at a quarter
of ten they began their good-bys.

At ten o'clock Mrs. Blair, Connie and Chad came into the room solemnly,
and bade Marley farewell; the judge himself came in after them, his
glasses in his hand and the magazine he had been reading, which, as
Marley thought with that pang of things going on without him, he would
in a few moments be reading again as calmly as ever. He took Marley's
hand, and wished him success; for the first time he spoke gently, almost
affectionately to him, and although Marley tried to bear himself
stoically, the judge's farewell touched him more than all the others.

The shameless children would have liked to remain and see the tragedy to
its close, but Mrs. Blair drew them from the room with her. The last
moment had come, and Marley held Lavinia in his arms; at last he tore
himself from her, and it was over. He looked back from out the darkness;
Lavinia was still standing in the doorway; he saw her slender, girlish
figure outlined against the hall light behind her; somehow he knew that
she was bravely smiling through her tears. She stood there until his
footfall sounded loud in the spring night, then the light went out, the
door closed as he had heard it close so often, and she was gone.

He saw the light in his father's study as he approached his home, and
there came again that torturing sense: the sermon his father then was
working on would be preached when he was far away; his mother, as he
knew by the light in the sitting-room window, was waiting for him; she
had waited there so many nights, and now she was waiting for the last
time. She rose at his step, and took him to her arms the minute he
entered the door.

"Be brave, dear," he said, stroking her gray hair; "be brave." He was
trying so hard to be brave himself, and she was crying. He had not often
seen her cry. She could not speak for many minutes; she could only pat
him on the shoulder where her head lay.

"Remember, my precious boy," she managed to say at last, "that there's a
strong Arm to lean upon."

He saw that she was turning now to the great faith that had sustained
her in every trial of a life that had known so many trials; and the
tears came to his own eyes. He would have left her for a moment but she
followed him. He had an impulse he could not resist to torture himself
by going over the house again; he went into the dining-room which in the
darkness wore an air of waiting for the breakfast they would eat when he
was gone; he went to the kitchen and took a drink of water, from the old
habit he was now breaking; then he went up stairs and looked into his
own room, at the neatly made bed where he was to sleep no more; at last
he stood at the door of the study.

He could catch the odor of his father's cigar, just as he had in
standing there so many times before; he pushed the door open and felt
the familiar hot, close, smoke-laden atmosphere which his father seemed
to find so congenial to his studies. Doctor Marley took off his
spectacles and pushed his manuscript aside, and Marley felt that he
never would forget that picture of the gray head bent in its earnest
labors over that worn and littered desk; it was photographed for all
time on his memory. His words with his father had always been few; there
were no more now.

"Well, father," he said, "I've come to say good-by."

His father pushed back his chair and turned about. He half-rose, then
sank back again and took his son's hand.

"Good-by, Glenn," he said. "You'll write?"

"Yes."

"Write often. We'll want to hear."

"Yes, write often," the doctor said. "And take care of yourself."

"I will, father."

"Wait a moment." Doctor Marley was fumbling in his pocket. He drew forth
a few dollars.

"Here, Glenn," he said. "I wish it could be more."

There was nothing more to do, or say. They went down stairs; Marley's
bag was waiting for him in the hall. He kissed his mother again and then
again; he shook his father's hand, and then he went.

"Write often," his father called out to him, as he went down the walk.
It was all the old man could say.

The door closed, as the door of the Blairs' had closed. Inside Doctor
Marley looked at his wife a moment.

"Well," he said, "he's gone."

Mrs. Marley made no answer.

"I suppose," he said, "I ought to have gone to the train with him."

Then he toiled up the stairs to his study and the sermon he was to
preach when Glenn was gone.

Marley walked rapidly down Market Street toward the depot; in the dark
houses that suddenly had taken on a new significance to him, people were
sleeping, people who would awake the next morning in Macochee. He could
not escape the torture of this thought; his mind revolved constantly
about the mystery of his being still in Macochee, still within calling
distance, almost, of Lavinia, of his father and mother, of all he loved
in life, when in reality they had in an instant become as inaccessible
to him as though the long miles of his exile already separated them.

Twenty minutes later, Lavinia, in her room, Mrs. Marley, at her prayers,
and Doctor Marley sitting in deep absorption at his desk, heard the
sonorous whistle of a locomotive sound ominously over the dark and quiet
town.




                              CHAPTER XXIV

                         THE GATES OF THE CITY


It was a relief to Marley when morning came and released him from the
reclining chair that had held his form so rigidly all the night. He had
not taken a sleeper because he felt himself too poor, and he had
somewhere got the false impression that comfort was to be had in the
chair car. He had stretched himself in the cruel rack when the porter
came through and turned the lights down to the dismal point of gloom,
but he had not slept; all through the night the trainmen constantly
passed through the car talking with each other in low tones; the train,
too, made long, inexplicable stops; he could hear the escape of the
weary engine, through his window he could see the lights of some strange
town; and then the trainmen would run by outside, swinging their
lanterns in the darkness, and calling to each other, and Marley would
fear that something had happened, or else was about to happen, which was
worse.

Finally the train would creak on again, as if it were necessary to
proceed slowly and cautiously through vague dangers of the night.
Through his window he could see the glint of rails, the two yards of
gleaming steel that traveled always abreast of him. Toward morning
Marley wearily fell asleep, and then the sorrow and heart-ache of his
parting from Lavinia and his home distorted themselves in fearful
dreams.

When he awoke at last, and looked out on the ugly prairie that had
nothing to break its monotony but a few scraggly scrub-oak bushes, and
some clumps of stunted trees, the dawn was descending from the gray sky.
The car presented a squalid, hideous sight; all about him were stretched
the bodies of sleeping passengers, flaccid, inert, having cast aside in
utter weariness all sense of decency and shame; the men had pulled off
their boots, and sprawled on the chairs, their stockinged feet
prominently in view; women lay with open mouths, their faces begrimed,
their hair in slovenly disarray.

The baby that had been crying in the early part of the night had finally
gone to sleep while nursing, and its tired mother slept with it at her
breast. The Jewish drummer across the aisle was sleeping in
shirt-sleeves; his head had rolled from the little rest on the back of
his chair and now lolled off his shoulder, his sallow face turned toward
Marley was greasy with perspiration; his closed eyes filled out their
blue hemispherical lids, and his cheeks puffed with his intermittent
snoring. At times his snoring grew so loud and so troubled that it
seemed as if he must choke; he would reach a torturing climax, then
suddenly the thick red lips beneath his black mustache would open, his
sallow cheeks would collapse, and relief would come.

Marley wished the passengers would wake up and end the indecencies they
had tried to hide earlier in the night. Glancing up and down the long
car he could recognize none of them as having been there when he had
boarded the car at Macochee; those who had got on with him had gone
short distances, and then got off, breaking the last tie that bound him
to his home. He found it impossible now to conceive of the car as having
been in Macochee so short a time before.

Presently he saw an old lady sitting up in the remote end of the car;
she was winding her thin wisp of gray hair in a little knob at the back
of her head. Then, feeling that he might bestir himself, Marley got up
and went forward; he washed his face, and tried to escape the discomfort
of clothes he had worn all the night by readjusting them. The train was
evidently approaching the city; now and then he saw a building, lonely
and out of place: on the hideous sand-dunes, as if it waited for the
city, in the growth it boasted, to catch up with it.

The train ran on; it had reached an ever-widening web of tracks; it
passed long lines of freight-cars, stock-cars from the west, empty
gondolas that had come with coal from the Hocking Valley; a switch tower
swept by, its bell jangling peevishly in alarm; long processions of
working-men trooped with their dinner-pails between the tracks. The
train stopped, finally, still far from its destination. The air in the
car was foul from the feculence of all those bodies that had lain in it
through the night, and Marley went out on the platform. He could hear
the engine wheezing--the only sound to break the silence of the dawn.
The cool morning air was grateful to Marley, though it was not the air
of the spring they were already having in Macochee. He risked getting
down off the platform and looked ahead. Beyond the long train, coated
with its black cinders, he saw Chicago, dim through the morning light,
lying dark, mysterious and grim under its pall of smoke. He shuddered
and went back into the car. After a while the train creaked and strained
and pulled on again.

The passengers had begun to stir, and now were hastening to rehabilitate
themselves in the eyes of the world; the woman with the baby fastened
her dress, the drummer put on his collar and coat, the men drew on their
boots, but it was long before they felt themselves presentable again.
The women could achieve but half a toilet, and though they were all
concerned about their hair, they could not make themselves tidy.

The train was running swiftly, now that it was in the city, where it
seemed it should have run more slowly; the newsboy came in with the
morning papers, followed by the baggage agent with his jingling bunch of
brass checks. The porter doffed his white jacket and donned his blue,
and waited now for the end of his labors, so near at hand. He made no
pretense of brushing his passengers, for those in his charge were
plainly not of the kind with tips to bestow.

As the train rushed over unknown streets, Marley caught visions of the
crowds blockaded by the crossing gates, street-cars already filled with
people, empty trucks going after the great loads under which they would
groan all the day; and people, people, people, ready for the new day of
toil that had come to the earth.

At last the train drew up under the black shed of the Union Station, and
Marley stood with the passengers that huddled at the door of the car. He
went out and down; he joined the crowd that passed through the big iron
gates into the station; and then he turned and glanced back for one last
look at the train that had brought him; only a few hours before it had
been in Macochee; a few hours more and it would be there again. In
leaving the train he felt that he was breaking the last tie that bound
him to Macochee, and he would have liked to linger and gaze on it. But a
man in a blue uniform, with the official surliness, ordered him not to
hold back the crowd. He climbed the steps, went out into Canal Street,
ran the gantlet of the cabmen, and was caught up in the crowd and swept
across the bridge into Madison Street.

He was in Chicago, and here among these thousands of people, each
hurrying along through the sordid crowd to his own task, here in this
hideous, cruel city, he must make a place for himself, and gain the
foothold from which he could fight his battle for existence in the
world.




                              CHAPTER XXV

                              LETTERS HOME


"How does she seem since he went away?" asked Judge Blair of his wife
two days after Marley had gone. He spoke in his usual habit of deference
to his wife's observation, though his own opportunities for observing
Lavinia might have been considered as great as hers.

"I haven't noticed any difference in her," said Mrs. Blair, and then she
added a qualifying and significant "yet."

"Well," observed the judge, "I presume it's too early. Has she heard
from him?"

"She had a letter this morning; that is, I suppose it was from him; she
ran to meet the postman, and then went up stairs."

"You didn't mention it to her?"

Mrs. Blair looked at her husband in surprise, and he hastened to make
amends by acquiescing in the propriety of her conduct, when he said:

"Oh, of course not."

He seemed to drop the subject then, but that it remained uppermost in
his mind was shown later, when he said:

"I think she will be weaned away from him after a while, don't you? That
is--if he stays long enough."

Mrs. Blair was not so hopeful; perhaps, too, in her romantic ideal of
devotion, she did not wish Lavinia to be weaned away. But she avoided a
direct answer by the suggestion:

"Perhaps he will be weaned away from her."

This possibility had not occurred to the judge.

"Why, the idea!" he said resentfully. "Do you think him capable of such
baseness?"

Mrs. Blair laughed.

"Would you like to think of _your_ daughter as fickle, and forgetting a
young man who was eating his heart out for her far away in a big city?"

A condition of such mild romantic sorrow might have attracted Mrs. Blair
in the abstract, but it could not of course appeal to her when it came
thus personally. As for the judge, he dismissed the problem, as he had
so many times before, with the remark:

"Well, we can only wait and see."

The letter which Lavinia received from Marley had been written the day
he reached Chicago. It was a long letter, conceived largely in a
facetious spirit, and he had labored over it far into the night in the
little room of the boarding-house he had found in Ohio Street.

"I chose Ohio Street," he wrote, "because its name reminded me of home.
Ohio Street may once have been the street of the well-born, but it has
degenerated and it is now the abode of a long row of boarding--places,
one of which houses me. My room is a little corner eyrie in the second
story, back, and from its one window I get an admirable view of the
garbage dump, the atmosphere and certain intensely red bricks which go
to make the wall of the house next door. And my landlady, ah, I should
have to be a Balzac to describe my landlady! She wears large, vociferous
ear-rings, and she says 'y-e-e-a-a-s' for yes; just kind o' rolls it off
her tongue as if she didn't care whether it ever got off or not. She is
truly a beauteous lady, given much to a scarlet hue of her nasal
appendage; also, her molar system is unduly prominent, too much to the
fore, as it were. As for form or figure, I'm afraid I couldn't say with
truth that she goes in for the sinuous, far from it; she leans more to
the elephantine style of feminine architecture. And she has a way of
reaching out that is very attractive; probably because of the necessity
of reaching for room rent. She bears the air of one bent on no earthly
thing, of a continual soaring in quest of the unexpected; there is about
her the charm of the intangible, the unknowable.

"The boarding-house itself isn't so bad; I get my room and two meals for
three-fifty a week; my noon luncheons I have to take down-town. They
have dinner here, you know, in the evening. I haven't seen much of the
people in the boarding-house; the men are mostly clerks, and the women
have bleached hair. They all looked at me when I went into the
dining-room this evening. There is one young man who sits at my table
who is in truth a very unwise and immature youth. He is given greatly to
the use of words of awful and bizarre make-up. For instance, he said
something about the jokes they get off in the shows here about Irishmen,
but instead of saying jokes, he said 'traversities'! What do you think
of that?"

Marley had already described his journey to Chicago in terms similar to
those in which he described his boarding-house; of Chicago itself he
said:

"It seems that ages ago when the gods, or maybe the demons, were making
over plans and specifications of the infernal region, Chicago was
mentioned and considered by the committee. When it came to a vote for
choice of sites the place that won had only three more votes than
Chicago. They didn't locate the brimstone plant here, and from what I
can learn Chicago was a candidate for both the plant and the honor. It
was a mistake on somebody's part, as Chicago is certainly an ideal place
for it."

But the letter discussed mostly the things of Macochee, where Marley's
spirit still dwelt. The passages Lavinia most liked, of course, were
those in which he declared his love for her; it was the first
love-letter she had ever received, and this tender experience went far
to compensate her for the loneliness she felt in his absence.

It grew upon her after she had read her letter many times, that it would
be a kindness to take it over and read to Mrs. Marley those parts, at
least, that were not personal. It was a hard thing for Lavinia to do;
she had a fear of Mrs. Marley; but she felt more and more the kindness
of it, and so in the morning she set out. Lavinia was surprised and a
little disappointed, when Mrs. Marley told her that she too had received
in the same mail a letter from Glenn. It somehow took away from her own
act, the more when Mrs. Marley calmly passed her letter over for Lavinia
to read.

Lavinia, who had not been able to resist a pang that Marley had written
his mother quite as promptly as he had written her, found some
consolation in the fact that his letter to his mother was not nearly so
long as his letter to her, and it contained, too, the same information;
in some instances, identical phrases, as letters do that are written at
the same time. She felt that she should be happy in them both, and she
wished she could determine which of the letters had been written first.
After she had read Mrs. Marley's letter, she could not speak for a
moment; the letter closed with a description of the sensations it gave
Marley to open his trunk and come across the Bible his mother had packed
in it. But she controlled herself, and when she had finished reading
parts of her own letter to Mrs. Marley, she said:

"Well, he seems to be in good spirits, doesn't he? He writes so
amusingly of everything."

Mrs. Marley looked up at Lavinia with a curious smile.

"Why, don't you see?" she said.

"What?" asked Lavinia, glancing in alarm at the two letters which she
still held in her lap.

"Why, the poor boy is dying of homesickness; that's what makes him write
in that mocking vein."

"Do you think that is so?" Lavinia leaned forward.

"Why, I know it," replied Mrs. Marley, with a little laugh. "He's just
like his father."

For a moment Lavinia felt a satisfaction in Marley's loneliness, but she
denied the satisfaction when she said:

"He'll get over it, after a while."

"Not for a long while, I'm afraid," said Mrs. Marley. "Not until some
one can be with him."

Lavinia blushed, and before she knew it Mrs. Marley had bent over and
kissed her cheek.

"He has a long hard battle before him, my dear," she said, "in a great
cruel city. We must help him all we can."

Lavinia hesitated a moment, then she put her arms about Mrs. Marley and
drew her down for the kiss which sealed their friendship.

They sat and talked of Marley for a long time, and at last when Lavinia
rose to go, she held out to Mrs. Marley the letter her son had written
her. She looked at it a moment before handing it to Mrs. Marley.

"Would you like to keep it?" Mrs. Marley asked.

"May I?"

"If you wish. But you must come often; I shall be lonely now, you know,
and you must bring his letters and read parts of them. He'll be writing
so many more to you than he will to me."

Lavinia received a letter from Marley every day; it was not long before
Clemmons, the postman, smiled significantly when, each morning at the
sound of his whistle, she ran to meet him at the door. And Lavinia wrote
to Marley as regularly herself, sitting at the little desk in her room
every night long after the house was dark and still.

The judge could find no hope in the observations Mrs. Blair reported to
him.

"She seems to have developed a new idea of constancy," said Mrs. Blair.
"She will not allow herself to do a thing, or go to a single place; she
will hardly accept any pleasure because he isn't here to share it. I
believe she tries not to have a thought that is not of him. She is
almost fanatical about it."

"Oh dear!" said the judge. "I thought the nightly calls were a severe
strain, but they can not compare to the strain of nightly letters."

"He writes excellent letters, however," Mrs. Blair said. "I wish you
could read the one he wrote his mother. A boy who writes like that to
his mother--"

"How did you get to see a letter he wrote his mother?" interrupted the
judge.

"Lavinia showed it to me."

"Has she been over there?"

"Yes. Why?"

The judge shook his head gravely, as if the situation were now hopeless,
indeed.




                              CHAPTER XXVI

                       THE ARMY OF THE UNEMPLOYED


"I am very tired to-night," Marley wrote to Lavinia a day or so later.
"I have been making the rounds of the law offices; I have been to all
the leading firms, but--here I am, still without a place. I thought I
might get a place in one of them where I could finish my law studies,
and make enough to live on, meanwhile; I had dreams of working into the
firm in time, but they were only dreams, and all my hopes have gone
glimmering. The men who are employed in the law offices are already
admitted to the bar; most of them are young fellows, but some are old
and gray-headed, and the sight of them gave me the blues.

"I did not get to see many of the firm members themselves; their offices
are formidable places. There is no office in Macochee like them; they
have big outer rooms, full of stenographers and clerks and there is a
boy at a desk who makes you tell your business before you can get in to
see any of the lawyers themselves. They seem to be mighty big, important
fellows. Most of them would not see me at all; several said they had no
place for me and dismissed me with a kind of pitying smile; one man,
when I asked him if he thought there was an opening, said he supposed
there ought to be, as one lawyer in Chicago had died of starvation only
the day before. But some were kinder; one, whom I shall never forget,
took pains to sit down and talk with me a long time, but he was no more
encouraging than the others. He said the profession was terribly
overcrowded, 'that is,' he corrected himself with a tired smile, 'if you
can call it a profession any longer. It is more of a business nowadays
and the only ones who get ahead are those who have big corporations for
clients. How they all live is a mystery to me!' He thought I had better
not undertake it and advised me to go into some business. But then most
of them did that.

"But I must tell you of my visit to Judge Johnson. You will remember my
telling you of him; he was Wade Powell's chum in the law school in
Cincinnati, and Mr. Powell had given me a letter to him. I had a hard
time seeing him; the hardest of all. When I went into the big stone
government building he was holding court, and a lawyer was making an
argument before him. I waited till they were all done, and then when the
crier had adjourned court--he said 'Oyez, Oyez, Oyez,' instead of the
'Hear ye, hear ye, hear ye' we have in Ohio; it sounded so old and
quaint, even if he did say 'Oh yes,' for 'Oyez!' It comes from the old
Norman-French, you know; ask your father about it, he'll explain it--I
tried to get in to him. I succeeded at last, but it was hard work. He
didn't seem glad to see me; he looked at me coldly, and made me feel as
if I ought to hurry up and state my business promptly and get away. When
I gave him Wade Powell's letter he put on his gold glasses and read it;
but--what do you think?--I don't believe he remembered Wade Powell at
all! At least he seemed not to. Of course he may have been putting it
on. Wouldn't it make Wade Powell mad to know that? I'd give a
dollar--and I haven't any to spare either--to see him when he hears that
his old friend, Judge Johnson of the United States Circuit Court,
couldn't remember him! Well, the judge didn't let me detain him long, he
looked at his watch a moment, and then he advised me not to try it in
Chicago; he said there were too many lawyers here anyhow, and that he
thought a young man made a mistake in coming to a city at all.

"'Why don't you stay in a small town?' he asked, looking at me sternly
over his glasses. 'Living is cheaper there, and life is much more simple
than it is in the cities. I've often wished I had stayed in a little
town.'

"I came away, as you can imagine, feeling pretty much cast down and
humbled in spirit. There are four thousand lawyers in Chicago; just
think of it, almost as many lawyers as there are people in Macochee! As
I walked through the crowded streets with men and women rushing along, I
wondered how they all lived. What do they do? Where are they all going,
and how do they get a place to stand on? As I came across the bridge
over to the North Side I felt that there was no place for me here in
this great, dirty, ugly city, just as there is no place for me back in
peaceful Macochee, where every minute of the day I long to be. Anyway, I
am sure that there is no place for me here in the law, and I shall have
to look for something else. I see so much wretchedness and poverty and
squalor; it is in the street everywhere--pale, gaunt men, who look at
you out of sick, appealing eyes.

"This morning I saw a sight down-town that filled me with horror; it was
noon, and a great crowd of ragged men were waiting in front of the
_Daily News_ office in Fifth Avenue. They were all standing idly and yet
expectantly about; I stood and watched them. Presently, as at some
signal, they all rushed for the office door, and then all at once they
seemed to be enveloped in a white, rustling cloud. Each one had a
newspaper, and they all turned to one page and began to read rapidly;
sometimes two or three men bent over the same paper; in another moment
they had scattered, going in all directions. Then it flashed upon me:
they had been waiting for the noon edition of the paper and the page
they had all turned to was the page with the 'want ads' on it; they were
all looking for jobs! It made me inexpressibly sad. I do not wish to
inflict my own sorrow upon you, dear heart, but it made me shudder; what
if I--but no, the thought is too horrible to mention. And yet I, too,
belong to this great army of the unemployed.

"As I write the clock in the steeple of a church a block away chimes the
hour of midnight; so you see that I've retained my nocturnal habits.
When the poets of a coming generation sing of me (as they doubtless
will, after my death) their songs will be called Nocturnes."

That same day Doctor Marley received a letter from his son which Mrs.
Marley, though her husband passed it over to her to read, did not show
to Lavinia. It ran:

"It's rather expensive living here, I find; especially for one who
belongs to the great army of the unemployed. My contract with my
basiliscine landlady calls for two meals a day and a bed at night--also
for three-fifty per week in payment of said two meals and bed. My
lunches I get down-town; that is, I did get them down-town; for two days
I have gone without lunches, and the aforesaid landlady looks
reproachfully at me at night when she sees me laying in an extra supply
of dinner. I don't mind the lack of the lunches, even if she does, but
I'll have to pay her in a day or so now. I'm in poor spirits to-night,
so can't write well; cause of said low mental temperature, only eighty
cents in the world between me, my landlady and ultimate starvation. It's
funny how much hungrier a fellow gets as the food supply gets low. A
word to the wise, etc.

"What do you think? I met Charlie Davis on the street this morning. He
is living here now, working in some big department store. My, it was
good to see some one from Macochee! How small the world is, after all!

"How are you all? How is Dolly? Does Smith Johnson still clap his hands
at his dog every evening as he comes home, and does the dog run out to
meet him as joyously as of yore? And does Hank Delphy still go down-town
in his shirt-sleeves? And has Charlie Fouly had any fits in the Square
lately? And, father, has mother got a girl yet? Give her an ocean of
love and tell her not to work too hard, and to let the heathen shift for
themselves a while. They haven't any trusts to monopolize the jobs as
yet, and they ought to be able to get along. Oh, how I'd like to see you
all! Answer all my questions: I propounded numerous ones to you. I don't
remember now what all of them were, but I know they were all momentous
and had much to do with my well-being, spiritual and physical, not to
say financial. And see that the moss doesn't get too thickly overlaid on
my memory."

Marley's new life in Chicago, as somewhat vaguely reflected in his
letters, impressed those who had a sense of having been left behind in
Macochee, as but a continuation of the life he had led there, that is,
it was presented to them as one long, hopeless search for employment. He
told of his daily tramps up and down the city, of his dutiful
applications for work in every place where the boon of work might be
bestowed, and of the unvarying refusals of those in whose hands had been
intrusted, by some inscrutable decree of the providence of economics,
the right to control the opportunity of labor. It was as if the primal
curse of earning his bread were in a fair way to be taken from man, had
not the primal necessity of eating his bread continued unabated.

The routine through which he went each day had begun to weary Marley,
and it might have begun to weary his readers in Macochee, had they not
all felt their own fortunes somehow bound up with his. He apologized in
his nightly letters for the monotony of their recitals, but he hoped it
might be condoned as the most realistic portrayal of his life that he
could give. He tried at times to give his letters a lighter tone by
describing, with a facility that grew with practice, the many incidents
that attracted him in a city whose life was all so new and strange to
him; he could not help a growing interest in it all, and while Lavinia
was probably unconscious of the change, his letters were now less
concerned with the things of the life he had left in Macochee, and more
and more with the things of the life he had entered upon in Chicago; as
on a palimpsest, the old impressions were erased to make way for new
ones.

But try as he would to give to his letters a cheer that was far from
expressing his own spirit, he could not save them from the despair that
was laying hold of him, a despair which finally communicated itself in
the declaration that it was now no longer with him a question of
selecting employment.

"I must take," he wrote, "whatever I can get, and that will probably be
some kind of manual, if not menial, work. Sometimes," so he let himself
go on, "I feel as if I would give up and go back to Macochee, defeated
and done for. But I can not come to that yet, though I would like to;
oh, how I would like to! But I don't dare, my pride won't let me act the
part of a coward, though I know I am one at heart. One thing keeps me up
and that is the thought of you; I see your face ever before me, and your
sweet eyes ever smiling at me--"

Lavinia's eyes were not smiling as she read this; and she poured out her
own grief and sympathy in a long letter that she promptly tore up, to
pen in its stead a calmer, braver one, that should hearten him in the
struggle which, as she proudly assured him, he was making for her.

Marley's description of his straits partly prepared Lavinia for the
shock of the letter in which he said he had found a job at last, but she
was hardly prepared to learn that it was anything so far from her
conception of what was due him as a job trucking freight for a railroad.
The mockery he put into the picture of himself in a blue jumper and
overalls could not console her, and she kept the truth from every one,
except her mother; she preferred rather that they number Marley still
with the army of the unemployed than to count him among those who toiled
so desperately with the muscles of their arms and backs. She tried to
conceal in encouraging congratulations the chagrin of which she felt she
should be ashamed, and she tried to show her appreciation of his droll
sarcasms about the preparation his four years of college had given him
for the task of trundling barrels of sugar and heaving pianos down from
box-cars.

"I'm sure it's honest work," she wrote, "but do be careful, dear, not to
hurt yourself in lifting such heavy loads." It was a comfort to remind
him that he was not intended to do such work.

There was a relief, however, that she did not dare admit, when he told
her three days later that he had lost his job.

"I realize for the first time my importance in the great scheme of
things," he wrote. "I was fired because I do not belong to the freight
handlers' union. It took them three days to find this out, and then they
threatened to strike if the railroad company did not immediately
discharge me. The railroad company, after due consideration, decided to
let me out, and--I'm out. It makes me tremble to think of the
consequences that would have followed had they decided otherwise. Think
of it! The railroad tied up, business at a standstill and the commerce
of the nation paralyzed, and all because of Glenn Marley, A. B. It is
really encouraging to know that my presence on the earth is actually
known to my fellow-mortals; it has at least been discovered that I am
alive and in Chicago, even if my diploma is not recognized by Freight
Handlers' Union No. 63. And now," he concluded, "as Kipling says, it's
'back to the army again, Sergeant, back to the army again'--the army of
the unemployed."

Lavinia was shocked again a day or so later when on opening her letter
she met the announcement that he had been offered a job with another
railroad as a freight handler.

"But you need not be alarmed," she was reassured to read--though it was
not until she thought it all over afterward that she began to wonder how
he had divined her dislike of his being in such work--"I haughtily
declined, and turned them down. You see this road is just now in the
throes of a strike, and all their freight handlers are out.
Consequently, they have had to employ scabs to do the work of the
strikers. They take anybody--that's why they were ready to take me. But
as I said, I declined. Somehow, I couldn't bring myself to take a place
away from a union man."

Lavinia mistook her satisfaction in Marley's declination of the position
for a satisfaction in the nobility of his sacrifice, and in her elation
she related the circumstance at dinner. Now that Marley had declined
such an employment she felt safe in doing this. But her father did not
see it in her light, or at least in Marley's light.

"Humph!" he sneered; "so he sympathizes with unionism, does he? Well,
those unions will own the whole earth if they keep on."

"But he says he thought of the wives and children of the union men--"

"Well, but why doesn't he think of the wives and children of the scabs,
as he calls them? They have as much right to live and work as the union
men."

Lavinia, as an opponent of union labor herself, could not answer this
argument, though she felt it her duty to defend Marley. But before she
could proceed in his defense, her father, strangely enraged at the mere
mention of the policies of the unions, hurried on:

"The union didn't show any consideration for him when it took his other
job away from him."

Lavinia shot a reproachful glance at her mother, who did not see it
because she was shooting a glance more than reproachful at her husband,
and it had the effect of silencing and humbling the judge, as all of
Lavinia's arguments, or all of the arguments known to the propaganda of
union labor, could not have done.




                             CHAPTER XXVII

                               A FOOTHOLD


The next letter the postman gave Lavinia began ecstatically:

"I've got a job at last! I'm now working for the C. C. and P. Railroad,
in their local freight office, and I'm not trucking freight either, but
I'm a clerk--a bill clerk, to be more exact. My duties consist in
sitting at a desk and writing out freight bills, for which by some
inscrutable design of Providence my study of common carriers and
contracts in the law was doubtless intended to prepare me.

"To-day I wrote out a bill for freight to Cook and Jennings, Macochee,
Ohio, and you can imagine my sensations. It made me homesick for a
while; I wished that by some necromancy I might conceal myself in the
bill and go to Macochee with it; I had a notion to write a little word
of greeting on the bill, but I didn't; it might have worried old man
Cook's brain and he couldn't stand much of a strain of that kind. But
I'm getting nearer Macochee every day now. I guess I'm to be a railroad
man after all, and some day you'll be proud to tell your friends that I
started at the bottom. 'Oh, yes,' you'll be boasting, 'Mr. Marley began
as a common freight trucker; and worked his way up to general manager.'
Then we'll go back to Macochee in my private car. I can see it standing
down by the depot, on the side track close to Market Street, baking in
the hot sun, and the little boys from across the tracks will be crowding
about it, gaping at the white-jacketed darky who'll be getting the
dinner ready. We'll have Jack and Mayme down to dine with us, and your
father and mother and Chad and Connie, and my folks, too, and maybe, if
you'll let me, Wade Powell. Then, of course, the Macochee people will
think better of me; they won't be saying that I'm no good, but instead
they'll stand around, in an easy, careless way, and say, 'Oh, yes, I
knew Glenn when he was a boy. I always said he'd get up in the world.'

"But, ah me, just now I'm a bill clerk at fifty dollars a month, thank
you, and glad of the chance to get it; so is my voluptuous landlady
glad; she'll get her board money a little more regularly now.

"I suppose you'll want to know something about my surroundings. They are
not elegant; the office is a big barn of a place, crowded full of desks,
where we sit and write from eight in the morning until any hour at night
when it occurs to the boss to tell us we can go. Last night it was ten
o'clock before the idea struck him. They kindly allow us an hour in
which to run out to a restaurant for supper. The windows in the office
were washed, so tradition runs, in 1493, the year after Columbus landed.
Outside, the freight trains rush by constantly so as to keep the noise
going. My boss, whose name is Clark, strikes me as being a sort of fool
of an innocuous sort. He is a conscientious ass, but a poor,
unfortunate, deluded simpleton. He's one of those close-fisted reubs
whose chief care is the pennies, and whose only interest in life is the
C. C. and P. Railroad. He makes his business his own personal affair and
the C. C. and P. his god. He lunches down-town and pays twenty cents for
his lunch, never more, often fifteen. One of the first things he told me
was, now that I had come under his protecting wing, to begin to save
money. They have a young man in the office here, whose desk is next to
mine, who was born somewhere in Canada, and is always 'a-servin' of her
Majesty the Queen,' as Kipling says. He told me with much gusto how he
had hung out of the office window last New Year's a Canadian flag. He
seemed proud of having done so, and also told me, boasted to me, in
fact, that he was going to hang the same flag out of the same window on
the Fourth of July. 'Oh, yes, you are!' thinks I. So I got the flag and
ripped it into shreds and started it through the waste-basket on a
hurried trip to oblivion. _A bas_ the Canadian flag! He'll probably get
another one, but if I get hold of it, it'll meet the same fate as the
first one. Then I have something to think of that'll keep my mind off my
horrible fate in being here in Chicago, while I smile in ghoulish glee
with a cynical leer overspreading my classic features, at the young
man's disapproval of my actions. The rest of the men in the office
aren't much to boast of. They're a diluted mixture of Nijni Norgordian
and Bill Hoffman the jeweler. I still hate this town; I wish it were
buried under seven hundred and thirty feet of Lake Michigan."

Marley's next letter to Lavinia opened thus:

"Extract from the diary of J. H. Anderson,
Esq., Canadian, clerk in the freight office of the
C. C. and P. Ry., at Chicago, Ill., April 20.

            "'New man on desk next to mine; young, about
            24. Rather decent fellow, but conceited. Do not
            think he will last. Took me to lunch with him
            this evening.'

"Now what do you think of that? The youth I described to you at such
length keeps a diary, and the foregoing is culled therefrom. He left it
by some mistake on top of his desk, and I picked it up innocently enough
to-night, to see what it was, and that was the first thing my eye lit
on. He is evidently an adept at coming to conclusions, apparently he can
sum one up in two whisks of a porter's broom. I was much surprised to
find myself so well done. Done on every side in those few words. I've
rather enjoyed it; strikes me as being uproariously funny. Maybe his
dictum is correct. You'll agree with me as to his richness. Tell every
one about it and see what they will think. Tell your mother and my
mother. Tell Jack and give him a chance to laugh. Tell Mayme Carter,
too."

Lavinia ran at once to her mother.

"Listen," she said. And she read it.

Mrs. Blair laughed.

"How funny!" she said, "and how well he writes! I should think he'd go
into literature."

Lavinia laid the letter down in her lap and looked at her mother as if
she had been startled by a striking coincidence.

"Why, do you know, I've thought of that very thing myself."

"But read on," urged Mrs. Blair.

Lavinia picked up the letter again and began:

"Well, de--"

"Oh," she exclaimed, blushing hotly, "I can't read you that. Let's
see--"

She leafed over the letter, one, two, three, four sheets. Mrs. Blair was
smiling.

"Aren't you leaving out the best parts?" she asked archly.

"Oh, there's nothing," Lavinia said, not looking up. "But--oh, well,
this is all. He says--

"'There is a good deal of unrest and uneasiness here just now, because
the first of May is coming. The road is anticipating trouble with the
freight handlers; they may go out on a strike that day.'

"Oh, dear," sighed Lavinia, "more strikes, and I suppose that means more
trouble for Glenn."

"Why, the strike of those men can't affect him," Mrs. Blair assured her.
"He's a clerk now."

"Yes, I know, but what if he gets the notion he ought to help them by
quitting too?"




                             CHAPTER XXVIII

                          THE TALK OF THE TOWN


Macochee's common interest in Marley was sharpened by his leaving town,
and out of the curiosity that raged, Lawrence and Mayme Carter one
evening made a call on Lavinia.

"Well, Lavinia," said Lawrence, almost as soon as they were seated in
the parlor, "what's the news about Glenn? How's he getting along?"

"Oh, pretty well," she said, smiling.

"Does he like Chicago?"

"Oh, yes; that is, fairly well."

"Run get his letters and let us read them."

"Why, Jack! The idea!" Mayme rebuked him.

But Lavinia instantly got up.

"Well, I'll read you part of one or two," she said. "He can tell you
much better than I all about himself."

She was gone from the room a moment and then returned with two thick
envelopes.

"My, Lavinia, you don't intend to read all that, do you?" Lawrence made
a burlesque of looking at his watch.

"Oh, you needn't be afraid," said Lavinia, smiling. She opened a letter.

"Here's one that came several days ago. He mentions you both in this
one."

"You don't mean to say he connects our names?" Lawrence affected
consternation.

"Can't you be serious a moment?" Mayme said, "I want to hear what he
says; do go on, Lavinia, and don't mind Jack."

Lavinia read the extract from the diary and Marley's comment.

"Doesn't he say anything about you?" said Lawrence. "Why don't you read
that? You skip the most interesting parts. You'd better let me read
them. Here--" and he held out his hand for the letter.

But Lavinia laid one letter securely in her lap and opened the other.

"Listen to this," she began, and then she glanced over the first page
and half-way down the second.

"Here you're skipping again," cried Lawrence. "Why don't you play fair?"

"'I have made a friend,' he says," she began, "'and it all came about
through the strike. You know the freight handlers went out on the first
of May, and since then there has been more excitement than work in the
office. The freight house is stacked high with freight, and only a few
men are working there and they are afraid of their lives. All around the
outside of the big, long shed are policemen and detectives, and the
strikers' pickets. All day they walk up and down, up and down, at a safe
distance, just off the company's ground, and they waylay everybody and
try to get them not to go to work here. I happened to see the strike
when it began. It was day before yesterday morning. I had gone out in
the freight house on some little errand and just at ten o'clock I
noticed a man walk down by the platform that runs along outside the
shed. I saw him stop by one of the big doors and look in. Suddenly he
gave a low whistle, then another. The men in the freight house stopped
and looked up. Then the man outside raised his arm, and held up two
fingers--'"

"He wanted them to go swimming probably," interrupted Lawrence.

"Oh, Jack, do stop," said Mayme, irritably. "Right at the most
interesting part, too! Do go on, Lavinia."

Lavinia read on:

"'Then the man outside raised his arm, and held up two fingers, and
instantly every truck in the shed dropped to the floor, bang, the men
all went and put on their coats, marched out of the freight house--and
the strike was on. Well, after that came the policemen and the
detectives and the pickets, to say nothing of the reporters. It is about
these last that I mean to tell you, for among them I have found this new
friend. The other day a young man came into the office to see Clark, our
boss. I was attracted by him at once. He was tall, and his smooth-shaven
face was refined and thoughtful; I call him good-looking; his eyes were
dark and his nose straight and full of character; his lips were thin and
level; his hair was not quite black and stopped just on the right side
of being curly. He was dressed modestly, but stylishly; I remember he
wore gloves--he always does--and I thought him somewhat dudish. But what
was my pleasure to see on his waistcoat the little white cross of my
fraternity! I rushed up to him instantly, and gave him the grip. He was
a Sig., from an Indiana college, and he is a reporter on the _Courier_.
His name is James Weston; no, he is no relation to Bob Weston of
Macochee at all. I asked him that the first thing; but he is some
relation to the Cliffords, distant, I suppose.'"

"I wonder if that isn't the young man who visited them summer before
last?" asked Mayme. "I'll bet it is!"

"No, it can't be," said Lavinia, "I thought of that the very first
thing, but you see he says," and Lavinia read on:

"'He says he hasn't been there for years. We chatted together for a few
minutes and were friends at once. To-morrow night, if I can get off in
time, I'm to dine with him at a cafe down-town. My, but it was good to
see some one wearing that little white cross! You see my college
training has done me some good after all.'"

In their conversation afterward, Lavinia and Mayme celebrated Marley's
abilities as a writer, but Lawrence begged Lavinia to read them more,
particularly, as he assured her, those parts about herself, saying he
could judge better of Marley's abilities after he heard how he treated
romantic subjects.

"I want to know how he handles the love interest," he said.

"Oh, you got that from George Halliday," said Mayme. "It sounds just
like him when he's discussing some book none of us has read, doesn't it,
Lavinia?"

Lavinia admitted that it did sound like Halliday, and Mayme returned to
her attack on Lawrence by saying:

"What do you know about writing, anyway?"

They might have gone farther along this line had not Mrs. Blair entered
with a plate of cake and some ice-cream that had been left over from
their dessert at supper. These refreshments instantly seemed to affect
Mayme with the idea that the call had assumed the formality of a social
function, and as she nibbled at her cake, she asked with a polite
interest:

"Just what is Mr. Marley's position with the railroad, Lavinia?"

"Oh," Lavinia answered, "he has a place in the office of the freight
department; he's a clerk there."

"I'm so glad to know," said Mayme, as if in relief.

"Why?" Lavinia looked up in alarm.

"Oh, well, you know--how people talk." Mayme raised her pale eyebrows
significantly. Lavinia was disturbed, but Lawrence, detecting the
danger, instantly turned it off in a joke.

"She heard he was a section hand," he said.

"The idea!" laughed Lavinia.

"Isn't this just the worst place for gossip you ever heard of?" said
Mayme.

"The worst ever," said Lawrence. "If I were you I'd quit and start a
reform movement."

When they had gone and were strolling toward the Carters', Lawrence
grumbled at Mayme:

"What did you want to give it all away to Lavinia for?"

"Why, Jack, I didn't say anything, did I?"

"Oh, no, nothing--only you tipped off the whole thing to her."

"Why, what did I say that hinted at it, even?"

"'Oh, you know how people talk!'" Lawrence mimicked her tone as he
repeated her words.

"Well, you know they do, Jack, and you know all the mean things they've
been saying about Glenn. And you remember Charlie Davis' mother told
mama that Charlie ran across him in the street: in Chicago and that--"

"Oh, Charlie Davis!" said Lawrence, as impatiently as he could say
anything. "What's he? Anyway, you didn't have to tell Lavinia."

"Well, I'm glad we got the truth anyway."

"Yes, so am I."

"We must tell everybody."

"Sure," acquiesced Lawrence, "if we can get the gossips started the
other way they'll have him president of the road in a few days."




                              CHAPTER XXIX

                            A MAN OF LETTERS


The Macochee gossips, after they were assured he was engaged in
clerical, and not manual work, might have promoted Marley much more
rapidly than his railroad would have done, had it not been for the news
that he had changed his employment. They had gone far enough to noise it
about that Marley was chief clerk in the office, where he was only a
bill clerk, when the _Republican_, with the impartial good nature with
which it treated all of Macochee's folk, so long as they kept out of
politics, mentioned him for the first time since his departure, and
then, to tell of the advancement he was rapidly making in the metropolis
that loomed so large and important in their provincial eyes. Lavinia had
the facts in a letter from Marley a day or so before the _Republican_
had them, though she never could imagine, as she told everybody, where
the _Republican_ got its information.

"I have a big piece of news to tell you," he wrote. "Last night I dined
with Weston. It was the first really enjoyable evening I have had since
I struck the town. Luckily, the strikers had everything tied up so tight
that we could do little work, and I had no trouble in getting off in
time. I met him about six o'clock, and we went to the swellest
restaurant in town. Weston is the finest fellow you ever saw; as it was
pay night, he said he would blow me off to a good dinner. And he did,
the best dinner I have ever eaten; there were half a dozen courses, and
as we ate we talked, talked about everything, college days, the hard
days that come after college, and you, and everything. Weston's
experience has been about the same as mine--one long, hopeless search
for a job. He, however, did not wait so long as I did; he said that he
realized there was no place for him in a small town, and so he set out
for the city almost at once. His father wanted him to study medicine,
but he said he hadn't the money or the patience to wait, and he hated
medicine anyway, and, as newspaper work offered the quickest channel to
making a living he chose that. His secret ambition, he confessed, is
literature, and I believe he is writing a book, but he would not, or did
not, tell me as much. He says he thinks newspaper work a bad business
for any one to get into, but then I have discovered that that is the way
every man talks about his own calling.

"After we had finished our dinner, we sat there for a long, long time
over our coffee and cigarettes, and we finally got to talking about the
strike. Weston, you know, has been working on it, and I was glad to be
able to tell him a good many things he said he could use. Finally, I
don't know just how it came about, but I told him how the strike started
with us, about the man appearing in the street alongside the freight
house, whistling, and then holding up two fingers--I think I described
it to you in a letter the other night. Weston was greatly interested; I
can see him still, sitting across the table from me, knocking the ashes
from his cigarette into his empty coffee-cup and looking so intently at
me out of his brown eyes that he almost embarrassed me. And what was my
surprise when I finished to have him say:

"'By Jove, Marley, I'll have to use that. I've been wondering how to
lead my story to-night.'

"Now you know the strike at our place occurred several days ago, but
since then it has been spreading, and to-day the men on another road
walked out. This morning when I picked up the _Courier_ and turned to
the strike news, here is what I read, under big head-lines:

"'A short man with a brown derby hat cocked over his eye walked
leisurely down Canal Street at ten o'clock yesterday morning. The short
man walked a block and then turned and walked back. At the open door of
the C. and A.'s big freight house he stopped. Suddenly he whistled,
once, twice, thrice, in low notes. Then he raised his hand with a
gesture that was graceful and yet commanding, and held up two fingers.
Inside the freight house the men who were heaving away at the big bales
and boxes, attracted by the whistle, paused in their labor and looked
up; they saw the man raise his two fingers; and, with the discipline of
well-trained troops, they dropped their trucks, put on their coats and
marched out of the freight house. And the Alton had been added to the
list of railroads whose men were on strike.'

"Of course, I was surprised and puzzled, and a little pleased too, that
I had had a hand in the article. As I read it, though, I thought of a
hundred details I might have told Weston, and I began to wish I had
written the account myself. This afternoon he came around to the office
again, and the first thing he said was:

"'Did you see your story this morning?'

"I told him I had, of course. 'But,' I added, 'that was the way it
happened on our road; not on the Alton.'

"But he only laughed, and said something about the tricks of the trade.

"And now for the news I was going to tell you. I told Weston, as we
talked the story over, of my little wish that I had written the article
myself, and he looked at me intently for a moment. Then he said:

"'How'd you like to break into newspaper business?'

"My heart leaped; it came to me suddenly that it wasn't the law, nor
railroad work, but journalism that I wanted to enter. I told him so
frankly and he said:

"'Well, it's a dog's life and I don't know whether I'm doing you a good
turn or not, but I'll speak to the city editor tonight. He's a little
short of men just now.

"My heart is in my mouth. I can hardly wait till to-morrow, when I'm to
see him again. Think of it, dear, and all it means! It means more money,
association with men of my own kind, men like Weston, and a fine,
interesting life; and it means you; oh, it means you!"

Marley was able in this letter to communicate to Lavinia some of his
enthusiasm and some of his suspense, and she found it difficult to await
the result of his next interview with Weston. She began to count the
hours until Marley and Weston should meet again, and then in a flash it
came over her that they had doubtless already met, that the decision was
already known, the fate determined, and she was still in ignorance. She
had a sense of mystery in it, and she grew impatient, wondering why he
did not telegraph. The next day came, and a letter with it; but the
letter did not decide anything. Marley wrote that Weston had spoken to
the city editor, and that he had told him to bring Marley around that
evening. And so, other hours of waiting, and then, at last, another
letter. Marley announced the result with what self-repression he could
command.

"It's settled," he wrote. "I'm to go to work Monday--as a reporter on
the staff of the _Courier_. The salary to begin with is to be fifteen
dollars a week. I'm glad to quit railroad work; I'm not built to be a
railroad man; I can't adhere to rules as they want me to, and I can't
bow down as it seems I should. I didn't tell you that my boss and I had
not been getting along very well lately; I thought I wouldn't worry you.
I was glad to be able to tell him to-day that I'd quit Saturday. I did
it in a proud and haughty manner; he seemed surprised and shocked--even
pained. And when I broke the news gently to the young Canuck he
expressed great sorrow and regret, but in his secret heart I knew he was
glad, for now as a prophet he can vindicate himself, at least partly, in
his diary."

Lavinia was glad that Marley had gone into newspaper work; much as she
had tried she had not been able to conceive of him in exactly the ideal
light as a clerk in a railroad office; that position, while it may have
had its own promise, nevertheless did not envelope him in the atmosphere
she considered native to him. In his new relation to literature, which,
in her ignorance, she confounded with journalism, she felt a deep
satisfaction, and a new pride, and she was glad when the _Republican_
announced the fact of Marley's new position; she felt that it was a
fitting vindication of her lover in the eyes of the people of Macochee
and a rebuke for the distrust they had shown in him.

Thereafter her mail was increased, for in addition to his letter Marley
sent her the _Courier_ with his work marked; often he marked Weston's as
well, and early in June he wrote: "I want you to read Weston's story in
Sunday's paper about the Derby; it's a peach; it's the best piece of
frill writing that the town has seen in many a day."

The tone of Marley's letters now became more cheerful; it was evident to
Lavinia that he was finding an interest in life, and in his descriptions
of his daily work and the places all over Chicago it took him to and the
people of all sorts it brought him in contact with, she found a new
interest for her own life. When he wrote that his salary had been
increased because of his story about a Sunday evening service in a
church of the colored people in Dearborn Street, it seemed to her that
happiness at last had come to them, and if, with the passing of June,
she felt a pang at Marley's grieving in one of his letters that this was
the month in which they had intended to be married, she was consoled by
the rapid progress he was making in his work. His salary had been raised
a second time; he was receiving now twenty-five dollars a week; it
seemed large to her, and she could not understand why it did not seem
large to Marley, even when he wrote that Weston was paid forty dollars a
week.

Her chief joy, perhaps, lay in the fact that he seemed to be living more
comfortably than he had before. Now that he had left his dismal
boarding-house she found a relief from its subtly communicated influence
of the stranded wrecks of life, as Marley surely found it in the
apartments he was sharing with Weston. She parted as gladly from the
knowledge of his landlady as Marley did himself, assuring her that the
landlady had "not decreased any in value as a zoo exhibit since first I
rhapsodized about her." Lavinia felt that she could dispense with much
of the worry her womanly concern for his comfort had given her, and she
turned with a new joy to the books he was constantly recommending.

"Did you ever read," he wrote, "Turgenieff's _Fathers and Sons_? I know
that you didn't and therefore I know what a treat you have coming. I'll
send you the book if you can't get it in Macochee, and I presume you
can't. Snider's sign 'Drugs and Books' is a lure to deceive an unwary
public that doesn't care as much for books as it does for soda-water;
and the stock there, as I recall it, consists largely of forty-cent
editions of books on which the copyright has expired, and which, printed
on cheap, pulp paper, are to be introduced for the first time to the
natives of Macochee. I wish you could see Weston's little book-case,
with its rows of his favorites. Besides Turgenieff and Tolstoi--he says
the Russians are the greatest novel writers the world has yet
produced--he has all of George Eliot; I have just read over again
_Middlemarch_ and _Daniel Deronda_. He likes Jane Austen, too, and he
says you would like her; I haven't read any but _Emma_ as yet. I'm going
to read them all. And if you like, you can read the set of little
volumes I am sending you to-day; we can read them thus together. And
Henry James--do read him--_Daisy Miller_ especially; you will like that.
Besides these, Weston has most of Ibsen's plays, and sometimes he reads
parts of them aloud to me; he reads them well. Some day, he says, he's
going to write a play himself; he is fond of the theater, and we often
go. One of the fine things about being on a newspaper is that we get
theater tickets, though we can't always get tickets to the theater we
want. Now and then the dramatic editor--a fine old fellow with a
magnificent shock of white hair, who may be seen about the office late
at night looking very _distingue_ in his evening clothes--gets Weston to
write a criticism on some play; and often the literary editor lets him
review books. Weston said to-day he'd get the literary editor to let me
review some books, and when I told him I didn't know how, he laughed in
a strange way and said that wouldn't make the slightest difference.
There's another book you _must_ read, and that is _A Modern Instance_.
The chief character is Bartley Hubbard, a newspaper man. Weston and I
had a big argument about the character to-day. I said I thought it was a
libel on the newspaper profession and Weston laughed and said it was
only the truth, and that I'd agree with him after I'd been in the work
longer. 'Newspaper work isn't a profession anyway,' he said, 'but a
business.' He speaks of journalism--though he won't call it journalism,
nor let me--just as lawyers speak of the law. He is urging me, by the
way, to keep up my law studies, and I'm thinking of going to the law
school here, if I find I can carry it on with my other work. Weston
declares I can; he says a man has to carry water on both shoulders if he
wants to amount to anything in the world--Wade Powell said something
like that to me once. Weston says I'll want to get out of newspaper work
after a while. He disturbed me a little to-day, and he hurt me, too, by
saying that a newspaper man has no business to be married; and he knows
all about you, too. Of course, he didn't mean to hurt me, it's merely
his way of looking at things."

Happy as she was, Lavinia still had to have her woman's worries, and
they began to express themselves in constant adjuration to Marley to
guard his health; she feared the effect of night work, and she feared,
too, that he could not carry on his law studies and do his duty as a
reporter at the same time. She sympathized with the spirit of pride and
determination which made him wish to finish his law studies and be
admitted to the bar, but she found a greater satisfaction in thinking of
him as a journalist than as a lawyer; the figure he thus presented to
her mind was so much more romantic than the prosaic one of a lawyer to
which she had been all her life accustomed; on a large metropolitan
daily he was almost as romantic to her as an army officer or a naval
officer would have been. And while she did not like the night work, and
had her fears of it for Marley, she nevertheless felt strongly its
picturesque quality.

The picture Marley drew in one of his letters of the strange shifting of
the scene that is to be observed in the streets of a great city as
darkness falls, when those that work in the prosaic day disappear and in
their places appears the vast and mysterious army of the toilers by
night, many of them in callings demanding the cover of the night,
thrilled her strangely. But she did not know how from all the
temptations of the irregular life he was leading he was saved, partly by
the gentle friend he had found in James Weston, but more by the constant
thought of the girl whom he had left behind at home.




                              CHAPTER XXX

                               HOME AGAIN


Marley, after a year or more in Chicago, found the excitement of his
first return home growing upon him as he looked out the car window and
long before the train entered the borders of Gordon County he eagerly
began watching for familiar things.

In the spirit of holiday which had come in this his first vacation, he
had felt justified in taking a chair in the parlor car, though from the
associations he had formed in his newspaper work it was more difficult
now for him to resist than to yield to extravagances. He had recalled
with a smile how in those first hard days in the freight office he had
joked about going home in a private car, and he had had all day a
childish pleasure in pretending that the empty Pullman was a private
car; he could almost realize such a distinction when he showed the
conductor the pass his newspaper had got for him.

But even if he now felt glad that he was a newspaper man instead of a
railroad man, he was quite willing to return to Macochee on any terms.
He had tried to convince himself that he knew the very moment the train
swept across the Indiana line into Ohio, and he felt a fine glow of
state pride. He held his pride somewhat in check until he heard some one
speak a name that he recognized as that of an Ohio town and then he
boasted to the porter:

"Well, I'm back in my own state again."

The porter, though ready to admit that Ohio was a pretty good old state,
was nevertheless not very responsive, and Marley saw that he would have
to enjoy his sensations all alone.

He could view with satisfaction the figure of a tolerably well-dressed
city man reflected in the long mirror that swayed with the rushing of
the heavy coach. He knew that his return would create a sensation in
Macochee, though he was resolved to be modest about it. Even if he was
not returning to Macochee in the ceremony he had dreamed of, he was
returning in a way that was distinguished enough for him and for
Macochee.

He was eager to see the old town; he tried to imagine his return in its
proper order and sequence, first, the little depot, blistering in the
hot sun of the August afternoon, the rails gleaming in front of it, and
the air above them trembling in the heat; he could see the baggage
trucks tilted up on the platform; from the eating-house came the odor of
boiled ham compromised by the smell of the grease frying on the
scorching cinders that were heaped about the ties; beyond was the grain
elevator that once appeared so monstrous in his eyes; across the tracks,
the weed-grown field; and the only living things in sight the two men
unloading agricultural machines from a box-car abandoned on a siding,
the only sound, the ticking of a telegraph instrument; the target was
set, but the station officials had not yet appeared.

Thence, in thought, he went up Miami Street; he saw the Court House and,
lounging along the stone base of the fence, the loafers whom no one had
ever seen move, but who yet must have made some sort of imperceptible
astronomical progress, for they kept always just in the shadow of the
building; then the old law office across the way; then Main Street, with
its crazy signs, its awnings, and the horses hitched to the racks, then
the Square with its old gabled buildings, the monument and the
cavalryman, the long street leading to his own home, and at last, Ward
Street, arched by its cottonwoods,--and he recalled his unfinished
verses which had taken Ward Street for a subject:

                  "I know a place all pastoral,
                    Where streams in winter flow,
                  And where down from the cottonwoods
                    There falls a summer snow."

And then, at last, the old house of the Blairs' with its cool veranda,
its dark bricks, its broad overhanging cornices, and Lavinia standing in
the doorway!

He had never forgotten the anguish of his parting that night in spring,
and he had looked forward to this return as an experience that would
expiate it, and restore the lost balance of his life. But now as he
thought of his life in Chicago, of the new scenes and associations, it
came to him that that night after all had been final; the youth who had
then gone forth had indeed gone forth never to return; another being was
coming back in his stead. He had been successful in a way which at first
flattered his pride, but a new sense of proportion had been growing in
him that had lately made him mistrust newspaper work; he had for it a
dislike almost as definite as that which used to displease him in
Weston. He was growing tired of his life as a reporter; it had so many
irregularities, so many hardships; it detached him from wholesome,
every-day existence. He longed for some calling more definite, more
permanent, a work in which he might do things, instead of record them in
an ephemeral way. He had for a while been envious of Weston's progress
in his literary efforts, and for a while he had emulated him, but he had
not been long in recognizing that he lacked literary talent.

Out of this dissatisfaction with himself he had lately gone in earnestly
to complete his law studies, which all along he had pursued in a
desultory fashion. He found some consolation in the hope that he might
be admitted to the bar in the fall, though how or when he was to get
into a practice was still as much of a problem as it had been in the old
days in Macochee. He clung steadfastly, however, to the feeling that his
newspaper work was but a makeshift; Weston and he had constantly
supported each other in this view--it was their one hope.

With thoughts somewhat like these Marley had been whiling away the hours
of his long day's journey from Chicago to Macochee. He had read
thoroughly, and with a professionally critical faculty, all the Chicago
papers, and had long ago thrown them aside in a disorderly pile. Now he
had the tired sense that his journey was nearing its end.

At last he saw the old mill-pond, and his heart leaped in affection;
then he got his umbrella and sticks, took off his traveling cap and put
it in his bag. He stood up for the porter to brush him off, and when he
had selected a half-dollar as a tip, he asked the porter to get his
luggage together, and in a conscious affectation he could not forego,
began to pull on his new gloves. They were nearing Macochee now; and
suddenly the tears started to his eyes, as in a flash he saw his
white-haired father standing on the platform, anxiously craning his neck
for a first glimpse of the boy who was coming home.

Marley's mother did not reproach him when he ate a hurried supper that
evening and then set off immediately for Lavinia's. He renewed some of
the emotions of the earlier days of his courtship as the familiar houses
along the way gradually presented themselves to his recognition; he was
glad to note the changeless aspect of a town that never now could
change, at least in the way of progress, and he discovered a novel
satisfaction--one of the many experiences that were so rapidly crowding
in with his impressions--in the feeling that here, at least, in
Macochee, things would remain as they were, and defy that inexorable law
of change which makes so many tragedies in life. Lavinia must have
recognized his step, for there she was, standing in the doorway, a smile
on her face, and her eyelashes somehow moist. Marley felt a strange
discomposure; there was a little effort, the intimacy of their letters
must now give way to the intimacy of personal contact. But in another
second she was in his arms, and her face was hidden against his breast.

"At last," she said, "you're here!"

He felt her tremble, and he held her more closely. When he released her
she put her hands up to his shoulders and held him away from her, while
she scanned him critically.

"You've grown broader," she said, "and heavier, and--oh, so much
handsomer!"

The Blairs filed in presently, and Marley had the curious sense of this
very scene having been enacted in his presence before, but it lacked the
usual baffling effect of this psychological experience, for he was able
to recall, in an incandescent flash of memory, that it was almost a
repetition of their good-bys that night when he had gone away; Mrs.
Blair was as tender, and if Connie and Chad were a little shy of his new
importance, Judge Blair was as dignified, and as anxious as ever to get
back to his reading. Marley felt once more that permanence of things in
Macochee; this household had remained the same, and it made him feel
more than ever the change that had occurred in him.

In lovers' intense subjectivity, he and Lavinia discussed this change
seriously. They reviewed their old dreams, and now they could laugh at
their defeated wish to live, even in an humble way, in Macochee.

"It was funny, wasn't it?" said Marley. "I was very young
then,--nothing, in fact, but a kid."

"Are you so very much older now?" asked Lavinia with a slight hint of
teasing in her tender voice.

"Well," Marley replied, with a seriousness that impressed him, at least,
as the ripe wisdom of maturity, "I am not much older in years, but I am
in experience, and in knowledge of life. You see, dear, you can measure
time by the calendar, but you can't measure life that way. And Weston
says that there is no calling that will give a man experience so quickly
as newspaper work. You know we see everything, and we get a smattering
of all kinds of knowledge. Weston says that is all that reconciles him
to the business; he says a man learns more there than he ever does in
college. He considers the training invaluable; he says it will be of
great help to him in literature, if he can ever get into literature--he
isn't sure yet that he can. He can tell better after his book is
published. And he says a newspaper experience will help me in the law,
too, that is," Marley added, with a whimsical imitation of Weston's
despairing uncertainty, "if I can ever get into the law."

"You think a great deal of Mr. Weston, don't you?" said Lavinia.

"He's the finest fellow in the world, and the best friend I ever had."

Marley had a curious intuition that Lavinia was a little jealous of
Weston. He immediately sought to allay the feeling with this argument:

"You see, when a man does all for a fellow that Jim has done for me, and
when you have lived with him, and shared your haversack with him, and he
with you, like two soldier comrades, you get right down to the bottom of
him. And I want you to know him, dear, I know you'll like him."

Lavinia was silent, and Marley had a fear that she might not accept
Weston quite so readily.

"He has done me a world of good," he went on. "He has taught me much, he
has corrected my reckoning in more ways than one. He has taught me much
about books; and he has taught me to look sanely on a life that isn't,
he says, always truthfully reflected in books. And besides all, if it
hadn't been for him, if he had not kept me at it and urged me on, I
think I should have been doomed for ever to remain a poor newspaper
man."

"Don't you like newspaper work?" she asked with a shade of
disappointment in her tone.

"I did, but I like it less every day. It's a hard and unsatisfactory
life, and it has no promise in it. A man very soon reaches its highest
point, and then he must be content to stay there. It's the easiest thing
for a young fellow to get a start in, if he's bright; I suppose I'm
making more money than any of the young lawyers in Chicago; but because
it is so easy is the very reason why it is hardly worth while. Things
that are easily won are not worth striving for."

"And you're going to get out of it?"

"Yes, as soon as I can. As soon as I can, I'm going to get into the law.
When Weston first began urging me to keep up my studies, and when
finally he made me go to the night law school, I consented chiefly
because I had always felt the chagrin of defeat in having been compelled
to give it up; lately, I've begun to see things differently, and I've
determined to carry out my first intention and get into the law somehow.
Of course, it's going to be hard. And one has to have a pull there as
everywhere else in these days."

Marley was silent for a moment and, Lavinia thought, a little depressed.
She watched him sympathetically, and yet she was a little troubled by a
sense of detachment. She felt that Weston was now more closely
associated with Marley's struggle than she, and she was disturbed, too,
by the disappointment of finding that his struggles were not at all
ended.

"Weston says," Marley went on presently, "that newspaper work is a good
stepping-stone, and by it I may be able to arrange for some place in the
law which will give me the start I want."

"I thought you liked your work," Lavinia said; "I thought you were happy
in it."

Marley detected her regret, and was on the point of speaking, when
Lavinia went on:

"I don't see why you can't go into literature as well as Mr. Weston."

Marley laughed.

"The reason is that I haven't his talent," he said

"I don't see why," Lavinia argued with some resentment of his humility.
"You haven't enough confidence in your own powers; you let Mr. Weston
dominate you too much."

"Now, dearest," he pleaded, "you mustn't do Jim that injustice. He
doesn't dominate me; but he is so much wiser than I, he knows so much
more. You will understand when you meet him."

"Well," she tentatively admitted, "that is no reason why you shouldn't
in time be a literary man as well as he. Why can't you?"

"Because I can't write, that's why."

"Why, Glenn, how can you say that? Your letters disprove that. Every one
who read them said that they were remarkable, and that you should go
into literature. They said you had such good descriptive powers."

Marley was looking at her in amazement.

"Why, Lavinia, you didn't show them!"

"You simpleton!" she said, with a smile in her eyes, "of course not; but
I have read parts of them to mama and to your mother now and then."

"Oh, well, that's all right," sighed Marley in relief, and then he
resumed his defense of Weston and his analysis of himself.

"Of course, I suppose I can write a fairly good newspaper story; at
least they say so at the office." He indulged a little look of pride,
and then he went on: "But that isn't literature."

"I don't see why it isn't," she said. "I should think it would be the
most natural thing in the world to go from one into the other."

"Not at all. Literature requires style, personality, distinction, and
the artistic temperament."

"I'd say you were talking now like George Halliday if I didn't know you
were talking like Mr. Weston."

"I wish you could hear Weston talk about literature," he said. "He'd
convince you."

"He couldn't convince me that he can write any better than you can."
Lavinia compressed her lips in a defiant loyalty.

Marley paused to kiss the lips for their loyalty, and he compromised the
validity of his own argument by saying:

"As a matter of fact, the law, in America and in England, has given more
men to literature than journalism ever has."

"Then maybe you can enter literature through the law," said Lavinia,
seizing her advantage.

"No," said Marley, shaking his head. "I'm not cut out for it, as Weston
is. Some day he will be a great man, and we shall be proud to have known
him so intimately. And we will have him at our home; I have many a dream
about that."

He looked fondly at her, and her eyes brightened.

"And there is another reason why I want to get out of newspaper work,"
he went on, speaking tenderly, "and that is because everybody says a
newspaper man has no more right to be married than a soldier has."

"But they all are," said Lavinia.

"Yes, they all are, or most of them."

"And I suppose it is the married ones who say that."

"Well, I know one who is going to be married just as soon as he can."

"Who is that,--Mr. Weston?"

"No, but Mr. Weston knows him, and knows his intentions, and he has
promised to be at the wedding and act as best man."

"Oh, it would be fine to have a literary man at the wedding, wouldn't
it."

They talked then about the wedding, and they found all their old
delicious joy in it. Marley said it must be soon now, though with a pang
that laid a weight on his heart, he wondered, as he thought of all the
extravagances he had allowed himself to drift into, where he was to get
the money. He could reassure himself only by telling himself that he was
going to live as an anchorite when he got back to Chicago; even if he
had to give up the pleasant apartment with Weston and go back to the
boarding-house in Ohio Street.

"How shall you like living in Chicago?" he asked. "Can you be happy in a
little flat, without knowing anybody, and without being anybody?"

"I shall be happy anywhere with you, Glenn!" she said, looking
confidently into his eyes.




                              CHAPTER XXXI

                       ILLUSIONS AND DISILLUSIONS


It was a pleasure to Marley to accept the homage the people paid him;
they confounded his success in journalism with a success in literature,
and under the impression that all writers are somehow witty, they
laughed extravagantly at his lightest observation.

But much as Marley relished all this, much as he enjoyed being at home
again, with Lavinia and with his father and mother, he was disturbed by
a certain restlessness that came over him after he had been in Macochee
a few days and the novelty and excitement of his return had worn off.
The glamour the town had worn for him had left it; it seemed to have
withered and shrunk away. He could no longer, by any effort of the
imagination, realize it as the place he had carried affectionately in
his heart during the long months of his absence; its interests were so
few and so petty, and he found himself battling with a wish to get away.
He was fearful of this feeling; he did not dare to own it to himself,
much less to his father and mother or to Lavinia.

He was glad that Lavinia would not let him mention going back to
Chicago, and as the days swept by with the swiftness of vacation time,
he was troubled that he did not feel more acutely the sorrow he felt
would best become the prospect of another separation. He was comforted,
finally, when he was able to analyze his sensations sufficiently to
discover that it was neither his sweetheart nor his parents that had
changed, but his own attitude toward life in a small town; he was vastly
relieved when he succeeded in separating his feelings and saw that it
was Macochee alone that he had lost his affection for, though he could
not analyze his sensations deeply enough to recognize himself as at that
period of life when external conditions are accepted for more than their
real value; he was still too young for that. And so he could spend his
days happily with Lavinia and grudge the moments which Lawrence and
Mayme Carter filched from them by their calls, and he was as resentful
of Mayme's invitation to the supper which she exalted into a dinner with
a reception afterward, as was Lavinia herself.

When Marley went to pay his call on Wade Powell, he found many
sensations as he glanced about the dingy little office where he had
begun his studies. Wade Powell himself, smoking and reading his
Cincinnati paper, was sitting at his old desk, with the same aspect of
permanence he had always given the impression of. Marley rushed in on
him with a face red and smiling and when Powell looked up, he threw down
his paper, and leaped to his feet, saying:

"Well, I'll be damned!"

But when their first greetings were over, Powell's manner changed; he
began to show Marley a certain respect, and he paid him the delicate
tribute of letting him do most of the talking, whereas he used to do
most of the talking himself. He was not prepared to hear that Marley was
still studying law; and it cost him an effort to readjust his conception
of Marley as a successful journalist to the old one of a struggling
student. He gave Marley some intelligence of this, and of his
disappointment when he said with a meekness Marley did not like to see
in him:

"Well, of course, you know your own business best."

But when Marley had taken pains to explain his position and when he had
described the Chicago law offices, Powell grew more reconciled.

"I've watched you," he said, "I've watched you, and I've asked your
father about you every time I've seen him; my one regret was that you
were not working on a Cincinnati paper; then I could have read what you
were writing. I did try to get a Chicago paper--but you know what this
town is."

Powell was deeply interested in Marley's description of his old friend,
Judge Johnson, and as Marley gave him some notion of the judge's
importance and prosperity Powell could only exclaim from time to time:

"Well, I'll be damned!"

Marley did not tell Powell that Judge Johnson had appeared to have
forgotten him; he felt that it would be more handsome to accept the
moral responsibility of a prevarication than to hurt Powell's feelings
in the way he knew the truth would hurt them. Even as it was, Judge
Johnson's success, now so keenly realized by Powell when it had been
brought home to him in this personal way, seemed to subdue him, and he
was only lifted out of his gloom when Marley said:

"But I'll tell you one thing, there isn't a lawyer in Chicago who can
try a case with you."

Powell's eye brightened and his face glowed a deeper red; then the look
died away as he said:

"Well, I made a mistake. I ought to have gone there."

"Is it too late?"

Powell thought a moment, and Marley regretted having tempted him with an
impossibility. He was relieved when Powell shook his head and said:

"Yes, it's too late now."

Powell, with something of the pathos of age and failure that was
stealing gradually over him, begged Marley to come in and see him every
day while he was at home.

"You see I've always kept your desk," he said, in a tone that apologized
for a weakness he perhaps thought unmanly, "just as it was when you went
away."

Marley thought cynically that Powell had kept everything else just as it
was when he went away, but he was instantly ashamed of the thought, and
ashamed, too, of the fact that he and Lavinia both considered even this
little morning call a waste of time, and a sacrifice almost too great to
be borne.

Powell went with Marley out into the street, and it gave him evident
pride to walk by his side down Main Street and around the Square.

"I want them all to see you," he said frankly.

He made Marley go with him to the McBriar House and then to Con's
Corner, and, in every place where men stopped him and shook Marley's
hand and asked him how he was getting along, Powell took the
responsibility of replying promptly:

"Look at him; how does he seem to be getting along?"

Powell found a delight that must have been keener than Marley's in
Marley's fidelity to Chicago, expressed quite in the boastful frankness
of the citizens of that city when abroad, though to Marley it seemed
that he was putting it on them by doing so. He found them all, however,
in a spirit of loyalty to Macochee that might easily have become
combative.

"Well, little old Macochee's good enough for us, eh, Wade?" they would
say.

Marley would not let them be ahead of him in praise of Macochee, and
Powell himself softened enough to admit that old Ohio was a pretty good
place to have come from.

When they suddenly encountered Carman in the street, Marley flushed with
confusion, first for himself and then vicariously for Powell. But there
was no escape from a situation that no doubt exaggerated itself to his
sensitiveness, and he was soon allowing Carman to hold his hand in his
right palm while with the other Carman solicitously held Marley's left
elbow, and transfixed him with that left eye which still refused to
react to light and shade.

"Well, how are you?" asked Carman. "How are you, anyway?"

"Oh, I'm all right."

"Guess you're glad now I didn't give you that job, eh?"

Marley could not look at Powell, but he hastened to say:

"Yes, I'm glad, now."

"Maybe it was for the best," said Carman.

When they had left him Marley quickly and crudely tried to change the
subject, but Powell insisted on saying:

"I want you to know that I've always felt like a dog over that."

"Oh, don't mention it," Marley begged. "I was honest when I told Carman
I was glad it turned out as it did."

"Yes," said Powell, "I guess it was all for the best."

To Marley's relief they dropped the matter then, and went over to Con's
Corner. There Powell lighted a cigar, and Marley could not resist asking
for a brand of cigarettes, the kind that Weston smoked, though he knew
that Con would not have them. He felt mean about it afterward, but he
could not forego some of the petty distinctions of living in a city and
he indulged a little revenge toward the people who had deserted him in
what had seemed to him his need, and now, in what seemed to them his
prosperity, were so ready to rally to him. Marley went home at noon
feeling that his triumph had been almost as great as if he had come home
in a private car.

His triumph soon was at an end; they came to the afternoon of the day
when Marley was to return to Chicago. It was a golden day, with a sun
shining out of a sky without clouds, and yet a delicious breeze blew out
of the little hills. Marley and Lavinia walked out the white and dusty
pike that made the road to Mingo. They walked slowly along the edge of
the road, in silence, under the sadness of the parting that was before
them. They longed ineffably that the moments might be stayed; somehow
they felt they might be stayed by their silence.

But when they had ascended the hill and stood beside the old oak-tree
which grew by the road, they looked out across the valley of the Mad
River, miles and miles away--across fields now golden with the wheat, or
green with the rustling corn that glinted in the sun, off and away to
the trees that became vague and dim in the hazy distance. Back whence
they had come lay Macochee; they could see the tower of the Court House,
the red spire of the Methodist church, the gleam of the sun on some
great window in the roof of the car-shops; on the other side of town
crawled a train, trailing its smoke behind it. Marley looked at
Lavinia--she was leaning against the tree, and as he looked he saw that
her blue eyes were filling slowly with tears.

"Isn't it beautiful!" he said, looking away from her to the simple
scenery of Ohio.

"Do you remember that day?"

"When we picked out our farm--where was it?"

"Wasn't it over there?"

"Yes," he said. "We could come and live here when we are old." He knew
he was but seeking to console himself for what now could not be. "And
there is the old town," he said. "It looks beautiful from here, nestling
among those trees, it seems peaceful, and calm, and simple. But it is
different when you are in it; for there are gossip and envy and spite,
and I can never quite forgive it because it had no place for me. Well,"
he went on defiantly, in the relief he had been able to make for himself
out of his immature reading of Macochee's character; "I don't need it
any more; it is little and narrow and provincial, and the real life is
to be lived out in the larger world. It's a hard fight, but it's worth
it."

"Don't you regret leaving it?" asked Lavinia, in a voice that was
tenderer than Marley had ever known it. Marley looked at Macochee and
then he looked at her.

"I regret leaving it, dear heart, because I must leave you behind in
it."

"Would you never care to come back if it were not for me?" she asked.

"I might," he admitted, "when we are old. We could come back here then
and settle down on our farm over there." He pointed.

"I'm half-afraid of the city," Lavinia said.

He turned and took her in his arms.

"Dearest," he said, "you must not say that; for the next time I come it
will be to take you away from Macochee."

"Will it?" she whispered.

"Yes; and it can't be long now. How we have had to wait!"

"Yes," she repeated, "how we have had to wait!"




                             CHAPTER XXXII

                                AT LAST


Marley, in that compensatory pleasure we find in difficulties in the
retrospect, was afterward fond of saying that if he had waited until he
had the money and the position to warrant his marrying, he never would
have married at all.

Just what moved him to take the decisive step he did he would have found
it hard to tell. He had grown accustomed to the life he was living in
Chicago, he had succumbed, as it were, to his environment; he no longer
regretted Macochee and he found a satisfaction in declaring, whenever he
had the chance, that the kindest thing the town had ever done for him
was to refuse him a place within its borders. As he looked back at all
the plans he had formed, he marveled at their number, but he marveled
more that he should have had such regret in the failure of all of them;
he was glad now that they had failed; had any one of them succeeded his
life would have been diverted into other channels, and it gave him a
kind of fear when he tried to imagine his life in those other channels;
he could see himself in those relations only as some other identity, and
it gave him a gruesome feeling to do this.

Not that he was satisfied with himself or his surroundings; he did not
like newspaper work, and he did not like Chicago very well. He was
determined to get out of newspaper work at any rate, and while he could
not yet clearly see a way of getting into the law, he had a calm
assurance that he would do it, in the end. Weston sustained him in this
hope by saying:

"A man can't control circumstances; they control him; but sometimes he
can dodge them, and, after all, every sincere prayer is answered."

During the winter that followed the summer when he had paid his visit to
his home he worked hard at the law, spending in study the hours the
other men on his newspaper spent in their dissipations, and in the
spring he stole away almost secretly to Springfield, took the
examination, and was admitted to the bar.

After it was done, it seemed but a little thing; he wrote Lavinia and he
wrote Wade Powell, knowing the interest Powell would have in the fact,
that he felt no different now as a lawyer than he had when he was merely
a layman. Weston had spent the winter over the book he was writing; in
the spring he found a publisher, and _The Clutch of Circumstance_ was
given to the world. Marley thought it a wonderful book, and so did
Lavinia, and while it made but little noise in the world, Weston said it
had done better than he expected--so well, in fact, that he was going to
give up newspaper work, and give his attention wholly to writing another
book.

It was a shock to Marley when Weston told him they would have to give up
their apartment; it was a break in the life to which he had grown
accustomed. But it seemed a time of change, and it was then he wrote
Lavinia that he thought it useless for them to wait any longer; he
thought they might as well be married then as at any time.

Unconsciously, perhaps, he wrote this letter as if he and not she had
been waiting, and if he had known the state of the sensitive public
opinion in Macochee, he might have felt himself justified in the
attitude. Ever since his visit there the summer before his apparent
prosperity had given the sentiment of the town an impetus in his favor;
the people had turned their criticism toward Lavinia; for months it was
a common expression that it was a shame she was keeping Marley waiting
so long. They would nod in a sinister way, and insinuate the worldliest
of motives; it was generally under stood that she was waiting for Marley
to make a fortune, and this, they held, was demanding too much. She had
withdrawn utterly from the society of Macochee; and she had not gone to
one of the balls Lawrence had arranged that winter at the Odd Fellows'
Hall; her position, outwardly at least, was as isolated as that of the
Misses Cramer, the fragile and transparent old maids who lived so many
years in their house sheltered by the row of cedars behind the High
School grounds.

When Judge Blair received the formal letter in which Marley told him he
had asked Lavinia to name the day and requested his approval, the judge
gave his consent with a promptness that surprised him almost as much as
it did Mrs. Blair and Lavinia. He justified his inconsistency to his
wife, in order perhaps, the more thoroughly to justify it to himself, by
saying that he had long felt Lavinia's position keenly.

"If the strain has been to her anything like what it has been to me," he
said to his wife, "they could not have endured it much longer."

"It will be lonely here without her," said Mrs. Blair, pensively.

"Yes," the judge assented, and then after a moment's thought he added:

"But we can now begin to worry about Connie."

"Don't you dare mention that, William!" said Mrs. Blair, almost
viciously. "She mustn't begin to think of such a thing."

"But she's in long dresses now, and she seems to walk home more and more
slowly every night with those boys from the High School."

"Well, I don't propose to go through such an experience as we have had
for these last three years, not right away, at any rate."

The judge tried to laugh, as he said:

"Well, I'll turn Connie over to you; I'm going to have a little peace
now."

The judge complained that he could find no peace, however, anywhere, so
great was the preparation that raged thereafter in the house, driving
him with his book and cigar from place to place. Mrs. Blair and Lavinia
and Connie were in fine excitement over the gowns that were being
fashioned, and Miss Ryan lived at the Blairs' for weeks, while in every
room there were billowy clouds of white garments, and threads and
ravelings over all the floors.

Meanwhile it was understood that Marley, too, was making arrangements in
Chicago. He had leased a small flat on the South Side, and had arranged
with Weston to remove most of the furniture of their apartment into the
new home where the lovers were to set up housekeeping. Mrs. Marley was
to spare them some of the things from her home, and Mrs. Blair, from
time to time, designated certain articles which she was willing to
devote to the cause. Chad's contribution was merely a suggestion; he
said they could depend on the wedding presents to fill up the gaps.

They were married in the middle of June. The ceremony was pronounced by
Doctor Marley in the parlor of the Blair home; everybody bore up well
until, under the stress of his emotion, the doctor's voice broke, and
then Mrs. Blair wept and the judge wiped his eyes and his reddened,
anguished face. Mrs. Marley cried too, though every one tried to comfort
her with the assurance that she was not losing a son, but gaining a
daughter. Connie, in her first long gown, acted as maid for her sister,
but it was evident that she was desperately impressed by the young
author of _The Clutch of Circumstance_, who had come on from Chicago to
act as groomsman.

The company that had been invited was as much impressed by Weston as
Connie was; they had never had an author in Macochee before, and though
most of them had such confused notions of Weston's performances in
literature that they grew cold with fear when they talked with him, they
nevertheless braved it out for the sake of an experience they could
boast of afterward. Most of them took refuge in a discussion of Marley's
achievements with him, and they gave him the unflattering impression
that Marley's work was as important as his own.

Many of them had plots they wished him to use in his stories, others
wished to know if he took his characters from real life; and Mrs. Carter
was of such an acuteness that she identified Marley as his hero, though
Weston had tried to keep his book from having any hero. George Halliday,
however, was able to save the day; he could discriminate; he had read
_The Clutch of Circumstance_, having borrowed Lavinia's autograph copy,
and he told Weston that while he did not go in for realism, because it
was too photographic, too materialistic and lacked personality, he
nevertheless had enjoyed a pleasant half-hour with the volume, and
considered it not half-bad.

This conversation was held in plain hearing of all in that difficult
moment after the ceremony, when the relatives of the bride had solemnly
kissed her, and her most intimate friends, like Mayme Carter, had wept
on her neck. The people were standing helplessly about; Marley noticed
Wade Powell, as dignified as a clergyman, in his black garments and
white tie standing apart with his wife.

Marley had never seen Mrs. Powell before, but he recalled in a flash
that she filled his conception of her; and this delicate, sensitive
little face completed the picture he remembered long ago to have formed.
When he saw Powell standing there, his hands behind him, unequal to the
ordeal of being entertained in Judge Blair's house, bowing stiffly and
forcing a smile on the few occasions when he was spoken to or thought he
was being spoken to, he had a wish to go to him, but he could not then
leave his place by Lavinia's side. He was glad a moment later when he
saw his father and Wade Powell in conversation, and as he and Lavinia
passed them on their way out to the dining-room he heard his father say:

"Well, I'll tell you, Mr. Powell, when I was young my creed was founded
on the fact of sin in man; but now that I am old, I find it more and
more founded on the fact of the good that is in all of them."

When the supper was over, Lawrence gave the cheer that every one wished
to see come to the wedding by clearing the parlor for a dance, and
Marley was glad that his position now permitted him to refrain from
dancing with a valid excuse.

Marley thought that Lavinia never looked so pretty as she did when she
stood at the head of the stairs after she had donned her blue traveling
gown, drawing on her gloves and waiting for the carriage that was to
drive them to the station. Her face was rosy in the light that filled
the house, and she met his eyes with a fond, contented glance.

"Are you happy?" he asked.

"Don't you see?" she said, looking up at him.

"And will you be happy in that big city, away from every one you know,
as the wife of a newspaper man?"

"I shall be happy anywhere with you."

"Our dreams are coming true," Marley said, "after a fashion. And yet not
just as we dreamed them, after all."

"In all the essentials they are, aren't they?"

"Yes, but you know our dream was that I was to practise law."

"Well, we still have that dream."

"Yes, we still have it; maybe it will come true. Weston says that our
dreams are as much realities in our lives as anything else."

                                THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Happy Average, by Brand Whitlock

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAPPY AVERAGE ***

***** This file should be named 45728.txt or 45728.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/7/2/45728/

Produced by Peter Bayes, Roger Frank and the online
Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
