The Project Gutenberg EBook of The New England Historical & Genealogical
Register, Vol. I., No. 2, April 1847, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The New England Historical & Genealogical Register, Vol. I., No. 2, April 1847

Author: Various

Editor: William Cogswell

Release Date: May 26, 2014 [EBook #45763]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEW ENGLAND HISTORICAL REGISTER, VOL I ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing, Heather Clark and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                 VOL. I.      APRIL, 1847.      NO. 2.

                                  THE
                              NEW ENGLAND
                  Historical & Genealogical Register:

                         PUBLISHED QUARTERLY,

                      UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE
              NEW ENGLAND HISTORIC, GENEALOGICAL SOCIETY.


                 REV. WILLIAM COGSWELL, D. D., EDITOR.

[Illustration]

                                BOSTON:
                      SAMUEL G. DRAKE, PUBLISHER.
                       NO. 56 CORNHILL.
                                 1847.

         COOLIDGE & WILEY Printers, 12 Water Street.




CONTENTS.


                                                                   Page.

  Memoir of Hon. Samuel Sewall,                                      105

  Letter of Chief-Justice Sewall,                                    111

  Col. Gookin's Letter,                                              113

  History of the Pilgrim Society,                                    114

  Passengers of the Golden Hind,                                     126

  Passengers of the Speedwell,                                       132

  Examination of the Quakers,                                        132

  Complete List of the Ministers of Boston,                          134

  First Settlers of New England,                                     137

  Capital Offences in Massachusetts,                                 139

  Juridical Statistics of Merrimack County, N. H.,                   140

  Reasons for Genealogical Investigations,                           147

  Our Ancestors,                                                     149

  Congregational Ministers and Churches in Rockingham County, N. H., 150

  Proprietors of New Haven, Ct.,                                     157

  Memoir of Enoch Parsons, Esq.,                                     159

  Philosophy of Life,                                                163

  Genealogy of the Cotton Family,                                    164

  Genealogy of the Butler Family,                                    167

  Genealogy of the Minot Family,                                     171

  Biographical Notices of Deceased Physicians in Massachusetts,      178

  Sketches of Alumni at the different Colleges in New England,       182

  Dr. Watts's Letter of Condolence to Madam Sewall,                  191

  List of Ancient Names in Boston and Vicinity,                      193

  Family Increase,                                                   196

  Instances of Longevity,                                            196

  Marriages and Deaths,                                              197

  Notices of New Publications,                                       199

[Illustration: N. Emmons Pinxt.
                                                            O. Pelton.]

  The Honble Samuel Sewall Esqir.}

  Late Chief Justice of His Maj's Province of Massachusetts Bay in N.E.
  And Judge of Probate for the County of Suffolk.

  AE. 77. 1728.

  Auris, mens, oculus, manus, os, pes; munere fungi,
  dum Pergunt Praestat discere velle mori.


                              NEW ENGLAND

                 HISTORICAL AND GENEALOGICAL REGISTER.

                 VOL. I.      APRIL, 1847.      NO. 2.




MEMOIR OF HON. SAMUEL SEWALL,

CHIEF-JUSTICE OF THE PROVINCE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY.


Samuel Sewall, son of Henry and Jane Sewall, was born at Bishop Stoke,
in Hampshire, England, March 28, 1652. The family to which he belonged
was ancient and respectable. His great-grandfather was a linen-draper
of the city of Coventry, "a prudent man, who acquired a great estate,"
and was more "than once chosen mayor of the city." His grandfather,
Henry Sewall, born in 1576, came to New England, lived in Newbury
and Rowley, Ms., and died about 1655. Samuel, the subject of this
memoir, was taught to read at Baddesly; and was afterwards sent to a
grammar-school at Rumsey, of which a Mr. Figes was master. In 1661, he
came to New England with his mother, his father having removed here
previously. He was immediately put under the instruction of Rev. Thomas
Parker of Newbury, with whom he continued six years, till his entrance
into Harvard College, in 1667. His first degree he received under
President Chauncy, in 1671.

It was his original intention to enter the Christian ministry; and with
a view to it, he studied divinity, commenced preaching, and received
encouragement to go to Woodbridge, N. J., and settle as a minister
among that people, who went from Newbury, where his father lived. But
his thoughts were probably diverted from the sacred profession by his
marriage connection, in consequence of which he came into possession of
great wealth, and the means of influence and usefulness in public life.
He was married, Feb. 28, 1676, by Gov. Bradstreet, to Hannah Hull,
daughter and sole heir of John Hull, Esq., a goldsmith and highly
respectable merchant in Boston, master of the mint for many years, and
one of the Assistants in 1683, the year in which he died.

Mr. Sewall was chosen one of the Assistants in 1684, '5, and '6,
when the Colony charter was annulled, and the ancient government was
superseded by a President and Council. In 1688, during the oppressive
administration of Sir Edmund Andros, when the titles of many to their
lands, and of his among others, were questioned and in danger of being
forfeited, he made a voyage to England. But on his return, in 1689,
Sir Edmund having withdrawn from the country, and the old Charter
government having been revived, he resumed his seat at the Board
of Assistants. In the Provincial charter, granted in 1692, he was
nominated to be of the Council; and afterwards, without interruption,
was annually chosen and sat at the Board until 1725, when being
elected, he declined serving; having survived more than seven years all
who were appointed with him to that office in the charter.

As one of the Assistants under the Colonial charter, Mr. Sewall was
also _ex officio_ a Judge of the Supreme Court. Soon after the arrival
of the Provincial charter in May, 1692, but before any courts of
justice had been established and organized under it, he was appointed
one of the Judges of a Special Court of Oyer and Terminer for the
trial of persons charged with witchcraft, William Stoughton, Esq.,
being Chief-Justice. It is well known, that at that time there was a
general persuasion, not only in New England, but in the mother country,
and throughout Europe, of the reality of those impious compacts with
Satan, into which persons guilty of witchcraft were supposed to have
entered, and of that diabolical power or influence, by which they were
believed to act.[A] This court especially was under the delusion; and
consequently _nineteen_ persons of the many who were indicted and
arraigned before it at Salem for this crime, were, at different times,
tried, condemned, and, in pursuance of its sentence, executed. In this
unhappy affair, the Judges proceeded with great caution, asking advice
of some of the wisest and best men in the community, and having the
countenance of rulers, ministers, and in general of all classes of men.
But the delusion was soon made manifest. Judge Sewall in particular was
convinced of his error, in the part which he had taken in the court of
trials; and often discovered deep regret and humiliation on account of
it. He notes particularly in his Journal of Dec. 24, 1696, on occasion
of his son Samuel's reciting to him in Latin a portion of Matthew xii,
"the 7th verse did awfully bring to mind the Salem Tragedie." And at
a public Fast, Jan. 14, 1697, in the order for which there was some
reference to the doings of that court of Oyer and Terminer, and when he
was under much affliction on account of the death of an infant daughter
and other troubles and crosses, he presented to Rev. Samuel Willard,
his minister, a "bill," which was read in the worshipping assembly; (he
standing up while Mr. Willard read it, and bowing in token of assent
when he had done;) in which, while with much delicacy he appears to
have studiously avoided saying any thing that might seem to implicate
the other judges, he acknowledged his own guilt in the decisions of
that court, asked the pardon of it both of God and man, and deprecated
the Divine judgments on account of his sin or the sin of any other
person, upon himself, his family, or the land.

But though he thus condemned himself for the part he had acted in the
trials at Salem, yet the public confidence did not appear to have been
shaken, either in him or the other Judges. For on the first appointment
of Judges of the Superior Court, under the Provincial charter, Dec. 6,
1692, Mr. Sewall was chosen one. The others were William Stoughton,
Chief-Justice, Thomas Danforth, John Richards, and Wait-Still Winthrop,
each of whom, excepting Mr. Danforth, had been members of the Court
of Oyer and Terminer. April 16, 1718, he was appointed to succeed
Wait-Still Winthrop as Chief-Justice of the Superior Court. And
although from various causes there were numerous changes in this court
in his day, yet he still retained his seat on the bench until 1728;
when, in consequence of his advanced years and increasing infirmities,
he resigned it; having survived more than ten years all those who had
been members of that court from the beginning, and having officiated in
this capacity under the Colonial and Provincial governments upwards of
forty years. At the same time, he also resigned his office of Judge of
Probate for the county of Suffolk, to which he had been appointed by
Lieut. Gov. Tailer, in 1715.

Chief-Justice Sewall was a man of distinguished piety. He feared God
from his youth, and apparently made it the main end of his life to
glorify the God of his fathers, by walking humbly and unblamably before
him. He was eminently a devout man; constant and exemplary in his
attendance on the worship of God, both in his family, and in the public
assembly. He was a most diligent hearer of the preaching of the gospel.
This is proved by his numerous manuscript volumes which still remain,
containing the texts and general outlines of sermons and lectures,
which he heard both at home and abroad. He would often devote a whole
day to fasting, reading the scriptures, and communion with God in
secret. On such occasions, he would be abundant in prayer not only for
himself, family, and near connections, but would also frequently pour
out his enlarged desires in copious intercessions, (minutely enumerated
in many instances in his Journal,) on behalf of the college; the civil
and religious interests of the town, province, and land in which he
dwelt; the aboriginal inhabitants and African slaves; the destruction
of papal tyranny, superstition, and usurpation; the universal extension
and establishment of Christ's kingdom.

He was a diligent student of the Scriptures, reading them in their
inspired originals; and was prayerfully solicitous not only to
receive and obey their instructions, but also, that the faith,
worship, and practice of the whole church of God should be in exact
conformity with them. The prophetic portions of the sacred volume he
read with an inquisitive mind, and held some opinions respecting the
events predicted in them, which would be considered singular at the
present day. Upon these and kindred topics, he took a deep interest
in conversing and corresponding with the Boston clergy generally,
and with such men abroad as the Rev. Messrs. Higginson and Noyes of
Salem, Wise of Ipswich, Torrey of Weymouth, Walter of Roxbury, and
Stoddard of Northampton; President Wadsworth of Harvard College, and
Rector Williams of Yale College; Gov. Saltonstall of Connecticut
and Gov. Burnet of New York, afterwards of Massachusetts; with most
of whom, remnants of his correspondence on these subjects are still
in existence. In 1697 he published a work which he dedicated to Sir
William Ashurst and Lieut. Gov. Stoughton, called "Phaenomena Quaedam
Apocalyptica," of which there was a second edition in 1727; and in
1713 another work styled "Proposals touching the Accomplishment of
Prophecies." Both of these productions of his pen were apparently much
read in his time, though they have now become obsolete.

Judge Sewall was warmly attached to that system of faith, and to those
forms of worship and government in the church, which were embraced
and practised by the Puritan settlers of New England. Occasionally
he employed his pen in their illustration and defence. And he was
strongly opposed to any innovations in doctrine, as well as jealous
of any ceremonies or usages in divine service, that savored of human
invention. Still he abhorred persecution, and exercised candor towards
those who differed from him in their modes of worship or discipline.

He possessed an ardent desire for the universal spread and obedient
reception of the gospel among mankind. He became particularly
interested in the spiritual condition of the aboriginal natives,
whom he believed, with the apostle Eliot, to be descendants of the
ten captive tribes of Israel. To encourage the praying Indians at
Natick, he occasionally met with them in their worship, and frequently
gave them pecuniary assistance. To those at Sandwich, he contributed
largely for building a meeting-house. And from Mather's Magnalia it
would seem, that for some Indian congregation he erected a house of
worship entirely at his own expense. Hence those Indians "prayed for
him under this character, 'He loveth our nation for he hath built us a
synagogue.'"

His zeal on behalf of the Indian natives being known, he was chosen
in 1699 one of the Commissioners of the Society in England for the
Propagation of the Gospel in New England and parts adjacent; and
shortly after, their Secretary and Treasurer.

His sympathy for the enslaved Africans was very great. In 1700 he
published a tract, entitled "The Selling of Joseph," in which he
advocated their rights. In writing to Judge Addington Davenport, just
before he sat on the trial of Samuel Smith of Sandwich, for killing
his negro, he uses the following language: "The poorest boys and girls
in this Province, such as are of the lowest condition, whether they
be English, or Indians, or Ethiopians; they have the same right to
religion and life, that the richest heirs have. And they who go about
to deprive them of this right attempt the bombarding of Heaven; and the
shells they throw will fall down on their own heads."

John Saffin, a judge of the same court with Judge Sewall, and a
slave-holder, printed an answer to "The Selling of Joseph," to which
Judge Sewall alludes in a letter to Rev. John Higginson of Salem, then
the oldest minister in the Province, and one of the most venerated
men in New England. The letter is dated April 13, 1706, and the
allusion is, "Amidst the frowns and hard words I have met with for this
undertaking, it is no small refreshment to me, that I have the learned,
reverend and aged Mr. Higginson for my abettor. By the interposition of
this breast work, I hope to carry on and manage this enterprise with
safety and success." In a letter to Henry Newman at London, afterwards
agent for the Province of New Hampshire, which accompanied a copy of
"The Selling of Joseph," he desires him to do something "towards taking
away this wicked practice of Slavery," expressing the opinion that
there would "be no progress in gospelling" until slavery was abolished.

Judge Sewall was a proficient in classical learning, and a friend of
learning and learned men. Such was the confidence in his wisdom and
discernment by the founders and Trustees of Yale College, that he was
employed by them in 1701, together with Hon. Isaac Addington, to draw
up statutes for the regulation of their infant seminary. And of Harvard
College, of which he was sometimes a Resident Fellow, and afterwards,
as a member of the Council, one of the Board of Overseers for many
years, he was a warm and steady friend and liberal benefactor.

In his judicial capacity, he was a person of distinguished integrity
and uprightness; administering the laws of the land with justice and
impartiality, mingled with clemency; a terror to evil doers, and a
praise to such as did well.

He was also a person of eminent humility and meekness, benevolence and
charity. His house was a seat of hospitality, ever open to all good
men. The learned found him an intelligent companion; the ministers of
the gospel a liberal patron and friend. He visited the fatherless and
widow in their affliction, and gave much alms to the needy, especially
to indigent ministers or their bereaved families. He distributed in
the course of the last year of his life four hundred copies of such
publications as Mitchel on the Glory of Heaven, Walter on the Holiness
of Heaven, Lee's Triumph of Mercy, Mather's Mighty Saviour, Mather's
Glory of Christ, Higginson's Legacy of Peace, Loring on the New
Birth, The Strait Gate, Faith and Fervency in Prayer, Gibbs's Sermon
to Little Children, as is particularly noted in his Almanac for that
year. His last illness was of about a month's continuance. He died in a
triumphant hope of immortal life and glory, on the morning of Jan. 1,
1729-30, in the seventy-eighth year of his age.

Judge Sewall was thrice married; 1. to Hannah Hull, daughter of Hon.
John Hull; 2. to widow Abigail Tilley; and 3. to widow Mary Gibbs, who
survived him. He had children by his first wife only; namely, seven
sons and seven daughters. Of these fourteen children only six lived
to mature age, and only three survived him. We purposely omit in this
article a further account of the family, as we intend to give in some
future No. of this work, a full Genealogical Memoir of the Sewall
Family.

Judge Sewall left numerous volumes of manuscripts, indicative of his
industry and attentive observation. Among them, beside several small
volumes of a miscellaneous character, are,

1. A Journal of occurrences, &c., from Dec., 1673, to July, 1677. This
was destroyed by a fire at Boston, in 1824; but a copy of it had been
previously taken, which yet remains.

2. Three volumes of Journals, from Feb., 1684-5, to Oct., 1729, within
three months of his death. Also, a small volume, being a Journal of his
voyage to England, &c., in 1688.

3. A Letter Book, containing copies of his letters to his
correspondents, and in some instances, of theirs to him; from Feb.,
1685-6, to Sept., 1729.

4. A Common Place Book in quarto, containing extracts from authors in
English and Latin on various subjects which he had read.

5. Five volumes in 12mo, containing sketches of sermons and lectures,
which he heard at home and abroad.

For most of the above facts, we are indebted to the Rev. Samuel Sewall
of Burlington, and the late John Farmer, Esq., of Concord, N. H.

FOOTNOTES:

[A] Lord Chief-Justice Hale was of this persuasion, and pronounced
sentence of death upon persons supposed to be in league with Satan.
A belief in witchcraft so prevailed in England as to hold in bondage
the best of men. Proof of this is found in the 72nd canon made by the
clerical convocation in 1603, and in the laws enacted against the
crime itself. Isaac Ambrose, in his Treatise on the New Birth, directs
persons seeking salvation to inquire, while searching out their sins,
whether they have not sometimes been guilty of witchcraft. The fact
of witchcraft was admitted by Lord Bacon and Mr. Addison. Dr. Johnson
more than inclined to the same side of the question; and Sir William
Blackstone quite frowns on opposers of this doctrine. These facts are
mentioned not to justify Mr. Sewall and his associates on the bench;
but to show the injustice of selecting them as peculiarly guilty. The
severe charges which have been brought against the people of Salem,
Gov. Winthrop, Dr. Cotton Mather, and others of this country, lie
equally against the most learned, pious, and eminent of mankind. This
belief was the _mania_ of the day.




LETTER OF THE FIRST CHIEF-JUSTICE SEWALL TO HIS SON, SAMUEL SEWALL,
ESQ., OF BROOKLINE, GIVING AN ACCOUNT OF HIS FAMILY.


                                           _Boston, April 21, 1720._

  DEAR SON,

    You have often desired, that I would give you some account of the
    family of which you are. And altho' I am much less ab'e to doe any
    thing of this nature now when I have been left of my dear Parents
    very near Twenty years, yet considering the longer I stay, the more
    unfit I shall be, take what I have to say as follows;

    Mr. Henry Sewall, my great Grandfather, was a Linen Draper in the
    City of Coventry in Great Britain. He acquired a great Estate, was
    a prudent Man, and was more than once chosen Mayor of the City.

    Mr. Henry Sewall, my Grandfather, was his eldest Son, who out of
    dislike to the English Hierarchy sent over his only Son, my Father,
    Mr. Henry Sewall, to New England in the year 1634, with Net Cattel
    and Provisions sutable for a new Plantation. Mr. Cotton would have
    had my Father settle at Boston; but in regard of his Cattel he
    chose to goe to Newbury, whither my Grandfather soon followed him.
    Where also my Grandfather Mr. Stephen Dummer and Alice his wife
    likewise dwelled under the Ministry of the Reverend Mr. Thomas
    Parker and Mr. James Noyes.

    On the 25th March, 1646, Richard Saltonstall, Esq. Grandfather
    of Gurdon Saltonstall, Esq. now Governour of Connecticut, joined
    together in Marriage my father Mr. Henry Sewall, and my Mother Mrs.
    Jane Dummer, eldest Child of Mr. Stephen Dummer aforesaid, and
    Alice his wife: my Father being then about 32, and my Mother about
    19 years of age.

    But the Climat being not agreeable to my Grandfather and
    Grandmother Dummer, (whose Maiden name was Archer) they returned
    to England the Winter following, and my Father with them, and
    dwelt awhile at Warwick, and afterwards removed to Hampshire. My
    Sister Hannah Tappin, their eldest Child, was born at Tunworth May
    10th, 1649. Baptised by Mr. Haskins. I was born at Bishop Stoke,
    March 28, 1652; so that the light of the Lord's Day was the first
    light that my Eyes saw, being born a little before day-break. I
    was baptised by Mr. Rashly, (sometime Member of the Old Church in
    Boston) in Stoke Church May 4th. 1652. Mr. Rashly first preached
    a Sermon, and then baptised me. After which an entertainment was
    made for him and many more. Some months after, my Father removed
    to Badesly, where my Brother John Sewall was born Oct. 10, 1654,
    and was baptised in my Father's House Nov. 22 by Mr. Henry Cox,
    Minister of Bishop Stoke. My brother Stephen Sewall was born at
    Badesly Aug. 19th, 1657, baptised in my father's house by the said
    Mr. Cox. * * * * * My Father had made one Voyage to New England to
    visit my Grandfather Mr. Henry Sewall. And in the year 1659, he
    went thither again; his rents at Newbury coming to very little when
    remitted to England. In my father's absence, October 25, 1659, my
    Sister Jane Gerrish was born at Badesly and was baptised by Mr. Cox
    at Bishop Stoke in the house of Mr. Boys.

    At this Badesly, by the merciful goodness of God, I was taught to
    read English. And afterwards was educated in the Grammar School at
    Rumsey of which Mr. Figes was Master.

    My Father sent for my Mother to come to him to New England. I
    remember being at Bishop Stoke and Badesly, April 23, 1661, the day
    of the Coronation of K Charles the 2d, the Thunder and Lightening
    of it. Quickly after my Mother went to Winchester with 5 small
    Children, Hannah, Samuel, John, Stephen and Jane; and John Nash
    and Mary Hobs her Servants; there to be in a readiness for the
    Pool Waggons. At this place her near Relations, especially my very
    worthy and pious Uncle Mr. Stephen Dummer took leave with Tears.
    Capt. Dummer of Swathling treated us with Raisins and Almonds. My
    Mother lodged in Pump-yard London, waiting for the going of the
    Ship, the prudent Mary, Capt. Isaac Woodgreen Commander. Went by
    water to Graves-End where the Ship lay. Took in Sheep at Dover.
    Passengers in the Ship at the same time were Major Brown, a young
    brisk Merchant, and a considerable Freighter, Mr. Gilbert and
    his wife, He was Minister at Topsfield; Madam Bradstreet [then
    Gardener] Mrs. Martha, Mr. Pitkins Sister, who died lately at
    Windsor, and many others. We were about eight weeks at Sea, where
    we had nothing to see but Water and the Sky; so that I began to
    fear I should never get to Shoar again; only I thought the Capt.
    and Mariners would not have ventured themselves if they had not
    hopes of getting to Land again. Capt. Woodgreen arrived here on
    Satterday. I was overjoyed to see Land again, especially being so
    near it as in the Narrows. 'Twas so late by that time we got to the
    Castle, that our men held a discourse with them whether they should
    fire or no, and reckoned 'twas agreed not to doe it. But presently
    after the Castle fired; which much displeased the Ship's Company;
    and then they fired. On the Lord's day my Mother kept aboard; but I
    went ashoar, the Boat grounded, and I was carried out in arms July
    6, 1661. My Mother lodg'd at Mr. Richard Collicott's. This week
    there was a publick Thanksgiving. My Father hastened to Boston and
    carried his Family to Newbury by Water in Mr. Lewis * * * Brother
    Tapan has told me our arrival there was upon Lecture-day which was
    Wednesday. Mr. Ordway carried me ashore in his Canoe. We sojourned
    at Mr. Titcomb's. My Father presently sent me to school to the
    Reverend and Excellent Mr. Thomas Parker, with whom I continued
    till my entrance into the College; being admitted by the very
    learned and pious Mr. Charles Chauncey.

    Sept. 3. 1662 Mother was brought to bed of Sister Anne, Mr. Joshua
    Moodey the Minister's Mother being her Midwife. Baptised by Mr.
    Parker.

    May 8. 1665 Sister Mehetabel was born: Baptised by Mr. Parker. She
    became wife to the midwife's Grandson Mr. William Moodey. Dorothy
    Sewall (now Northend) was born Oct. 29. 1668. Baptised by Mr.
    Parker.

    At this time the commencement was in August. In the year 1667
    my father brought me to be admitted, by which means I heard Mr.
    Richard Mather of Dorchester preach Mr. Wilson's Funeral Sermon.
    "_Your Fathers where are they?_" I was admitted by the very learned
    and pious Mr. Charles Chauncey, who gave me my first Degree in the
    year 1671. There were no Masters in that year. These Bachelours
    were the last Mr. Chauncey gave a degree to, for he died the
    February following.

    In July 1672, Dr. Hoar came over with his Lady and sojourned
    with your Grandfather Hull. He (Dr. Hoar) was my Aunt Quincey's
    Brother, and preached as an assistant, to the Rev. Mr Thomas
    Thacher at the South Church. The College quickly called him to be
    President. He was installed in the College Hall in December 1672.
    Gov. Bellingham lay dead in his House, and Dep. Gov. Leverett was
    the Chief Civil Magistrat present at that Solemnity. The March
    following Mrs. Bridget Hoar, now Cotton, was born in Cambridge. In
    1674 I took my 2d Degree, and Mrs. Hannah Hull, my dear Wife, your
    honoured Mother, was invited by the Dr. and his Lady to be with
    them a while at Cambridge. She saw me when I took my Degree and
    set her affection on me, tho' I knew nothing of it till after our
    Marriage; which was February 28th. 1675-6. Gov. Bradstreet married
    us in that we call the Old Hall; 'twas then all in one, a very
    large Room. As I remember, Madam Thacher and Madam Paige, with whom
    Gov. Bradstreet boarded, visited us the next day.

    On the 2d of April, 1677, it pleased God to favour us with the
    birth of your brother John Sewall, our first-born. In June 1678 you
    were born. Your brother lived till the September following, and
    then died. So that by the undeserved Goodness of God your Mother
    and I never were without a child after the 2d of April 1677.

    In the Fall 1678, I was seized with the Small Pocks and brought
    very near to death; so near that I was reported to be dead. But
    it pleased GOD of his Mercy to Recover me. Multitudes died, two
    of my special Friends; viz. Mr. John Noyes, and Ensign Benjamin
    Thirston, who both died while I lay sick: and Mr. William Dummer,
    Son of Jeremiah Dummer Esq., aged about 19 years. Presently after
    my Recovery, in December, Col. Townsend and I were bearers to Mr.
    Joseph Tappin, one of the most noted Shop-keepers in Boston.

    And now what shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits? The
    good Lord help me to walk humbly and Thankfully with Him all my
    days; and profit by Mercies and by Afflictions; that through Faith
    and Patience I may also in due time fully inherit the Promises. Let
    us incessantly pray for each other, that it may be so!

                                                  SAMUEL SEWALL.

  _Augt. 26, 1720._

    [Postscript to the above letter, by the son of the writer, Samuel
    Sewall, Esq., of Brookline, to whom the letter was addressed.

    "June 30th, 1729, Recd the following acco of my Hond Father: viz.
    my Great Grandfather Sewall lived at Newbury at Old Town Green
    where the first Meeting House stood; and upon the Removal of the
    Meeting House where it now stands (being Mr. Tappin's Meeting
    House) He sold his House and Ground and moved to Rowley where he
    died and was Buried."]




COL. GOOKIN'S LETTER TO REV. NATHANIEL GOOKIN OF HAMPTON, N. H.


                                   _Philadelphia, 9br 22d 1710._

  DR SR

    The business of ye Province sometimes requires me to visit ye
    extreme parts of it and I am often obliged to stay at New Castle
    ye chief town of ye next Government, and by that means miss many
    opportunities of answering my friends' letters, this and having
    very little to write that could entertain ye are ye reasons ye have
    not heard from me of late. I have had two letters from ye since I
    wrote yo last ye 3d of Octb. By letters from Ireland I am informed
    two of our relatives are lately dead, viz. _Robert Gookin_, son
    of my Uncle Robert, and Augustine Gookin, eldest son of my Uncle
    Charles. My own affairs in ye government are very likely to
    improve, for ye last assembly who were extremely ye Proprietor's
    enemies and against raising money for ye support of Gover'nt, are
    every one laid by this election, and such men chosen as I believe
    will answer his expectations and mine.

    By the packet I have letters from ye Proprietor, wherein he tells
    mee he has more friends in this ministry than in ye last, and gives
    me fresh assurances of his friend in case he resigns ye government
    to ye crown, which he thinks he shall find it his interest to do.
    I shall not give ye any account of ye public affairs since ye will
    be better informed by ye prints. I shall not add, but only desire
    ye will not take my backwardness in writing in an unkind sense, but
    believe I have a due regard for all my relations and that I am in a
    more particular manner

  [Superscription.]
  Dr Cossn yr very affecte Kinsman
  and Servt

                                                   CHAS. GOOKIN.


  To the Reverend Mr. Nathl Gookin,
  att Hampton, N. Hampshire,

  _Frce Ch. Gookin_. via Boston.





HISTORY OF THE PILGRIM SOCIETY,

WITH A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE EARLY SETTLEMENT OF PLYMOUTH COLONY.


As introductory to a notice of the Pilgrim Society, the narration of
a few facts in reference to the early settlement of New England may
be neither inappropriate nor uninteresting. It will serve also to
elucidate more fully the objects of the Society.

Religious persecution was the chief cause of the emigration of our
forefathers to this country. The memorable Reformation, effected
principally by the instrumentality of Luther and Calvin, appeared
in England in 1534, under Henry VIII. During its progress, in the
reigns of Mary, Elizabeth, and James I., those who were denominated
Puritans[B] were subjected to the most cruel oppression. Thousands
suffered martyrdom; many were banished; and others were doomed to
perpetual imprisonment.

Those Puritans who lived in the north of England were, on account of
their dispersed state, divided, in the year 1606, into two distinct
churches. With one of these was connected the celebrated John Robinson,
who afterwards became its minister. Persecuted for non-conformity to
the established church, he, with a part of his congregation, that they
might worship God according to the dictates of their consciences,
removed in 1607-8 to Amsterdam, in Holland, where religious toleration
was then sanctioned by law; and soon after, (in 1609,) they went to
Leyden, where they formed themselves into a church, according to the
pattern prescribed, as they supposed, by the word of God. In that
place they remained till their removal to America. "Their motives
for this," (their removal,) "were to preserve the morals of their
youth; to prevent them, through want of employment, from leaving their
parents and engaging in business unfriendly to religion; to avoid the
inconveniences of incorporating with the Dutch; to lay a foundation
for propagating the gospel in the remote parts of the world; and, by
separating from all the existing establishments in Europe, to form the
model of a pure church, free from the admixture of human additions."
What Lord Brougham, of England, has said of the North American colonies
in general, is most strictly and emphatically true of these individuals
in particular. "All idea of wealth or pleasure was out of the question.
The greater part of them viewed their emigration as taking up the
cross, and bounded their hopes of wealth to the gifts of the Spirit,
and their ambition to the desire of a kingdom beyond the grave. A set
of men more conscientious in their doings, or simple in their manners,
never founded any commonwealth."

Such were the reasons which induced the founders of New England to
leave all that was dear to them in England and Holland, and to remove
to these then inhospitable shores; reasons sufficient to affect the
minds, hearts, and conduct of some of the best men that ever lived.
Speaking of them, Governor Stoughton remarked, "God sifted a whole
nation that he might send choice grain over into this wilderness."

In accomplishing their object, "it was agreed by the English
congregation at Leyden, that some of their number should go to America
to make preparation for the rest. Mr. Robinson,[C] their minister, was
prevailed on to stay with the greater part at Leyden; Mr. Brewster,[D]
their elder, was to accompany the first adventurers, but these and
their brethren remaining in Holland were to continue to be one church,
and to receive each other to Christian communion without a formal
dismission, or testimonial. Several of the congregation sold their
estates and made a common bank, which, together with money received
from other adventurers, enabled them to purchase the Speedwell,[E] a
ship of sixty tons, and to hire in England the May Flower, a ship of
one hundred and eighty tons, for the intended enterprise."[F]

The following graphic description of the attachment of the Pilgrims to
each other, and of their pious views and feelings on the occasion of
their separation, is found in Morton's New England Memorial.

"Being prepared to depart, they had a solemn day of humiliation, the
pastor teaching a part of the day very profitably, and suitably to the
present occasion; the text of Scripture was Ezra viii:21. The rest
of the time was spent in pouring out of prayers unto the Lord, with
great fervency, mixed with abundance of tears.--When they came to the
place," (Delftshaven,) "they found the ship and all things ready; and
such of their friends as could not come with them, followed after them,
and sundry came from Amsterdam to see them shipped, and to take their
leave of them. One night was spent with little sleep with the most, but
with friendly entertainment, and Christian discourse, and other real
expressions of Christian love. The next day, the wind being fair, they
went on board, and their friends with them, where truly doleful was the
sight of that sad and mournful parting, to hear what sighs, and sobs,
and prayers did sound amongst them; what tears did gush from every eye,
and pithy speeches pierced each other's heart, that sundry of the Dutch
strangers, that stood on the quay as spectators, could not refrain from
tears: Yet comfortable and sweet it was, to see such lively and true
expressions of dear and unfeigned love.--Their reverend pastor falling
down on his knees, and they all with him, with watery cheeks, commended
them with most fervent prayers unto the Lord and his blessing; and
then with mutual embraces and many tears, they took their leave one of
another, which proved to be the last leave to many of them."

On the 6th of September, 1620, the adventurers sailed from Plymouth,
in the May Flower, and, on the 9th of November, they arrived, after
enduring a perilous voyage, in sight of Cape Cod. Having entered
the harbor, they, on the 11th day of the month, after prayer and
thanksgiving, subscribed a written instrument, by which they were made
a body politic. The covenant entered into was signed by _forty-one_
individuals, who, with their families, amounted to _one hundred and
one_ persons. Mr. John Carver was unanimously elected Governor of the
colony for one year.[G] Though these adventurers undertook their
enterprise under the authority and sanction of a royal charter, yet
they commenced their political existence as a republic. December 22,
1620, they disembarked and went on shore. The place where they landed,
called by the Indians Patuxet, they named Plymouth, after the town in
England from which they last sailed.

Such was the origin of the settlement of the Plymouth colony.

Sentiments of high respect for the principles and character of the
first settlers of New England have been cherished in every succeeding
generation of their descendants. They have been eager to reward their
inestimable service by commemorating their virtues and piety, and by
preserving a recollection of their sufferings, resolution, and noble
deeds, in so glorious a cause. In doing this they have been actuated by
the dictates of nature, reason, and gratitude.

On January 13, 1769, when the storm of British oppression was
gathering, and the time for open and decided resistance to the crown
was at hand, an association called the "Old Colony Club" was formed
at Plymouth, consisting of some of the principal men of that place
and vicinity; and on December 22, of that year, the "Landing of the
Forefathers" was first celebrated.[H] The Winslows, Watsons, and
Howlands were among those who were the most prominent. Major-General
John Winslow of Marshfield, who had been an eminent officer in the war
between England and France, in 1754-1762, General Peleg Wadsworth,
Colonel Gamaliel Bradford, and Hon. George Partridge of Duxbury, Hon.
William Sever and General John Thomas of Kingston, Colonel Alexander
Scammell, then a teacher of youth in Plymouth, and afterwards a
distinguished officer in the American Revolution, were original or
early members of the Society.

"In the year 1773 the Association was dissolved, in consequence of
conflicting opinions existing among its members, in relation to the
American Revolution," and two of the early members of the Club left the
country, from attachment to the British government.

The following gentlemen have delivered sermons or addresses, by the
request of the "Old Colony Club," or of the inhabitants of the town, or
of the members of some one of the religious societies, at the times of
the anniversary at Plymouth, on the 22nd of December. Edward Winslow,
Jr., Esq., Plymouth; Rev. Chandler Robbins, D. D., Plymouth; Rev.
Charles Turner, Duxbury; Rev. Gad Hitchcock, D. D., Pembroke; Rev.
Samuel Baldwin, Hanover; Rev. Sylvanus Conant, Middleborough; Rev.
Samuel West, D. D., Dartmouth; Rev. Timothy Hilliard, Barnstable; Rev.
William Shaw, D. D., Marshfield; Rev. Jonathan Moore, Rochester; Doct.
Zaccheus Bartlett, Plymouth; Hon. John Davis, LL. D., Boston; Rev. John
Allyne, D. D., Duxbury; Hon. John Quincy Adams, LL. D., Quincy; Rev.
John Thornton Kirkland, D. D., Cambridge; Rev. Jonathan Strong, D. D.,
Randolph; Rev. James Kendall, D. D., Plymouth; Alden Bradford, LL. D.,
Boston; Rev. Abiel Holmes, D. D., Cambridge; Rev. James Freeman, D. D.,
Boston; Rev. Adoniram Judson, Plymouth; Rev. Thaddeus Mason Harris, D.
D., Dorchester; Rev. Abiel Abbot, D. D., Beverly; Rev. John Elliot,
D. D., Boston; Rev. James Flint, D. D., Salem; Rev. Ezra Goodwin,
Sandwich; Rev. Horace Holley, LL. D., Boston; Hon. Wendell Davis,
Sandwich; and Hon. Francis Calley Gray, Boston.

As the "Old Colony Club" had for many years ceased to act as a society,
and had, in fact, ceased to exist, that the object of the annual
celebration of the "Landing of our Forefathers" might be better
accomplished, a society was formed, November 9, 1819, by the name of
the "Old Colony Pilgrim Society," and immediately went into operation.
The Hon. Joshua Thomas, William Jackson, and Nathaniel M. Davis,
Esqs., were chosen a committee on behalf of the Society, to petition
the General Court for an act of incorporation. On February 24, 1820,
the Society was incorporated and made a body politic, by the name of
the "Pilgrim Society." The design of the institution may in part be
learned from a clause in the first section of the act of incorporation,
which is, "to perpetuate the memory of the virtues, the enterprise, and
unparalleled sufferings of their ancestors."

The "Landing of our Forefathers" was first celebrated by the Pilgrim
Society, December 22, 1820, that being the completion of the second
century since the settlement of New England, or the landing of the
Pilgrims. This event, which, in a most important sense, gave existence
to the nation, with all that is valuable in its civil, literary, and
religious establishments, was observed that year with more than usual
solemnity and interest. The Hon. Daniel Webster delivered an address[I]
on the occasion, worthy of himself and the memory of those whose
character and sufferings he so eloquently portrayed. A large concourse
of people attended the celebration, and were escorted to the place of
public service by the Standish Guards, a military company so called in
honor of Capt. Miles Standish.[J]

There were present on the occasion, a delegation from the Massachusetts
Historical Society, and from the American Antiquarian Society. The
Hon. Judge Davis addressed the Pilgrim Society on behalf of the former
institution, and the Hon. Levi Lincoln on behalf of the latter.
The Rev. Dr. Kendall replied to the one, and Alden Bradford, Esq.,
replied to the other. The kindest sentiments and feelings universally
prevailed, and the occasion was one of great satisfaction and rejoicing.

The Pilgrim Society, as such, annually commemorates the day on which
our Forefathers landed at Plymouth. On some of these anniversaries,
addresses have been delivered; in 1820, by Hon. Daniel Webster; in
1824, by Hon. Edward Everett; in 1829, by Hon. William Sullivan;
in 1834, by Rev. George Washington Blagden; in 1835, by Hon. Peleg
Sprague; in 1837, by Rev. Robert B. Hall; in 1838, by Rev. Thomas
Bobbins, D. D.; and in 1845, by Joseph R. Chandler, Esq. Since 1820,
at the request of some religious society or association, the following
gentlemen have delivered addresses on these anniversary occasions,
though not specially before the Pilgrim Society; Rev. Richard S.
Storrs, D. D., Braintree; Rev. Lyman Beecher, D. D., Boston; Rev.
Samuel Green, Boston; Rev. Daniel Huntington, North Bridgewater; Rev.
Benjamin B. Wisner, D. D., Boston; Rev. John Codman, D. D., Dorchester;
Rev. Convers Francis, D. D., Watertown; Rev. Jonathan Bigelow,
Rochester; Rev. Samuel Barrett, Boston; Rev. William T. Torrey,
Plymouth; Rev. John Brazier, D. D., Salem; and Rev. Mark Hopkins, D.
D., Williamstown. In the addresses which have been delivered, the
principles, motives, intentions, and character of the Forefathers
have been exhibited and approved; the causes of their emigration, the
interposition of God in their behalf, and the glorious results which
have followed, have been glowingly described.

The Society erected in the year 1824 a monumental edifice; the
corner-stone of which was laid with appropriate solemnities, and in
an excavation made in it for the purpose, was deposited, with other
articles, a plate having the following inscription: "In grateful memory
of our Ancestors, who _exiled_ themselves from their native country,
for the sake of religion, and here successfully laid the foundation of
_Freedom_ and Empire, December 22, A. D. MDCXX., their descendants,
the Pilgrim Society, have raised this edifice, August XXXI. A. D.
MDCCCXXIV."

The edifice is built of unwrought split granite, and is seventy feet
in length by forty in width, and is two stories in height. It has a
handsome Doric portico in front, eight feet wide, supported by six
pillars sixteen feet high. The whole expense of the building and
its appurtenances was more than $15,000. Its location is pleasant
and presents a full view of the outer harbor of the town. The
principal hall is adorned by a magnificent painting, representing our
Forefathers. This picture, valued at $3,000, was a donation to the
Pilgrim Society by the artist, Henry Sargent, Esq., Boston. It is a
splendid representation of the Pilgrims at their arrival on these
western shores. Pilgrim Hall is the most suitable receptacle for it;
and Col. Sargent has exhibited a noble generosity in placing it within
its walls. The dimensions of the picture are sixteen feet by thirteen.
It contains several groups of individuals attired in the costume of
their day. 1. Governor Carver and his wife and children; 2. Governor
Bradford; 3. Governor Winslow; 4. Wife of Governor Winslow; 5. Mr.
William Brewster, the presiding Elder; 6. Capt. Miles Standish; 7. Mr.
William White and his child Peregrine; 8. Mr. Isaac Allerton and his
wife; 9. Mr. John Alden; 10. Mr. John Turner; 11. Mr. Stephen Hopkins,
his wife, and children; 12. Mr. Richard Warner; 13. Mr. Edward Tilley;
14. Mr. Samuel Fuller; 15. Wife of Capt. Standish; 16. Samoset, an
Indian Sagamore; 17. Mr. John Howland, of Governor Carver's family, who
married his daughter.

In the edifice there is a room set apart for a Library and a Cabinet of
curiosities. It is already supplied with a number of volumes and many
manuscripts of early date. It is desirable that a copy of all the works
published by the Pilgrims and their descendants should be deposited in
the Library.

"Among the antiquities in the Cabinet of the Pilgrim Society are the
following:

"A chair which belonged to Gov. Carver. The sword of Miles Standish,
presented by William S. Williams, Esq. A pewter dish which belonged to
Miles Standish, presented by the late Joseph Head, Esq. An iron pot
which belonged to Miles Standish, presented by the late John Watson,
Esq. A brass steelyard, owned by Thomas Southworth. A cane which
belonged to William White; presented by Hon. John Reed. A dressing-case
which belonged to William White. The gun-barrel with which King Philip
was killed, presented by Mr. John Cook of Kingston. The original letter
of King Philip to Gov. Prince, written in 1662. A china mug and leather
pocket-book which belonged to Thomas Clark. A piece of ingenious
embroidery, in a frame, executed by Lora Standish, a daughter of Miles
Standish; presented by Rev. Lucius Alden of East Bridgewater. Many
curiosities are still in the hands of individuals and families, which
might add much to the interest of Pilgrim Hall."

The following Portraits embellish Pilgrim Hall: "1. of Edward Winslow,
painted in London in 1651, copied from the original, by C. A. Foster.
2. of Josiah Winslow, the first native Governor of the Old Colony,
painted in London in 1651, copied from the original, by C. A. Foster.
3. of Gov. Josiah Winslow's wife, Penelope Pelham, copied from the
original, by C. A. Foster. 4. of General John Winslow, copied from the
original, by C. A. Foster. The portrait of Gov. Edward Winslow is the
only one preserved, of those individuals who came in the Mayflower. The
originals of these paintings belong to Isaac Winslow, Esq., of Boston,
and are now in the rooms of the Massachusetts Historical Society. 5.
A portrait of the Hon. Ephraim Spooner, presented by Thomas Davis,
Esq., of Boston. 6. A portrait of John Alden, Esq., of Middleborough,
who died in 1821, aged 102 years, who was the great-grandson of John
Alden, who came in the Mayflower; painted and presented by Cephas
Thompson, Esq. 7. A portrait of Hon. John Trumbull, presented by
Col. John Trumbull. This portrait was painted in 1781. The face was
executed by Mr. Stewart, and the other parts by Mr. Trumbull himself,
while a student with him. 8. A portrait of James Thacher, M. D., late
Librarian and Cabinet-Keeper of the Pilgrim Society. It was painted by
Mr. Frothingham, in January, 1841, by order of the Pilgrim Society,
pursuant to a vote expressing their sense of the valuable services he
had rendered, in promoting the objects of said society.[K]

"The Hall contains also a bust of Hon. Daniel Webster, presented by
James T. Hayward, Esq., of Boston; and the bust of Hon. John Adams,
presented by Samuel Nicholson, Esq."

For an account of "Forefathers' Rock" and the beautiful monument
erected by the Pilgrim Society for its preservation, we make the
following extract from Dr. Thacher's History of Plymouth.

"The inhabitants of the town," [1774] "animated by the glorious spirit
of liberty which pervaded the Province, and mindful of the precious
relic of our Forefathers, resolved to consecrate the Rock on which they
landed to the shrine of liberty. Col. Theophilus Colon and a large
number of the inhabitants assembled, with about twenty yoke of oxen,
for the purpose of its removal. The rock was elevated from its bed by
means of large screws; and in attempting to mount it on the carriage,
it split asunder, without any violence. As no one had observed a flaw,
the circumstance occasioned some surprise. It is not strange that some
of the patriots of the day should be disposed to indulge a little in
superstition, when in favor of their good cause. The separation of
the rock was construed to be ominous of a division of the British
Empire. The question was now to be decided whether both parts should be
removed, and being decided in the negative, the bottom part was dropped
again into its original bed, where it still remains, a few inches above
the surface of the earth, at the head of the wharf. The upper portion,
weighing many tons, was conveyed to the liberty-pole square, front of
the meeting-house, where, we believe, waved over it a flag with the
far-famed motto, 'Liberty or death.' This part of the rock was, on the
4th of July, 1834, removed to 'Pilgrim Hall,' and placed in front of
that edifice, under the charge of the Pilgrim Society. A procession was
formed on this occasion, and passed over Cole's hill, where lie the
ashes of those who died the first winter.

"A miniature representation of the Mayflower followed in the
procession, placed in a car decorated with flowers, and drawn by six
boys. The procession was preceded by the children of both sexes of the
several schools in town. On depositing the rock in front of the Hall,
a volley of small arms was fired over it by the Standish Guards, after
which, an appropriate address was delivered by Doct. Charles Cotton,
and the services were closed with a prayer by Rev. Dr. Kendall.

"It affords the highest satisfaction to announce, that the long desired
protection of the 'Forefathers' Rock' is at length completed; and
it may be pronounced a noble structure, serving the double purpose
of security to the rock and a monument to the Pilgrims. The fabric
was erected in June of the present year, [1835,] and consists of a
perfect ellipse, forty-one feet in perimeter, formed of wrought iron
bars, five feet high, resting on a base of hammered granite. The heads
of the perpendicular bars are harpoons and boat-hooks alternately.
The whole is embellished with emblematic figures of cast iron. The
base of the railing is studded with emblems of marine shells, placed
alternately reversed, having a striking effect. The upper part of the
railing is encircled with a wreath of iron castings, in imitation of
heraldry curtains, fringed with festoons; of these there are forty-one,
bearing the names in bass-relief of the forty-one Puritan fathers who
signed the memorable compact while in the cabin of the Mayflower, at
Cape Cod, in 1620. This valuable and interesting acquisition reflects
honor on all who have taken an interest in the undertaking. In the
original design by George W. Brimmer, Esq., ingenuity and correct
taste are displayed; and in all its parts, the work is executed with
much judgment and skill. The castings are executed in the most
improved style of the art. This appropriate memorial will last for
ages, and the names and story of the great founders of our nation
will be made familiar to the latest generation. This monument cost
four hundred dollars. The fund was obtained by subscription; Lieut.
Gov. Armstrong heading the paper, and Samuel T. Tisdale, Esq., of New
York, contributing one hundred dollars. The author of this work" (Dr.
Thacher,) "had the honor and satisfaction of being the active agent in
its execution."

This account of the Pilgrim Society we conclude, by expressing our
high commendation of its object. To be affected at the sufferings
of the Pilgrims of New England; to exercise gratitude for their
inestimable labors and sacrifices; to venerate their virtue and piety;
to revere their principles of religious and civil liberty; and to
hand down a suitable memorial of them to succeeding generations, is
at once the duty and privilege of their descendants. Most cordially
can we adopt the expressive language of President Dwight, in speaking
of our ancestors. "When I call to mind," says he, "the history of
their sufferings on both sides of the Atlantic, when I remember their
preeminent patience, their unspotted piety, their immovable fortitude,
their undaunted resolution, their love to each other, their justice
and humanity to the savages, and their freedom from all those stains
which elsewhere spotted the character, even of their companions in
affliction, I cannot but view them as illustrious brothers, claiming
the veneration and applause of all their posterity. By me the names of
Carver, Bradford, Cushman,[L] and Standish, will never be forgotten,
until I lose the power of recollection."

Our apology for appending so many notes to this historical notice is,
that they illustrate the character of the Pilgrims of New England
and the times in which they lived, and thus serve to accomplish the
object we have in view. For instance, a few sentences in the farewell
discourse of the Rev. Mr. Robinson, who was in an important sense the
Father of the Plymouth colony, show the cast of mind, the religious
faith, and the adherence to Protestant principles, of himself and of
his flock.[M]

The first Presidents of the Society were Hon. Joshua Thomas, John
Watson, Alden Bradford, LL. D., and Nathaniel M. Davis, Esqs.

The present officers are Charles H. Warren, _President_; William Davis,
_Vice-President_; Andrew L. Russell, _Recording Secretary_; Benjamin M.
Watson, _Corresponding Secretary_; William S. Russell, _Librarian and
Cabinet-Keeper_; Nathaniel M. Davis, John B. Thomas, Isaac L. Hedge,
William M. Jackson, Schuyler Sampson, Joseph Cushman of Plymouth, and
James T. Hayward and William Thomas of Boston, _Trustees_.

FOOTNOTES:

[B] The term _Puritan_ was originally a term of reproach, though now
one of commendation. Neal, in his History of the Puritans, speaks thus
of them: "If a man maintained his steady adherence to the doctrines of
Calvin and the Synod of Dort; if he kept the Sabbath and frequented
sermons; if he maintained family religion and would neither swear
nor be drunk, nor comply with the fashionable vices of the times, he
was called a _Puritan_." The Puritans arose in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth. After the famous Act of Uniformity, or, as it is called, the
Bartholomew Act, passed by the English Parliament, in 1602, they were
called Non-conformists. Since that period they have been more generally
denominated Dissenters.

[C] The Rev. Mr. Robinson never came to New England as he intended; but
died at Leyden, March 1, 1625, in the fiftieth year of his age. His
widow and children afterwards came to Plymouth. Mr. Robinson received
a university education in England, and ranked among the first divines
of his age. Prince, the New England Annalist, in his Chronology, thus
speaks of him: "He was highly esteemed both by the city and university
of Leyden, for his learning, piety, moderation, and excellent
accomplishments. The magistrates, clergy, and scholars lamented his
death as a public loss."

[D] Mr. William Brewster was born in England, 1560, was educated at
the University of Cambridge, and became a zealous Puritan. He resided
in the north of England, and when the church was formed over which
the Rev. Messrs. Richard Cilfton and John Robinson were ordained as
pastors, the members met at his house on Lord's day for worship,
so long as they were permitted by the civil authorities. When the
church, with their pastors, on account of persecution, had removed
to Holland, Mr. Brewster was elected Ruling Elder. After the arrival
of the Pilgrims at Plymouth, he usually preached to them twice every
Sabbath for nine years, as they had no regular minister till Mr. Ralph
Smith was ordained their pastor, in 1629; but he never administered the
sacraments. He was a man in whom the church reposed the most unlimited
confidence in respect to all their spiritual affairs. For piety he was
eminent. For human as well as sacred literature, he had a great taste;
and at his death, which occurred April 16, 1644, being 83 years old,
he left a handsome library valued in that day at _forty-three_ pounds,
a catalogue of which is to be found in the colony records.--_Allen's
Biog. Dict._

[E] The ship Speedwell, commanded by Capt. Reynolds, proved leaky
and unfit for the voyage, and was discharged from service before the
Pilgrims left Plymouth. The whole company, therefore, which came over
to this country, were passengers in the May Flower.

[F] Holmes's American Annals.

[G] Governor Carver died greatly lamented on the 5th of April
following, having sustained the office of chief-magistrate but
four months and twenty-four days. "He was a man of great prudence,
integrity, and firmness of mind. He had a good estate in England, which
he spent in the migration to Holland and America. He was one of the
foremost in action, and bore a large share of suffering in the service
of the colony, who confided in him as its friend and father. Piety,
humility, and benevolence, were eminent trails in his character."--_Dr.
Belknap._

On the death of Governor Carver, although only thirty-two years
old, and confined at the time by sickness, Mr. William Bradford was
unanimously elected his successor, as Governor of the colony. He
conducted the affairs of the colony for the great part of the time, as
chief, and two or three years as second magistrate, with consummate
prudence and ability for a period of more than thirty-one years.--In
his youth, he embraced the doctrines which were taught by the venerable
Clifton, and afterwards by Robinson, and became one of their most
devoted followers. He applied himself with great diligence to the
study of the ancient languages, both Latin and Greek. Of the Hebrew
his knowledge was intimate, and the French and Dutch he spoke with
ease. He read much on subjects of history and philosophy. In theology
he was deeply versed, and few there were who could contend with him
successfully in a polemical dispute. He wrote considerably; the loss
of his valuable manuscript history of the colony to 1646, can never be
supplied.--_Dr. Thacher's History of Plymouth._

[H] The following dishes were served up for entertainment on the first
anniversary; and the account is here inserted as a matter of curiosity:
"1, a large baked Indian whortleberry pudding; 2, a dish of sauquetach
(succotash, corn and beans boiled together); 3, a dish of clams; 4, a
dish of oysters and a dish of cod fish; 5, a haunch of venison, roasted
by the first jack brought to the colony; 6, a dish of roasted sea
fowl; 7, a dish of frost fish and eels; 8, an apple pie; 9, a course
of cranberry tarts and cheese made in the Old Colony."--_Dr. Thacher's
History of Plymouth._

The following toasts were also given on the occasion:

1. To the memory of our brave and pious ancestors, the first settlers
of the Old Colony.

2. To the memory of John Carver and all the other worthy Governors of
the Old Colony.

3. To the memory of that pious man and faithful historian, Mr.
Secretary Morton.

4. To the memory of that brave man and good officer, Capt. Miles
Standish.

5. To the memory of Massasoit, our first and best friend, and ally of
the Natives.

6. To the memory of Mr. Robert Cushman, who preached the first sermon
in New England.

7. The union of the Old Colony and Massachusetts.

8. May every person be possessed of the same noble sentiments against
arbitrary power that our worthy ancestors were endowed with.

9. May every enemy to civil or religious liberty meet the same or a
worse fate than Archbishop Laud.

10. May the Colonies be speedily delivered from all the burthens and
oppressions they now labor under.

11. A speedy and lasting union between Great Britain and her Colonies.

12. Unanimity, prosperity, and happiness to the Colonies.--_Russell's
Guide to Plymouth._

[I] The address was published, and has passed through several editions,
and been a source of considerable income to the Society.

[J] It is said of Capt. Standish, He possessed much native talent, was
decided, ardent, resolute, and persevering, indifferent to danger, a
bold and hardy man, stern, austere, and unyielding; of exemplary piety,
and of incorruptible integrity; "an iron-nerved Puritan, who could hew
down forests and live on crumbs."

The Rev. John Thornton Kirkland, D. D., President of Harvard College,
and the Rev. Eleazar Wheelock, D. D., first President of Dartmouth
College, were descendants of Capt. Standish.

[K] Dr. Thacher was appointed Librarian and Cabinet-Keeper of the
Pilgrim Society at its first organization, and his indefatigable
efforts contributed largely to the promotion of its objects. The
following extract from the report of a Committee of the Society
indicates the sense entertained of his services. "The undersigned,
to whom was referred the report of Dr. James Thacher, respecting the
Iron Railing around the Forefathers' Rock, report that the Society are
indebted to Dr. Thacher for this beautiful and costly monument, which
while it secures the Pilgrim Rock from further depredation, records
for the benefit of posterity, the names of our fathers, and affords a
pleasing subject of contemplation to many strangers who visit us." Dr.
Thacher died May 23, 1811, aged 90--The two extracts above are taken
from the Guide to Plymouth.

[L] "On the 11th of November, [1621] Robert Cushman arrived at
Plymouth, in a ship from England, with thirty-five persons, destined to
remain in the Colony. By this arrival the Plymouth colonists received
a charter, procured for them by the adventurers in London, who had
been originally concerned with them in the enterprise; and they now
acknowledged the extraordinary blessing of Heaven, in directing their
course into this part of the country, where they had happily obtained
permission to possess and enjoy the territory under the authority of
the president and council for the affairs of New England."--_Holmes's
Annals._

The names of the thirty-five persons who came in the Fortune, (for
so the vessel was called,) are, Robert Cushman, William Hilton, John
Winslow, William Conner, John Adams, William Tench, John Cannon,
William Wright, Robert Hickes, Thomas Prence, (Prince,) afterwards
Governor, Stephen Dean, Moses Simonson, (Simons,) Philip De La Noye,
(Delano,) Edward Bompasse, (Bumpus and Bump,) Clement Brigges,
(Briggs,) James Steward, (Stewart,) William Pitts, William Palmer,
probably two in his family, Jonathan Brewster, Bennet Morgan, Thomas
Flavil and his son, Hugh Stacie, (Stacy,) William Beale, Thomas
Cushman, Austin Nicolas, (Nicholas,) Widow Foord, probably four in her
family, Thomas Morton, William Bassite, (Bassett), two probably in his
family.

Mr. Cushman was one of those who left England for the sake of religious
liberty, and settled at Leyden. In 1617 he was sent to England, with
Mr. Carver, the first governor of the Colony, to procure a grant of
lands in America, and in 1619 he was sent again, with Mr. Bradford,
second governor of the Colony, and obtained a patent. He set sail
with the first company in 1620, but the Speedwell proving leaky, he
was obliged to relinquish the voyage. He came, however, to Plymouth,
November 10, 1621, but remained there only one month, when he returned.
While preparing to remove to America, he died, 1626. He was a man
of activity and enterprise, talents and piety, and well versed in
the Scriptures. Though not a minister, yet, while at Plymouth, he
delivered a discourse in the form of a sermon "on the Sin and Danger of
Self-Love," which was the first sermon from New England, ever printed.
It was first published at London, 1622, then at Boston, 1724, and at
Plymouth, 1785. After his death, Mr. Cushman's family came to New
England. Many are their descendants in this country.--_Allen's Biog.
Dict._--_Farmer's Register._

[M] "Brethren," said he, "we are now quickly to part from one another,
and whether I may ever live to see your face on earth any more, the
God of heaven only knows; but whether the Lord hath appointed that or
not, I charge you before God and his blessed angels, that you follow
me no farther than you have seen me follow the Lord Jesus Christ. If
God reveal any thing to you by any other instrument of his, be as ready
to receive it as ever you were to receive any truth by my ministry;
for I am fully persuaded, I am very confident, that the Lord has more
truth yet to break forth out of his holy word. For my part, I cannot
sufficiently bewail the condition of the reformed churches, who are
come to a period in religion, and will go at present no farther than
the instruments of their reformation. The Lutherans cannot be drawn
to go beyond what Luther saw; whatever part of his will our good God
has revealed to Calvin, they will rather die than embrace it; and the
Calvinists, you see, stick fast where they were left by that great man
of God, who yet saw not all things.

"This is a misery much to be lamented, for though they were burning
and shining lights in their times, yet they penetrated not into the
whole counsel of God; but were they now living, would be as willing to
embrace further light, as that which they at first received. I beseech
you to remember that it is an article of your church covenant, that you
shall be ready to receive whatever truth shall be made known to you
from the written word of God. Remember that, and every other article of
your sacred covenant. But I must here withal exhort you to take heed
what you receive as truth. Examine it, consider it, and compare it
with other Scriptures of truth, before you receive it; for it is not
possible that the Christian world should come so lately out of such
thick antichristian darkness, and the perfection of knowledge should
break forth at once."

[Illustration]




PASSENGERS OF THE GOLDEN HIND.

(The First Englishmen in North America.)

BY SAMUEL G. DRAKE, M. A.


    [The above engraving is an exact copy of an armed ship of the time
    of Queen Elizabeth, the original publication of which bears date
    1594, and is to be found in that rare old work on "Nauigation,
    lately collected out of the best _Moderne writers thereof by M.
    Blundinile, and by him_ reduced into such a plaine and orderly
    forme of teaching as euery man of a meane capacitie may easily
    vnderstand the same."

    It is doubtless a much better representation of the ships that
    transported our fathers to these shores than any hitherto given.]

It was long ago remarked that but for the voyages and expeditions of
SIR FRANCIS DRAKE, North America would have remained unsettled, if
not almost unknown, for many years, if not for ages. To those who are
familiar with the history of the state of Europe during the century in
which Elizabeth lived, no argument will be required to convince them of
the truth of that position.

An exception may be taken to the heading of our article, but we are
well aware of the voyages of the Cabots, of Ponce de Leon, and of
Verazzini; the former of whom it is said discovered Newfoundland,
and the latter ravaged some part of Florida; and that Verazzini, a
little later, was eaten by the Indians of North America. If we consult
history, popularly known as such, it will hardly appear that the Cabots
set foot on these shores, while what was done by the others tended only
to discourage voyages of discovery in this hemisphere.

It is the intention in this article to furnish as complete a list
of the persons who sailed upon the voyage with SIR FRANCIS DRAKE
round the world, as can be collected, after long and patient search
and investigation. That such a list or catalogue cannot fail to be
interesting at this day, we feel assured, for two reasons; first,
because they were probably the first Englishmen, (certainly the first
whose names we have,) who landed in North America; and secondly, many
of them bore names common amongst us, even to this time. Whether they
were the ancestors or connections of the ancestors of these, we leave
for the investigation of those who bear these names, or who may have
the curiosity and leisure to pursue the interesting inquiry.

A third reason might have been given why such a catalogue of names
should be made out, had we published earlier, but as a settlement of
the "Oregon Question" has taken place, no one will be likely to put in
a claim to any part of that territory by right of discovery made by his
ancestor; and hence an emigrant to that region has no other reason for
any interest he may take in the following names than any of us have on
this side of the Rocky Mountains. And instead of the ancient claim of
rights by discovery, the Oregonian must now console himself as well as
he can with this distich of our famous revolutionary poet, Freneau:

    For the time once was here, to the world be it known,
    That all a man sail'd by, or saw, was his own.

By the following list it will be seen that the largest number of
those who embarked in the voyage, continued during it, and that some
others did not; while of some it is uncertain whether they continued
in it, returned with Capt. Winter, were lost with Capt. Thomas, or are
otherwise to be accounted for.

DRAKE set sail from Plymouth, Nov. 15, 1577, and returned to the same
port Sept. 26, 1580.

The following is the last entry, in the only true and authentic journal
preserved of that voyage. It is entitled "THE WORLD Encompassed by SIR
FRANCIS DRAKE," &c., and was printed in a small quarto volume, with
this imprint, "LONDON, Printed for NICHOLAS BOVRNE, and are to be sold
at his shop at the _Royall Exchange_, 1628."

    "And the 26. of Sept. [1580 in the margin,] (which was Monday in
    the just and ordinary reckoning of those that had stayed at home in
    one place or countrie, but in our coputation was the Lord's day or
    Sonday) we safely with ioyfull minds and thankfvll hearts to God,
    arriued at Plimoth, the place of our first setting forth after we
    had spent 2. yeares 10. moneths and some few odde daies beside,
    in seeing the wonders of the Lord in the deep, in discouering
    so many admirable things, in going through with so many strange
    aduentures, in escaping out of so many dangers, and ouercomming so
    many difficulties in this our encompassing of this neather globe,
    and passing round about the world, which we haue related."

We now proceed with the proposed catalogue of names, in which we shall
study brevity.

  FRANCIS DRAKE, Admiral, or as that officer was then generally
    denominated, general, of the expedition, in the ship called the
    Pelican, which name she bore until she entered the South Sea, when
    it was changed to the GOLDEN HIND. He was born about 1537,[N] and
    died on board his ship near Porto Bello, Jan. 28, 1596.

  JOHN WINTER, Vice-Admiral, in the Elizabeth. He continued in the
    voyage till the passing of the Straits of Magellan, when a storm,
    which for its fury and duration, had never been known to him or his
    companions, made every heart quail but the Admiral's, and compelled
    him, for his own safety, as he contended, to forsake the voyage and
    return to England. How many returned with him, we have no means of
    knowing, at present.

  To form an estimate of the violence of the tempest which deprived
    Drake of all his ships but that in which he himself was, one must
    recur to the original Journal of the voyage before noticed. That
    the reader may have an idea of that curious work, and lest he may
    never see it, a short extract will here be introduced. The writer
    of the Journal was in the Admiral's ship, to which it applies.

    "For such was the present danger by forcing and continuall flawes,
    that we were rather to looke for present death then hope for any
    deliuery, if God almightie should not make the way for vs. The
    winds were such as if the bowels of the earth had set all at
    libertie; or as if all the clouds vnder heauen had beene called
    together, to lay their force vpon that one place: The seas,
    which by nature and of themselues are heauie, and of a weightie
    substance, were rowled vp from the depths, euen from the roots of
    the rockes, as if it had beene a scroll of parchment, which by the
    extremity of heate runneth together: and being aloft were carried
    in most strange manner and abundance, as feathers or drifts of
    snow, by the violence of the winds, to water the exceeding tops of
    high and loftie mountaines. Our anchors, as false friends in such
    a danger, gaue ouer their holdfast, and as if it had beene with
    horror of the thing, did shrinke downe to hide themselues in this
    miserable storme; committing the distressed ship and helpelesse men
    to the vncertaine and rowling seas, which tossed them, like a ball
    in a racket. In this case, to let fall more anchors would auaile
    vs nothing; for being driuen from our first place at anchoring,
    so vnmeasurable was the depth, that 500. fathome would fetch no
    ground: So that the violent storme without intermission; the
    impossibility to come to anchor; the want of opportunitie to spread
    any sayle; the most mad seas; the lee shores; the dangerous rocks;
    the contrary and most intolerable winds; the impossible passage
    out; the desperate tarrying there; and ineuitable perils on euery
    side, did lay before vs so small likelihood to escape present
    destruction, that if the speciall providence of God himselfe had
    not supported vs, we could neuer haue endured that wofull state:
    as being inuironed with most terrible and most fearfull judgements
    round about. For truly it was more likely that the mountaines
    should have beene rent in sunder, from the top to the bottome, and
    cast headlong into the sea, by these vnnatural winds, than that we,
    by any helpe or cunning of man, should free the life of any one
    amongst vs.

    "Notwithstanding, the same God of mercy which delivered _Ionas_
    out of the Whales belly, and heareth all those that call vpon him
    faithfully, in their distresse; looked downe from heauen, beheld
    our teares, and heard our humble petitions, ioyned with holy vowes.
    Euen God (whom not the winds and seas alone, but euen the diuels
    themselues and powers of hell obey) did so wonderfully free vs, and
    make our way open before vs, as it were by his holy Angels still
    guiding and conducting vs, that more then the affright and amaze of
    this estate, we received no part of damage in all the things that
    belonged vnto vs.

    "But escaping from these straites and miseries, as it were through
    the needles ey (that God might haue the greater glory in our
    deliuery) by the great and effectuall care and trauell of our
    Generall, the Lord's instrument therein; we could now no longer
    forbeare, but must needes finde some place of refuge, as well to
    provide water, wood, and other necessaries, as to comfort our men,
    thus worne and tired out, by so many and so long intollerable
    toyles: the like whereof, its to be supposed, no traveller hath
    felt, neither hath there ever beene, such a tempest (that any
    records make mention of) so violent, and of such continuance, since
    _Noahs_ flood; for as hath beene sayd, it lasted from September 7.
    to October 28, full 52 dayes."

Though this extract be long, we have given but the closing part of the
description of the storm. When we consider that it was winter in that
region, and the nature of those seas, the storm (of which we have heard
so much,) which overtook Columbus sinks into comparative insignificance.

We cannot close this lengthened digression, (if so it may be
considered,) without an extract from a Poem on the Death of Drake by
CHARLES FITZ-GEFFREY; who in the following passage seems to have had
the wild scenes of Terra del Fuego, in a dismal winter's night, vividly
before him:--

    "Huge mountain islands of congealed ice,
    Floating (like Delos) on the stormy main,
    Could not deter him from his enterprise,
    Nor blood congealing winter's freezing pain,
    Enforce him, coward like, turn back again:
      Valor in greatest danger shines most bright,
      As full-faced Phoebe in the darkest night."

  JOHN THOMAS, captain of the Marigold. He was lost with all his
    company, after the expedition had passed the Straits of Magellan,
    in the terrible tempest, just described, among the islands of Terra
    del Fuego.

  JOHN CHESTER, captain of the Swan. He probably continued throughout
    the voyage.

  THOMAS MOONE, captain of the Christopher. He was with Drake in his
    early voyages to South America, and seems always to have been with
    him and to have followed his fortunes as long as he lived, and to
    have died almost at the same time with his beloved commander; not
    however from disease like him, but by the hand of his enemy, being
    killed by the Spaniards.

  THOMAS DRAKE, the youngest brother of the Admiral. He does not appear
    to have been in any command at the outset of the voyage, but was
    soon after raised to the command of one of the ships. At this
    time he was probably about 18 years of age. He continued with his
    brother in most of his voyages afterwards, was with him in his last
    voyage, and in command of a ship. From him are descended the Drakes
    of Buckland, and of several other places in the south of Devonshire.

  FRANCIS FLETCHER, chaplain to the expedition. He kept a journal of
    the voyage, a copy of which in MS. is said still to be seen in the
    British Museum, and from which the account before mentioned is
    supposed to be principally made up.

  EDWARD CLIFFE, who sailed in Capt. Winter's ship, and returned with
    him. He left a good account of his voyage.

  JOHN DRAKE, who for being the first to discover a Spanish
    treasure-ship was rewarded by the Admiral with his gold chain,
    "which he usually wore." He does not appear to have been of the
    Admiral's immediate family, but was very probably a near relative.
    He was afterwards a captain in Fenton's disastrous expedition, was
    cast away in the mouth of the Rio de la Plata, fell into the hands
    of the Indians, thence into the hands of the Spaniards, and was not
    heard of after.

  HENRY DRAKE. Of his relationship to the Admiral we have no certain
    knowledge, nor are we _certain_ that he was one of the "great
    voyage." He was in the last voyage, was present when a cannon-shot
    from the castle of Porto Rico passed through Sir Francis's ship,
    while he with his principal officers were at supper, which shot
    struck his seat from under him, mortally wounding Capt. _Brute
    Browne_ and _Sir Nicholas Clifford_. "This," says Dr. Thomas
    Fuller, "I had from the mouth of HENRY DRAKE, ESQ., there present,
    my dear and worthy parishioner lately deceased."

  FRANCIS PRETTY. About this individual there has been of late much
    controversy; whether or not he was one of Drake's company, and if
    he was, whether he was the author of the "Famous Voyage," (as that
    around the world was styled,) first printed by Hakluyt, in 1589.
    We have not space here to go into an examination of that question,
    and shall only remark, that it is possible he may have been one of
    Drake's company. Some have made him a Frenchman; but that opinion
    we entirely reject. It is certain that he sailed with Cavendish,
    and wrote an account of his voyage. The two voyages of Drake and
    Cavendish were printed in connection, which may have given rise
    to an error. Dr. Twiss, in his late examination of the Oregon
    Question, has, to our mind, set the matter in a clear light.

  GEORGE FORTESCUE, probably a connection of Drake, and perhaps of the
    family of Bartholomew Fortescue, Esq., whose daughter Gertrude
    married Sir Bernard Drake of Ash. This George Fortescue left a
    MS. account of the voyage, or at least some part of it, as we are
    informed by Dr. Fuller. He was a captain under his old commander in
    the West Indies, in 1585, and died during that expedition.

  THOMAS DOUGHTY. One of those, who, if we can credit Herrera, went out
    as a gentleman, "to learn navigation" and naval warfare, without
    any particular office. He became mutinous before the fleet arrived
    on the coast of Brazil, and was finally tried, condemned, and
    executed on a small island in the harbor of Port St. Julian. "In
    the Island," says the writer of the voyage, "as we digged to burie
    this gentleman, we found a great grinding stone, broken in two
    parts, which wee tooke and set fast in the ground, the one part
    at the head, the other at the feet, building vp the middle space
    with other stones and turfes of earth, and engraved in the stones
    the names of the parties buried there, with the time of their
    departure, and a memoriall of our generalls name in Latine, that
    it might the better be vnderstood, by all that should come after
    vs." He was buried with Mr. Oliver, who had just been killed by the
    Indians.

  THOMAS HOOD, mentioned only in connection with the case of Doughty.

  THOMAS BLACOLER, afterwards in the expedition of Fenton. The name is
    spelt with variation. There are those bearing it now in New England.

  JOHN GRIPE. Perhaps a mistake for "John the Greek."

  LEONARD VICARY, who was an advocate for Doughty. The name of Vicary,
    though not common in New England, is to be met with, and has
    probably been known in Massachusetts since 1680. In that year,
    Seth, according to Farmer, was admitted a freeman of Hull; and he
    adds, "this name has been in New Hampshire within a few years."

  ---- CRANE, perhaps _Ralph_ Crane, who afterwards served with Fenton,
    in 1582.

  THOMAS CHESTER, also a witness in the case of Doughty.

  ROBERT WINTERLY.

  ---- OLIVER, the master-gunner in the fleet, killed by the
    Patagonians.

  THOMAS CUTTLE, belonging to the Admiral's ship, with the rank of
    captain.

  JOHN DOUGHTY, a younger brother of Thomas, who was executed.

  JOHN BROWN, a trumpeter, an evidence against Doughty.

  JOHN COOK. It is doubtful whether any one of the company bore this
    name, yet a MS. bearing it has been made use of in a collection of
    voyages, the whole purport of which seems to be an attempt to cast
    a stain on the proceedings of Drake in the case of Doughty. It is
    supposed to have been written by some one present in the fleet, and
    the name of the transcriber may have been taken for the author. A
    _John Conyers_ is mentioned by Mr. Barrow as "an annotator on" the
    original narrative, now in the British Museum.

  JOHN FRYE, who, with more courage than discretion, jumping on shore
    in Africa, was seized by the Moors and carried off. He finally
    returned to England.

  EDWARD BRIGHT, a chief accuser of Thomas Doughty.

  THOMAS GOOD, prominent in the case of Doughty.

  JOHN BREWER, one of the company who landed on the island of Mocha
    with the Admiral, and were attacked by the Indians. He received
    seventeen wounds, yet recovered, and sailed afterwards with
    Cavendish.

  HUGH SMITH, mentioned in connection with the affair of Doughty.

  RICHARD MINIVY, who was killed by the Spaniards near Cyppo, Dec. 19,
    1578.

  ROBERT WINTER. Perhaps the same called _Winterly_ in one account, and
    _Winterhie_ in another.

  PETER CARDER, who with seven others separated from the Admiral at
    the western mouth of the Straits of Magellan, during the tempest
    before mentioned. In an open boat they succeeded in repassing the
    Straits, coasted the continent to Brazil, through every variety of
    suffering, until Carder alone was left alive. He finally reached
    England after nine years' absence, and was admitted to the presence
    of Queen Elizabeth, who heard from his own mouth the tale of his
    adventures. Purchas got from him the account which we have, and
    which he published in "his Pilgrims."

  WILLIAM PITCHER, who was one of the companions of Carder, and lived
    to reach the coast of Brazil, where he died from drinking too
    freely of water, when near dead of thirst.

  JOHN AUDLEY, one of those who favored Doughty's mutinous conduct.

  ---- WARRALL, also deeply concerned in the mutiny.

  ULYSSES, probably an African, servant to Capt. Winter.

  ---- COBB, [Caube in the narratives] with Winter or Thomas.

  ---- CHARLES, also with Winter or Thomas, but once mentioned.

  ---- ANTHONY, also with Winter or Thomas, and but once mentioned.

  WILLIAM HAWKINS, perhaps a brother of Sir Richard Hawkins, and son of
    Sir John Hawkins, Kt. He was afterwards vice-admiral under Capt.
    Fenton, in the expedition of 1582.

  JOHN DEANE, a witness in the case of Doughty. Whether he continued
    throughout the voyage or not, is unknown.

  JOHN MARTYN, afterwards Capt. John Martyn or Martin of Plymouth, and
    son of---- Martin of Bridgetown near Totnes, who had male issue
    living there in 1620.

  THOMAS CLACKLEY, boatswain in the Admiral's ship.

  JOHN SARICOLD, one of the important evidences against Doughty.

  EMANUEL WATKYNS. His name, with Saricold's and several others, is
    signed to certain articles going to prove the guilt of Doughty.

  GEORGE CARY, a musician. The same probably called _Gregory Cary_, in
    the documents in Barrow's Worthies. He attested to the mutinous
    conduct of Doughty.

  HENRY SPINDELAY, gunner in Capt. Chester's ship.

  JAMES SYDYE, mentioned only in Doughty's case.

  WILLIAM SEAGE, mentioned only as above.

  JOHN DAVIS, whose name the great northern Strait will ever
    perpetuate, who was perhaps in Capt. Winter's ship, though we
    are not sure of the fact; but in 1595, he said he had then
    "thrice passed the Straits of Magellan," which renders it quite
    certain that he must have sailed with Drake in his voyage of
    circumnavigation, as there is no other way of accounting for his
    having "thrice passed those Straits."

Thus out of "164 able and sufficient men," we have about one third of
them by name; and from a passage in "Barrow's Naval Worthies" we are
led to hope, that "twenty-nine" other names will yet be recovered.
Should they come to our hand, we may at a future time make an article
respecting them also.[O]

FOOTNOTES:

[N] The time of Sir Francis Drake's birth has usually been fixed at
1545; but from genealogical and other investigations, it appears that
he must have been born as early as 1537.

[O] Mr. Drake has in a forward state for publication a full account of
Admiral Drake and his Voyages, containing some important facts hitherto
unpublished.--_Editor._




"A LYST OF THE PASINGERS ABORD THE SPEEDWELL OF LONDON, ROBERT LOCK
MASTER, BOUND FOR NEW ENGLAND.


  Richard Stratlon,             aged
  John Mulfoot,                   "
  Richard Smith,                  "  43
  Francis Brinsley,               "  22
  Thomas Noyce,                   "  32
  Mathew Edwards,                 "
  Joseph Boules,                  "  47
  William Brand, (Q)[P]           "  40
  John Copeland, (Q)              "  28
  Christopher Holder, (Q)         "  25
  Thomas Thurston, (Q)            "  34
  Mary Prince, (Q)                "  21
  Sarah Gibbons, (Q)              "  21
  Mary Weatherhead, (Q)           "  26
  Dorothy Waugh, (Q)              "  20
  Lester Smith,                   "  24
  Christopher Clarke,             "  38
  Edward Lane,                    "  36
  Tho: Richardson,                "  19
  John Earle,                     "  17
  Thomas Barnes,                  "  20
  Shudrack Hopgood,               "  14
  Thomas Goodynough,              "  20
  Nathaniel Goodinough,           "  16
  John Fay,                       "   8
  William Tayler,                 "  11
  Richard Smith,                  "  28
  Muhuhulett Munnings,            "  24
  Margarett Mott,                 "  12
  Henry Reeue,                    "   8
  Henery Seker,                   "   8
  John Morse,                     "  40
  Nickolus Dauison,               "  45
  John Baldwin,                   "  21
  Mary Baldwin,                   "  20
  Rebeca Worster,                 "  18
  John Wigins,                    "  15
  John Miller,                    "  24
  Thomas Home,                    "  11
  John Crane,                     "  11
  Charels Baalam,                 "  18

    "The persons aboue named past from hence [in] the shipp aboue
    mentioned, and are, according to order, registred heare. Dated,
    Searchers office, Grauesend, 30th May, 1656.

                                    EDWARD PELLING, } _Searchers._
                                    JOHN PHILPOTT.  }

    "Theese were Landed at Boston in N. E. the 27th of the moneth, 1656.

                                                                 J. E."




"AN EXAMINATION OF THE QUAKERS BEFORE [THE] COURT OF ASSISTANTS, 8
SEPTEMBER, 1656."


[The following is an exact copy of the original minutes, made at the
examination of the Quakers, at the court in Boston above specified.
Hutchinson refers to the books of the Court in his account or notice of
this affair; but whatever may there be found to justify his remark that
the Quakers made "rude and contemptuous answers," no one will allow
that any thing of the kind was contained in these original minutes, to
justify any such conclusion. They are here presented to illustrate, as
far as they may, this dark page of our early history. This document
is the more important, as it appears to be one of the earliest, if
not _the_ earliest paper in relation to the proceedings against that
people. They came into New England in July preceding their apprehension
and trial, and were twelve in number. The issue of their examination
being matter of history, it will not be necessary to go into the
details here. The inquirer after truth may consult Hutchinson, Neal,
Hazard, Bishop, and others for them.]

  1. Quest. Whither you oune yor selves to be such as are commonly
    knowne or called by ye name of Quakers?

  Ansr. Wee are all so called. Wee are all of one minde.

  2. Quest. Whither yow brought not ouer hither seuerall bookes wherein
    are conteyned the seuerall opinions of yt sect or people. Mary
    Prince and another.

  [Ans.] Yea. those yt were taken from us.

  3. Quest. Wherefore came yow into theise parts?

  Ansr. (by all) To doe ye will of God wteuer he should mak knowne to
    be his will.

  4. Quest. How doe yow make it Appeare yt God called yow hither?

  Ansr. (Dor. Wawgh)[Q] He yt belieues hath ye witness in himself.

  (Brend.)[R] By the Power of ye spirit of ye lord. It was a crosse to
    my will. I would not haue come but the lord hath brought me downe
    to oby him in his call.

  5. Quest. Doe yow Acknowledg ye light in every man's Conscienc yt
    comes into ye world is xt and yt yt light would saue him if obeyd?

  The Ansr to ys in thiere bookes is, The light is but one wch is xt,
    who enlightnes one, and all are enlightned wth one light, as in
    the 3d pag of yt booke, and in ye close of ye booke. Ad: yt ys is
    called ye light of yor Conscienc, the true teacher, and sayd to be
    the first step to peace, _ult verba_. Mary Prince Do yow oune the
    letter yow sent me? which was sheu [_blot_] hir.

  Ansr. Yes: and sayd it was ye eternall word of ye lord wich must
    stand for euer, and should stand; and sayd further, she wrote this
    as a prophet, one of ye lord, and was Guided by ye Infallible
    Spirit of ye lord.

  6. Quest. Whether yow oune that the scriptures are the rule of
    knowing God and living to him?

  Ansr. The eternall word is ye Rule of theire lines, and not ye
    written word: and in Ansr. to ye Question propounded from them:
    That if yow had not the scriptures to direct yow yet yow haue yt
    wthin yow wch was before scripture, yt vould guide you aright.

  To wch Mary Prince Ansrd, yea, and yt it was a sufficyent Guide.

  7. Quest. Doe yow Acknowledg yt xt is God and man in one pson?

  This they will not acknowledg.

  8. Quest. Doe yow Acknowledg one God subsisting in three
    persons--father, sonne and holy Ghost?

  Ansr. They Acknowledg no Trinity of persons.

  9. Quest. Whither yow Acknowledg yt God and man in one person remayne
    foreuer a distinct pson from God ye father and God ye holy Ghost
    and from ye saints, notwithstanding theire vnion and comunion wth
    him?

  This they will not Acknowledge.

  10. Quest. Doe yow Acknowledg your self a sinner?

  This they will not Acknowledge.

11. Quest. Doe yow Acknowledg Baptisme wth water to be an ordjnance of
God?

This they will not Acknowledg.

FOOTNOTES:

[P] The eight names against which is the letter Q had a Q set opposite
to them in the margin of the original paper containing the account,
denoting, as is supposed, that the individuals were Quakers. It is said
in Sewall's History of the Quakers that there arrived at Boston two
other Quakers in July of this year, namely, Mary Fisher and Ann Austin,
who were very ill treated on their arrival, by Gov. Bellingham, though
there was yet no law against Quakers.

[Q] Dorothy Waugh.

[R] William Brend, or Brand. See List of Passengers in the Speedwell.




A COMPLETE LIST OF THE MINISTERS OF BOSTON OF ALL DENOMINATIONS, FROM
1630 TO 1842, ARRANGED IN THE ORDER OF THEIR SETTLEMENT.

BY JAMES C. ODIORNE, M. A.


  -------------+-------------------------+------------+--------------
   _Order of_  |  _Names of Ministers._  | _Denomin-_ | _Churches._
  _Settlement._|                         |  _ation._  |
  -------------+-------------------------+------------+--------------
        1      |John Wilson              |Cong.       |1st Chh.
        2      |John Cotton              |Cong.       |1st Chh.
        3      |John Mayo                |Cong.       |Old North
        4      |John Norton              |Cong.       |1st Chh.
        5      |Thomas Gould             |Bapt.       |1st Bapt. Chh.
        6      |John Davenport, B. D.    |Cong.       |1st Chh.
        7      |James Allen              |Cong.       |1st Chh.
        8      |Increase Mather, D. D.   |Cong.       |Old North
        9      |Thomas Thacher           |Cong.       |Old South
       10      |John Oxenbridge          |Cong.       |1st Chh.
       11      |Isaac Hull               |Bapt.       |1st Bapt.
       12      |Samuel Willard           |Cong.       |Old South
       13      |John Russell             |Bapt.       |1st Bapt.
       14      |John Miles               |Bapt.       |1st Bapt.
       15      |Joshua Moodey, Assistant |Cong.       |1st Chh.
       16      |Cotton Mather, D. D.     |Cong.       |Old North
       17      |John Emblen              |Bapt.       |1st Bapt.
       18      |Robert Ratcliffe         |Epis.       |King's Chapel
       19      |Robert Clarke            |Epis.       |King's Chapel
       20      |Peter Daille             |Fr. Protest.|School St.
       21      |Samuel Myles             |Epis.       |King's Chapel
       22      |George Hatton            |Epis.       |King's Chapel
       23      |John Bailey, Assistant   |Cong.       |1st Chh.
       24      |Benjamin Wadsworth       |Cong.       |1st Chh.
       25      |Christopher Bridge       |Epis.       |King's Chapel
       26      |Benjamin Colman, D. D.   |Cong.       |Brattle St.
       27      |Ebenezer Pemberton       |Cong.       |Old South
       28      |Thomas Bridge            |Cong.       |1st Chh.
       29      |Ellis Callender          |Bapt.       |1st Bapt.
       30      |Henry Harris             |Epis.       |King's Chapel
       31      |Joseph Sewall, D. D.     |Cong.       |Old South
       32      |John Webb                |Cong.       |New North
       33      |William Cooper           |Cong.       |Brattle St.
       34      |Thomas Foxcroft          |Cong.       |1st Chh.
       35      |Elisha Callender         |Bapt.       |1st Bapt.
       36      |Thomas Prince            |Cong.       |Old South
       37      |Andrew Le Mercier        |Fr. Protest.|School St.
       38      |Samuel Checkley          |Cong.       |New South
       39      |William Waldron          |Cong.       |New Brick
       40      |Peter Thacher            |Cong.       |New North
       41      |Joshua Gee               |Cong.       |Old North
       42      |Timothy Cutler, D. D.    |Epis.       |Christ Church
       43      |Charles Chauncy, D. D.   |Cong.       |1st Chh.
       44      |William Welsteed         |Cong.       |New Brick
       45      |Roger Price              |Epis.       |King's Chapel
       46      |John Moorhead            |Pres.       |Federal St.
       47      |Thomas Harward           |Epis.       |King's Chapel
       48      |Samuel Mather, D. D.     |Cong.       |Old North
       49      |Mather Byles, D. D.      |Cong.       |Hollis St.
       50      |Addington Davenport      |Epis.       |King's Chapel
       51      |William Hooper           |Cong.       |West Chh.
       52      |Ellis Gray               |Cong.       |New Brick
       53      |Jeremiah Condy           |Bapt.       |1st Bapt. Chh.
       54      |Addington Davenport      |Epis.       |Trinity Chh.
       55      |Stephen Roe              |Epis.       |King's Chapel
       56      |Samuel Mather, D. D.     |Cong.       |N. Bennet St.
       57      |Andrew Eliot, D. D.      |Cong.       |New North
       58      |Ephraim Bownd            |Bapt.       |2nd Bapt.
       59      |Samuel Cooper, D. D.     |Cong.       |Brattle St.
       60      |Henry Caner, D. D.       |Epis.       |King's Chapel
       61      |Charles Brockwell        |Epis.       |King's Chapel
       62      |Jonathan Mayhew, D. D.   |Cong.       |West Chh.
       63      |William Hooper           |Epis.       |Trinity Chh.
       64      |Samuel Checkley, Jr.     |Cong.       |Old North
       65      |Andrew Croswell,         |Cong.       |School St.
       66      |Ebenezer Pemberton, D. D.|Cong.       |New Brick
       67      |John Troutbeck           |Epis.       |King's Chapel
       68      |James Greaton            |Epis.       |Christ Chh.
       69      |Alexander Cuming         |Cong.       |Old South
       70      |William Walter, D. D.    |Epis.       |Trinity Chh.
       71      |Samuel Stillman, D. D.   |Bapt.       |1st Bapt. Chh.
       72      |Penuel Bowen             |Cong.       |New South
       73      |Samuel Blair. D. D.      |Cong.       |Old South
       74      |Simeon Howard, D. D.     |Cong.       |West Chh.
       75      |Mather Byles, Jr., D. D. |Epis.       |Christ Chh.
       76      |John Lathrop, D. D.      |Cong.       |Old North
       77      |John Davis               |Bapt.       |2nd Bapt.
       78      |John Bacon               |Cong.       |Old South
       79      |John Hunt                |Cong.       |Old South
       80      |Joseph Howe              |Cong.       |New South
       81      |Isaac Skillman, D. D.    |Bapt.       |2nd Bapt. Chh.
       82      |John Murray              |Univ.       |1st Univ. Chh.
       83      |Samuel Parker, D. D.     |Epis.       |Trinity Chh.
       84      |Ebenezer Wight           |Cong.       |Hollis St.
       85      |John Clarke, D. D.       |Cong.       |1st Chh.
       86      |Stephen Lewis            |Epis.       |Christ Chh.
       87      |Joseph Eckley, D. D.     |Cong.       |Old South
       88      |John Elliot, D. D.       |Cong.       |New North
       89      |Oliver Everett           |Cong.       |New South
       90      |James Freeman, D. D.     |Unit.       |King's Chapel

[**continued]

  -------------+-----------------+-----------------------+--------------------
   _Order of_  |   _Graduated._  |       _Settled._      |_Died or Resigned._
  _Settlement._|                 |                       |
  ------------ +-----------------+-----------------------+--------------------
        1      |Camb., Eng.      |Inst.   Nov.   22, 1630|Died  Aug.   7, 1667
        2      |Camb., Eng.      |Inst.   Oct.   17, 1633|Died  Dec.  23, 1652
        3      |England          |Ord.    Nov.    9, 1655|Dism. April 15, 1672
        4      |Camb., Eng.      |Inst.   July   23, 1656|Died  April  5, 1663
        5      |                 |                   1665|Left            1675
        6      |Oxford, Eng.     |Inst.   Dec.    9, 1668|Died  Mar.  15, 1670
        7      |Oxford, Eng.     |Inst.   Dec.    9, 1668|Died  Sept. 22, 1710
        8      |Harv., 1656      |Ord.    May    27, 1669|Died  Aug.  23, 1723
        9      |England          |Inst.   Feb.   16, 1670|Died  Oct.  15, 1678
       10      |Oxford, Eng.     |Inst.   April  10, 1670|Died  Dec.  28, 1674
       11      |                 |                   1675|Left            1688
       12      |Harv., 1659      |Inst.   April  10, 1678|Died  Sept. 12, 1707
       13      |                 |Ord.    July   28, 1679|Died  Dec.  21, 1680
       14      |                 |                       |Left            1683
       15      |Harv., 1653      |        May     3, 1684|Dism.           1692
       16      |Harv., 1678      |Ord.    May    13, 1684|Died  Feb.  13, 1728
       17      |                 |                   1684|Died  Dec.   9, 1702
       18      |England          |Induct. June   15, 1686|Res.            1689
       19      |                 |Induct.            1686|Left
       20      |                 |Com.               1687|Died  May   20, 1715
       21      |Harv., 1684      |Induct. June   29, 1689|Died  March  4, 1728
       22      |England          |Induct. June   15, 1693|Left  July,     1696
       23      |                 |        July   17, 1693|Died  Dec.  12, 1697
       24      |Harv., 1690      |Ord.    Sept.   8, 1696|Dism. June  16, 1725
       25      |England          |Induct. March  20, 1699|Rem.  Sept.     1706
       26      |Harv., 1692      |Ord.    Aug.    4, 1699|Died  Aug.  29, 1747
       27      |Harv., 1691      |Ord.    Aug.   28, 1700|Died  Feb.  13, 1717
       28      |England          |Inst.   May    10, 1705|Died  Sept. 26, 1715
       29      |---- ----        |Com.               1708|                1728
       30      |England          |Induct. April,     1709|Died  Oct.  16, 1729
       31      |Harv., 1707      |Ord.    Sept.  16, 1713|Died  June  27, 1769
       32      |Harv., 1708      |Ord.    Oct.   20, 1714|Died  April 16, 1750
       33      |Harv., 1712      |Ord.    May    23, 1716|Died  Dec.  13, 1743
       34      |Harv., 1714      |Ord.    Nov.   20, 1717|Died  June  18, 1769
       35      |Harv., 1710      |Ord.    May    21, 1718|      Mar.  31, 1738
       36      |Harv., 1707      |Ord.    Oct.    1, 1718|Died  Oct.  22, 1758
       37      |Geneva           |                   1719|Left  March  7, 1748
       38      |Harv., 1715      |Ord.    Nov.   22, 1719|Died  Dec.   1, 1769
       39      |Harv., 1717      |Ord.    May    23, 1722|Died  Sept. 20, 1727
       40      |Harv., 1696      |Inst.   Jan.   28, 1723|Died  Feb.  26, 1739
       41      |Harv., 1717      |Ord.    Dec.   18, 1723|Died  May   22, 1748
       42      |Harv., 1701      |Induct. Dec.   29, 1723|Died  Aug.  17, 1765
       43      |Harv., 1721      |Ord.    Oct.   25, 1727|Died  Feb.  10, 1787
       44      |Harv., 1716      |Ord.    March  27, 1728|Died  Sept. 29, 1753
       45      |England          |Induct. June   25, 1729|Res.  Nov.  21, 1746
       46      |Scotland         |Inst.   March  31, 1730|Died  Dec.   2, 1773
       47      |England          |Induct. April,     1731|Died  April 15, 1736
       48      |Harv., 1723      |Ord.    June   21, 1732|Dism. Oct.  23, 1741
       49      |Harv., 1725      |Ord.    Dec.   20, 1733|Dism. Aug.   9, 1776
       50      |Harv., 1719      |Induct. April  15, 1737|Dism. May    8, 1740
       51      |Scotland         |Ord.    May    18, 1737|Dism. Nov.  19, 1746
       52      |Harv., 1734      |Ord.    Sept.  27, 1738|Died  Jan.  17, 1753
       53      |Harv., 1726      |Ord.    Feb.   14, 1739|Left  Aug.      1764
       54      |Harv., 1719      |Induct. May     8, 1740|Died  Sept.  8, 1746
       55      |                 |Induct.            1741|Rem.            1744
       56      |Harv., 1723      |Com.    Oct.   23, 1741|Died  June  27, 1785
       57      |Harv., 1737      |Ord.    April  14, 1742|Died  Sept. 13, 1778
       58      |---- ----        |Ord.    Sept.   7, 1743|Died  June  16, 1765
       59      |Harv., 1743      |Ord.    May    22, 1746|Died  Dec.  20, 1783
       60      |Yale, 1724       |Induct. April  11, 1747|Dism. Mar.  17, 1776
       61      |                 |Induct.            1747|Died  Aug.  20, 1753
       62      |Harv., 1744      |Ord.    June   17, 1747|Died  July   9, 1766
       63      |Scotland         |Induct. Aug.   28, 1747|Died  April 14, 1767
       64      |Harv., 1743      |Ord.    Sept.   3, 1747|Died  Mar.  19, 1768
       65      |Harv., 1728      |Inst.   Oct.    5, 1748|Died  April 12, 1785
       66      |Harv., 1721      |Inst.   March   6, 1754|Died  Sept.  9, 1777
       67      |                 |Induct.            1755|Dism. Nov.      1775
       68      |Yale, 1754       |Induct.            1759|Left  Aug.   5, 1767
       69      |                 |Inst.   Feb.   25, 1761|Died  Aug.  25, 1763
       70      |Harv., 1756      |Induct. July   22, 1764|Dism. Mar.  17, 1776
       71      |---- ----        |Inst.   Jan.    9, 1765|Died  Mar.  12, 1807
       72      |Harv., 1762      |Ord.    April  30, 1766|Dism. May   12, 1772
       73      |Coll. N. J., 1760|Inst.   Nov.   26, 1766|Dism. Oct.  10, 1769
       74      |Harv., 1758      |Ord.    May     6, 1767|Died  Aug.  14, 1804
       75      |Harv., 1751      |Induct. April  22, 1768|Dism. April,    1775
       76      |Coll. N. J., 1763|Ord.    May    18, 1768|Died  Jan.   4, 1816
       77      |---- ----        |Ord.    Sept.   9, 1770|Left  July  19, 1772
       78      |Coll. N. J., 1765|Inst.   Sept.  25, 1771|Dism. Feb.   8, 1775
       79      |Harv., 1764      |Ord.    Sept.  25, 1771|Died  Dec.  30, 1775
       80      |Yale, 1765       |Ord.    May    19, 1773|Died  Aug.  25, 1775
       81      |Coll. N.J., 1766 |Com.    Oct.    3, 1773|Dism. Oct.   7, 1787
       82      |England          |Com.    Oct.   24, 1773|Died  Sept.  3, 1815
       83      |Harv., 1764      |Induct. May    19, 1774|Died  Dec.   6, 1804
       84      |Harv., 1776      |Ord.    Feb.   25, 1778|Dism. Sept.     1788
       85      |Harv., 1774      |Ord.    July    8, 1778|Died  April  1, 1798
       86      |---- ----        |Induct. Aug.       1778|Dism. Sept.     1785
       87      |Coll. N. J., 1772|Ord.    Oct.   27, 1779|Died  April 30, 1811
       88      |Harv., 1772      |Ord.    Nov.    3, 1779|Died  Feb.  14, 1813
       89      |Harv., 1779      |Ord.    Jan.    2, 1782|Dism. May   26, 1792
       90      |Harv., 1777      |Induct. Oct.   18, 1782|Died  Nov.  14, 1835

(To be continued.)




A LIST OF NAMES FOUND AMONG THE FIRST SETTLERS OF NEW ENGLAND.


[Those names which are starred are not contained in Fanner's
Genealogical Register, and concerning those which are not starred,
additional facts are related. The article is prepared entirely from
unpublished manuscripts, by Mr. S. G. Drake.]

  ADAMS SAMUEL, Chelmsford, authorized to solemnize marriages there,
    1664.

  ALLEN, BOZOUN, Boston, constable, 1680.

  ALLIN, ONESIPHORUS,* Ipswich, 1679.

  ALLYNE, THOMAS,* Barnstable, 1644, a witness to a sale of land by the
    Indian _Seacunk_.

  ANDREWS, THOMAS,* and THOMAS JR.,* Dorchester, 1664.

  ANGIER, ANDREW, first inhabitant at Dunston, Me.--ARTHUR, born about
    1625.

  ANNABLE, ANTHONY, Barnstable, 1644.

  ARCHARD, SAMUEL,* church member, Salem, 1640.

  ARDELL, RICHARD,* Boston, merchant, 1686.

  ATWOOD, JOHN,* ensign, Boston, juror, 1686.

  AVERY, WILLIAM* and JONATHAN,* members of the church, Dedham, 1677.

  BAXTER, DANIEL, Salem, 1638. Carried the charter of R. Island from
    Boston to Newport, 1663. [_Farmer's MS._]

  BENTLEY, WILLIAM,* came to New England in the ship Arabella, Richard
    Sprague master; sailed from Gravesend, May 27, 1671.

  BEZBEANE, JOHN,* Woburn, 1677.

  BERRY, RICHARD,* Medford, 1636.

  BLAKE, FRANCIS,* Dorchester, 1664.--WILLIAM,*--JAMES, a. 24 in 1677.

  BLOWERS, JOHN, a. 36 in 1663, a lessee of an island in Boston harbor
    for seven years.

  BOTT, ISAAC,* Boston, 1675.

  BRADLEY, WILLIAM,* Dorchester, 1664.

  BROUGHTON, THOMAS, Boston, 1655, petitions general court against
    imposing duties on importations.

  BULL, WILLIAM, Charlestown, 1638, heard Squaw Sachem say then, that
    she had given all her lands to Mr. Gibbons; was 43 years of age in
    1662.

  CAPEN, BARNARD, witnesses the Indian deed of Dorchester, 1671;
    SAMUEL,* also a witness to the same.

  CARPENTER, WILLIAM, Hingham, 1641, witnessed, and seems to have
    drawn the deed of a tract of land there from the Indians "to John
    Tower the elder." His autograph, and the instrument to which it is
    attached, are a most elegant specimen of the chirography of that
    age.

  CHEEVER, EZEKIEL, married the widow of Capt. Lothrop, who was killed
    in Sudbury fight, before May 19, 1680.

  CHILD, RICHARD,* Watertown, juror, 1680.

  CHURCH, GARRETT, Watertown, 1636, aged 51 in 1662.--RICHARD,
    Plymouth, 1631; went there from Wessaguscussett.

  CLARKE, JONAS, constable of Cambridge, 1680.--THEODORE,* York, 1663.

  CLAY, NATHANIEL,* Dorchester, 1664.

  COBB, HENRY, Barnstable, 1644.

  COOK, GEORGE, Colonel. &c., Cambridge, Ms., in which place and
    vicinity he had large possessions; returned to England in or about
    the beginning of the Civil War, in which he took a part, went
    into Ireland, where he was killed in 1652. He was twice married,
    and left by one of his wives, two daughters: 1. MARY, m. to "her
    mother's younger brother," Mr. Samuel Annesley, 1681. In 1669 she
    resided at Martins in the Fields, London; in 1691 she resided with
    her husband in the city of Westminster. 2. ELIZABETH, m. 1st, Rev.
    John Quick, of St. Giles. Cripple Gate, London, and perhaps, 2ndly,
    Joseph Cawthorne.

  CRISPE, BENJAMIN, "Misticke als Meadforde," 1636.

  CURWIN, GEORGE, Salem, 1682, aged 70; went there near 44 years before.

  CUSHIN, JEREMIAH,* Boston, juror, 1680.

  DAVIS, LAWRENCE,* York, 1663.

  DINSDALE, WILLIAM, aged 47 in 1663. Hired an island of John Leverett,
    in Boston harbor, for seven years.

  DOGGETT, JOHN, Hingham, 1662, where he witnessed an Indian deed.

  DURGIE, WILLIAM,* came to Ipswich, Nov. 9, 1663, and was then 33
    years old. Had been in the W. Indies, and came here from thence.
    Wife, Martha. Perhaps this name is that since written _Durgin_.

  EDGECOMBE, MILES,* a. 25, 1676. Was at "Black Point the day and tyme
    when nine of Winterharbor men were fighting with the Indians upon
    the sands opposite to the said place."

  EEDY, JOHN,* Plymouth, left there to reside in Massachusetts, before
    Feb., 1632.

  EUERS, MATHIAS,* Dorchester, 1664.

  EVERETT, JOHN, Chelmsford, 1664, where he is authorized to unite
    people in marriage.

  FOOTE, PASCO, Salem church, 1640.

  FOSTER, JAMES,* Dorchester, constable, 1680.

  FOX, THOMAS, Ms., about 52 in 1659, wife, Elinor.

  FOXWELL, RICHARD, Dunston, Me., 1654.

  FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN, Boston, before 1678, wife, Katherine.

  FRIEND, JOHN, Salem, church memb., 1640.

  GODDARD, GILES,* Boston, 1679, had wife and servants.

  GRAY, JOHN,* buys Nantasket of the Indians, 1622.

  GREENLEAFE, ENOCH,* Boston, saddler, 1693.

  GREENOUGH, ROBERT,* Rowley, 1701.

  GREEN, JOHN, Cambridge, juror, 1680. NATHANIEL, 1675.

  HARROD, THOMAS,* Boston, juror, 1680.

  HEWS, JEREMIAH,* Dorchester, 1664.--ELEAZER,* Dorchester.

  HAUXWORTH, THOMAS,* Salisbury. Had a daughter married to Onesiphorus
    Page. His widow was living there, 1667.

  HAYDEN, SAMUEL,* Dorchester or vicinity, 1666.

  HILLS, JOSEPH, Medford, a. 60 in 1662. Capt. JAMES,* [HILL] grand
    juror, Boston, 1686.

  HOAR, WILLIAM,* Boston, baker, 1679.

  HODMAN, JOHN, Dorchester, 1679, born 1659.

  HOOD, JEREMIAH,* Massachusetts, 1676.

  HOPIN, STEVEN,* born 1626, Dorchester, in Capt. Roger Clapp's employ,
    1642. Witness to Indian deed of Dorchester, (8:4:1649.)

  HOUGHTON, RALPH, Lancaster, 1676, where he was constable, collector
    of taxes, treasurer, &c. There were at the same place in 1703,
    HENRY, JONAS, ROBERT, JOHN, SEN, JOHN, JR., JOSEPH and JACOB.

  HOWARD, JACOB,* Dorchester, 1664.

  HUDSON, WILLIAM, lived at "Wading River" in 1670, "where King Philip
    and Squamaug (brother of Josias deceased) met to settle the bounds
    between them, which had for some time been in dispute."

  JOHNSON, EDWARD, a. 60 in 1660, at which time he gives evidence about
    land in Charlestown. FRANCIS, Marblehead, 1660, nephew of Mr.
    Christopher Coulson, a merchant adventurer of London.

  JOYLIFFE, JOHN, Boston, will dated 1699-1700. Had a brother, Dr.
    GEORGE JOYLIFFE, in England; sisters, DOROTHY CANE, in England,
    MARTHA COOK, in England, REBECCA WOLCOTT, MARGARET DRAKE, and MARY
    BISS, "sometime wife of James Biss of Shepton Mallet, in the county
    of Somerset," Eng.

  KEY, JOSHUA,* probably married a daughter of Capt. Thomas Lothrop,
    who was killed by the Indians in 1675, as his children received a
    legacy out of Lothrop's estate.

  KING, THOMAS, was an inhabitant of Exeter, 1675.

  KNIGHT, WALTER, aged 66 in 1653, at which time he was at Boston. The
    same person was at Nantasket in 1622. JOHN, Charlestown, juror in
    the witch trials, 1680.

  LATHAM, CARY, was born in 1612; Boston, 1663.

  LAWRENCE, THOMAS, Hingham, 1661.

  LOEPHELIN, PETER,* Frenchman, Boston, 1679.

  LEACH, RICHARD, Salem, a. 60 in 1678, leased a farm of Gov. Endecott,
    1657.

  LONG, ROBERT, Marblehead, a. 70 in 1660.

  LOTHROP, CAPT. THOMAS; his widow married Joseph Grafton, before May
    19, 1680. After her decease, the property left her by Lothrop was
    ordered by court to the wife of Ezekiel Chever, and her issue,
    heirs of Capt. Lothrop. It is also ordered Mrs. Grafton to pay to
    the children of Joshua Key, L20.

  LYON, PETER, Dorchester, 1664.

  MARRINER, ANDREW,* Boston, 1693, leather dresser.

  MATHER, TIMOTHY, Dorchester, 1667.

  MAYHEW, THOMAS, hired a farm in Medford, 1636.

  MELLEN, JOHN,* Charlestown, where he died before 1695.

  MIDDLECOTT, MR. [RICHARD?] Boston, juror at trials for witchcraft,
    1680.

  MOKALL, JAMES,* b. 1660, Massachusetts, 1680.

  MORSE, WILLIAM, Newbury; wife, Elizabeth, accused of practising
    witchcraft, finally acquitted at Boston, 1680.

  MOSE, JOHN, Watertown, 1680, constable.

  MOTT, NATHANIEL, a. 19, or thereabouts, in 1681.

  NARAMORE, THOMAS,* Dorchester, 1664. Persons of this name are in N.
    Hampshire at this time.

  NEIGHBOR, JAMES,* Massachusetts, 1662.

  ODIORNE, JOHN and PHILL., Portsmouth, N. H., 1657, subscribed toward
    the support of public worship.

  PAGE, ONESIPHORUS,* Salisbury, 1667, married daughter of Thomas
    Hauxworth [Hawksworth].

  PARSONS, MARK,* Sagadahock, 1665.

  PATESHALL, ROBERT,* Boston, 1655, petitions General Court against
    duties on importations.

  PEASLEE, JOSEPH, went to Haverhill before 1653.

  PHILIPS, JOHN,* Massachusetts, 1630, styled servant, went to
    Plymouth, 1631.

  POLE, WILLIAM,* Dorchester, 1649. The name is since written _Pool_.

  PRAY, EPHRAIM,* born 1661, Dorchester, 1680.

  RAINSFORD, SAMUEL,* Boston, killed with Capt. Turner, at Pawtucket,
    in Philip's war, leaving no relative in the country.

  RICE, HENRY, Charlestown, juror, 1662.

  RICHARD, GYLES,* SEN., Massachusetts, 1666.

  ROBBINS, RICHARD, juror at trials for witchcraft, 1680.

  ROOT, THOMAS, Lynn, 1674, where he attempted to gather a church.

  RYALL, JOSEPH,* Charlestown, constable, 1680.

  SAUNDERS, MARTIN,* born 1630, Boston, 1679.

  SEALE, EPHRAIM,* Lieutenant, Boston, juror, 1686.

  SEARES, JOHN,* Boston, Lieutenant, 1652.

  SEWALL, HENRY, was residing at Manchester, Lancaster co., Eng., in
    1623, only son of HENRY SEWALL, who came to N. England with his
    family, and settled in Newbury.

  SHERBURNE, GEORGE, b. 1602, Portsmouth, 1650, m. Rebecca, dau.
    Ambrose Gibbins, and had children, SAMUEL, ELIZABETH, m. Tobias
    Lear, MARY, HENRY, JOHN, AMBROSE, SARAH, and REBECCA. [_Farmer's
    MS._]

  SIBLY, JOHN, church member, Salem, 1640.

  SMITH, JOHN,* Barnstable, 1644.

  SPRAGUE, SAMUEL,* Charlestown, 1695.

  STILEMAN, ELIAS, Boston, constable, 1673.

  STONE, JOHN,* Watertown, juror, 1680.

  STUDSON, ROBERT,* one of the commissioners for settling the bounds
    between Plymouth and Massachusetts, 1664.

  SUMNER, WILLIAM,* Dorchester, 1670.

  SWAIN, JOHN,* Salisbury, b. 1633, Nantucket, 1703. A Lieutenant SWAIN
    had been under Major Appleton against the Indians at Narraganset,
    in 1675. He was afterwards a captain.

  TAYLER, JOHN,* Shipcot, [Sheepscot,] 1665.

  THAYER, RICHARD, Massachusetts, went to England, and returned in 1679.

  TINKHAM, EPHRAIM, Massachusetts, 1666, at which time he was a witness
    to the sale of lands to Richard Thayer of Braintree, by the Indian
    chief _Josias_. He attests to it in 1678.

  TOWER, JOHN, Hingham, buys a large tract of land of several Indians
    in that place; deed dated June 17, 1641. In an endorsement on said
    deed, (made by Ri: Bellingham, 19: 1: 1662-3,) JOHN TOWER is called
    senior. But in the TOWER GENEALOGICAL TREE there are assigned
    as the children of JOHN TOWER of Hingham, (1637) only AMBROSE,
    BENJAMIN, JONATHAN, HANNAH, and JEREMIAH.

  TRAVIS, DANIEL,* "chiefe gunner in ye town of Boston, to salute
    shipps and look after ye artillery," at L5 per annum, 1680.

  WAIT, JOHN, Charlestown, juror, 1662, [spelt _Wayte_,] Boston, juror
    at the trials for witchcraft, 1680. RICHARD, Boston, a. 82 in 1678.
    He was marshal. RICHARD, Springfield, 1680, wounded by Indians,
    Oct. 5, 1675.

  WALES, JOHN,* and JOHN, JR.,* Dorchester, 1677.

  WALKER, ROBERT, Boston, aged 72 in 1679. He came from Manchester,
    Eng., where he was living in 1623.

  WAY, RICHARD, Lieutenant, Boston, juror, 1680. HENRY, Dorchester,
    1664.

  WEBB, THOMAS, came to N. England in 1671, in the ship Arabella, Capt.
    Richard Sprague, which sailed from Gravesend May 27.

  WHITTINGHAM, RICHARD,* Charlestown, 1693; had been in England in 1691.

  WILLEY, EDWARD,* Boston, juror, 1686.

  WILLIAMS, WILLIAM,* Boston, 1675, wife, Johanna; was pressed to go
    against the Indians in Philip's war, and was killed at Medfield,
    leaving "four small children."

  WILLIS, LAWRENCE,* Barnstable, 1644.

  WINSOR, JOSHUA,* Boston, constable, 1686.

  WISWALL, JOHN, Dorchester, witnesses a new deed of the town, (8: 4:
    1649,) made "because ye old deed was something decayed with ill
    keeping."




CAPITAL OFFENCES IN MASSACHUSETTS.


Thirteen offences were made capital by the original laws of
Massachusetts Bay; namely, Idolatry; Witchcraft; Blasphemy; Murder;
Bestiality; Sodomy; Adultery; Rape; Man-stealing; False-witness;
Conspiracy, or rebellion against the government; Cursing or smiting
the father or mother, after passing sixteen years of age, unless with
justifying provocation, or with unchristianly neglect in education;
Filial rebellion, after sixteen years of age.

To these were added, 1692, High Treason; Concealing the death of a
bastard child; Arson; Piracy.




JURIDICAL STATISTICS OF MERRIMACK COUNTY, N. H.

(Concluded from page 59.)


ATTORNEYS AT LAW.

----|-----------+---------------------+---------------+---------------
No. | _Towns._  |       _Names._      |_Native Place._|_When and where_
    |           |                     |               |  _graduated._
----|-----------+---------------------+---------------+---------------
  1 |Andover    |John H. Slack        |New London     |Dart. 1811
    |           |                     |               |
  2 |           |Samuel Butterfield   |Goffstown      |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
  3 |Boscawen   |Nathaniel Green      |Worcester, Ms. |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
  4 |           |Daniel Webster       |Franklin       |Dart. 1801
    |           |                     |               |
  5 |           |Ezekiel Webster      |Franklin       |Dart. 1804
    |           |                     |               |
  6 |           |Zachariah G. Whitman |Hanover, Ms.   |Harv. 1807
    |           |                     |               |
  7 |           |Francis Cogswell     |Dover          |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
  8 |           |Frederick Smith      |Gilmanton      |Dart. 1826
    |           |                     |               |
  9 |           |Lewis Smith          |Ashford, Ct.   |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 10 |Bradford   |Weare Tappan         |East Kingston  |Dart. 1811
    |           |                     |               |
 11 |           |James Whittle        |Weare          |Dart. 1823
    |           |                     |               |
 12 |           |Mason W. Tappan      |Newport        |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 13 |Chichester |Philip Carrigain     |Concord        |Dart. 1794
    |           |                     |               |
 14 |           |Zachariah Batchelder |Gloucester, Ms.|Dart. 1821
    |           |                     |               |
 15 |Concord    |E. St. L. Livermore  |Londonderry    |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 16 |           |Peter Green          |Worcester, Ms. |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 17 |           |Thomas W. Thompson   |Newbury, Ms.   |Harv. 1786
    |           |                     |               |
 18 |           |Arthur Livermore     |Londonderry    |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 19 |           |Charles Walker       |Concord        |Harv. 1787
    |           |                     |               |
 20 |           |Samuel Green         |Concord        |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 21 |           |Arthur Rogers        |Concord        |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 22 |           |Philip Carrigain     |Concord        |Dart. 1794
    |           |                     |               |
 23 |           |William Pickering    |Greenland      |Harv. 1797
    |           |                     |               |
 24 |           |Moody Kent           |Newbury, Ms.   |Harv. 1801
    |           |                     |               |
 25 |           |Isaac Gates          |               |Harv. 1802
    |           |                     |               |
 26 |           |Samuel A. Kimball    |Concord        |Dart. 1806
    |           |                     |               |
 27 |           |Lyman B. Walker      |Brookfield, Ms.|---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 28 |           |Moses H. Bradley     |Concord        |Dart. 1807
    |           |                     |               |
 29 |           |Samuel Fletcher      |Plymouth       |Dart. 1810
    |           |                     |               |
 30 |Concord    |John Whipple         |Hamilton, Ms.  |Dart. 1812
    |           |                     |               |
 31 |           |Amos A. Parker       |Fitzwilliam    |Vt. U. 1813
    |           |                     |               |
 32 |           |George Kent          |Concord        |Dart. 1814
    |           |                     |               |
 33 |           |Richard Bartlett     |Pembroke       |Dart. 1815
    |           |                     |               |
 34 |           |Samuel D. Bell       |Francestown    |Harv. 1816
    |           |                     |               |
 35 |           |Nathaniel P. Rogers  |Plymouth       |Dart. 1816
    |           |                     |               |
 36 |           |Nathaniel G. Upham   |Rochester      |Dart. 1820
    |           |                     |               |
 37 |           |William C. Thompson  |Salisbury      |Dart. 1820
    |           |                     |               |
 38 |           |Stephen C. Badger    |Warner         |Dart. 1823
    |           |                     |               |
 39 |           |William W. Stickney  |Enfield        |Dart. 1823
    |           |                     |               |
 40 |           |Ira Perley           |Boxford, Ms.   |Dart. 1822
    |           |                     |               |
 41 |           |William G. Webster   |Plymouth       |Dart. 1822
    |           |                     |               |
 42 |           |Ralph Metcalf        |Charlestown    |Dart. 1823
    |           |                     |               |
 43 |           |James Whittle        |Weare          |Dart. 1823
    |           |                     |               |
 44 |           |Charles H. Peaslee   |Gilmanton      |Dart. 1824
    |           |                     |               |
 45 |           |Franklin Pierce      |Hillsborough   |Bowd. 1824
    |           |                     |               |
 46 |           |Hamilton Hutchins    |Concord        |Dart. 1827
    |           |                     |               |
 47 |           |George Minot         |Bristol        |Dart. 1828
    |           |                     |               |
 48 |           |James Sullivan       |Exeter         |Dart. 1829
    |           |                     |               |
 49 |           |Calvin Ainsworth     |Littleton      |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 50 |           |Ephraim Eaton        |Candia         |Dart. 1833
    |           |                     |               |
 51 |           |Asa Fowler           |Pembroke       |Dart. 1833
    |           |                     |               |
 52 |           |Arthur Fletcher      |Bridgewater    |Yale. 1836
    |           |                     |               |
 53 |           |Josiah Minot         |Bristol        |Dart. 1837
    |           |                     |               |
 54 |           |William Butterfield  |Goffstown      |Dart. 1836
    |           |                     |               |
 55 |           |George G. Fogg       |Meredith       |Dart. 1839
    |           |                     |               |
 56 |           |Sylvester Dana       |Orford         |Dart. 1839
    |           |                     |               |
 57 |           |Chandler E. Potter   |Concord        |Dart. 1831
    |           |                     |               |
 58 |           |John H. George       |Concord        |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 59 |Dunbarton  |Jeremiah Stinson     |Dunbarton      |Dart. 1798
    |           |                     |               |
 60 |Dunbarton  |Caleb Stark, Jr.     |Dunbarton      |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 61 |Epsom      |Benjamin Moody       |W. Newbury, Ms.|---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 62 |           |Jonathan Steele, Jr. |Peterborough   |Wms. 1811
    |           |                     |               |
 63 |Franklin   |Parker Noyes         |South Hampton  |Dart. 1796
    |           |                     |               |
 64 |           |Thomas H. Pettingill |Salisbury      |Dart. 1804
    |           |                     |               |
 65 |           |George W. Nesmith    |Antrim         |Dart. 1820
    |           |                     |               |
 66 |           |Austin F. Pike       |Hebron         |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 67 |Henniker   |John Kelly           |Warner         |Dart. 1804
    |           |                     |               |
 68 |           |Artemas Rogers       |Billerica, Ms. |Harv. 1809
    |           |                     |               |
 69 |           |Samuel Smith         |Peterborough   |Dart. 1827
    |           |                     |               |
 70 |           |John J. Prentice     |Mont Vernon    |Dart. 1834
    |           |                     |               |
 71 |           |Lewis Smith          |Ashford, Ct.   |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 72 |Hooksett   |John Whipple         |Hamilton, Ms.  |Dart. 1812
    |           |                     |               |
 73 |           |Benjamin B. French   |Chester        |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 74 |           |Ebenezer French      |Newtown        |Dart. 1824
    |           |                     |               |
 75 |Hopkinton  |Stephen Scales       |Concord, Ms.   |Harv. 1763
    |           |                     |               |
 76 |           |Baruch Chase         |Sutton, Ms.    |Dart. 1786
    |           |                     |               |
 77 |           |John Harris          |Harvard, Ms.   |Harv. 1791
    |           |                     |               |
 78 |           |Joel Harris          |Harvard, Ms.   |Dart. 1804
    |           |                     |               |
 79 |           |Matthew Harvey       |Sutton         |Dart. 1800
    |           |                     |               |
 80 |           |John Whipple         |Hamilton, Ms.  |Dart. 1812
    |           |                     |               |
 81 |           |Horace Chase         |Unity          |Dart. 1814
    |           |                     |               |
 82 |           |Hamilton E. Perkins  |Hopkinton      |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 83 |           |William S. Morton    |               |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 84 |Loudon     |Timothy Darling      |Henniker       |Harv. 1822
    |           |                     |               |
 85 |           |James Whittle        |Weare          |Dart. 1823
    |           |                     |               |
 86 |           |John Doe             |Pembroke       |Dart. 1825
    |           |                     |               |
 87 |           |Edward S. Morris     |Gorham, Me.    |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 88 |New London |Stephen C. Badger    |Warner         |Dart. 1823
    |           |                     |               |
 89 |           |Walter P. Flanders   |Warner         |Dart. 1831
    |           |                     |               |
 90 |Northfield |Asa P. Cate          |Sanbornton     |Dart. M.A. 1844
    |           |                     |               |
 91 |           |Benjamin A. Rogers   |Northfield     |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 92 |Pembroke   |Arthur Rogers        |Concord        |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 93 |           |Moody Kent           |Newbury, Ms.   |Harv. 1801
    |           |                     |               |
 94 |           |Nathaniel Dearborn   |Chester        |
    |           |                     |               |
 95 |           |Boswell Stevens      |Promfret, Ct.  |Dart. 1804
    |           |                     |               |
 96 |           |Caleb Stark, Jr.     |Dunbarton      |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
 97 |           |John Parker          |Bedford        |
    |           |                     |               |
 98 |           |John E. Stanyan      |Pembroke       |Dart. 1840
    |           |                     |               |
 99 |           |Edward S. Morris     |Gorham, Me.    |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
100 |Pittsfield |Caleb Merrill        |Atkinson       |Dart. 1808
    |           |                     |               |
101 |           |Moses Norris, Jr.    |Pittsfield     |Dart. 1828
    |           |                     |               |
102 |           |Ithamar W. Beard     |Littleton, Ms. |Dart. 1837
    |           |                     |               |
103 |           |Charles H. Butters   |Pittsfield     |Dart. 1837
    |           |                     |               |
104 |           |James A. E. Merrill  |Pittsfield     |Dart. 1839
    |           |                     |               |
105 |           |George L. Merrill    |Pittsfield     |Dart. 1840
    |           |                     |               |
106 |Salisbury  |Thos. W. Thompson    |Newbury, Ms.   |Harv. 1786
    |           |                     |               |
107 |           |Moses Eastman        |Salisbury      |Dart. 1794
    |           |                     |               |
108 |           |Thomas W. Pettingill |Salisbury      |Dart. 1804
    |           |                     |               |
109 |           |Richard Fletcher     |Cavendish, Vt. |Dart. 1806
    |           |                     |               |
110 |           |Samuel I. Wells      |Sherburne, Ms. |Dart. 1814
    |           |                     |               |
111 |           |Elbridge F. Greenough|Boscawen       |Dart. 1828
    |           |                     |               |
112 |Sutton     |Harrison G. Harris   |Harvard, Ms.   |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
113 |           |Benjamin B. French   |Chester        |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
114 |           |Ebenezer French      |Newton         |Dart. 1824
    |           |                     |               |
115 |           |Ira B. Pearson       |Newport        |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
116 |Warner     |Jeremiah H. Woodman  |Sanbornton     |Dart. 1794
    |           |                     |               |
117 |           |Parker Noyes         |South Hampton  |Dart. 1796
    |           |                     |               |
118 |           |Henry B. Chase     } |Brookfield, Ms.|Dart. M.A.
    |           |                   } |               |1823
119 |           |Harrison G. Harris   |Harvard, Ms.   |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
120 |           |Herman Foster        |Andover, Ms.   |---- ----
    |           |                     |               |
121 |Wilmot     |John H. Slack        |New London     |Dart. 1811

[**continued]

----|---------------------+------+-----------------------------------------------
No. |_With whom read Law._|_Com._|_General Remarks._
    |                     |_prac._|
----|---------------------+------+-----------------------------------------------
  1 |J. Harris            |1814  |Practised also at Goffstown and Wilmot a
    |                     |      |  short time, and resided a short time in various
    |                     |      |  other places, lived at Georgetown,
    |                     |      |  D. C., now in Virginia, on a farm.
    |                     |      |
  2 |Thomas Jameson     } |      |
    |Josiah Forsaith    } |1817  |Practised in Epping till 1821, removed to
    |John Harris        } |      |  Andover, Rep. from Andover and P. Master.
    |Levi Woodbury      } |      |
    |                     |      |
  3 |Peter Green          |1787  |Practised also a short time in Hopkinton,
    |                     |      |  removed from the State, d., 1811.
    |                     |      |
  4 |T. W. Thompson     } |1805  |Practised in Boscawen till 1807, Portsmouth,
    |Christopher Gore   } |      |  till 1817. Rep. in Cong. from 1813 to '17,
    |                     |      |  removed to Boston, Rep. in Cong. from
    |                     |      |  1823 to '27, Sen. from 1827 to '39 and again
    |                     |      |  1845, Sec. of State of U. S., 1841 to '42.
    |                     |      |  LL.D. Dart., Harv., Coll. N. J., Columb.
    |                     |      |
  5 |James Sullivan     } |1807  |Rep. from Boscawen from 1821 to '25 and
    |Parker Noyes       } |      |  1827-28, Sen. 1815, Trustee of D. C. He fell
    |                     |      |  dead while arguing a case in the Court
    |                     |      |  House in Concord, April 10, 1829, a. 49.
    |                     |      |  Brother of Hon. Daniel Webster.
    |                     |      |
  6 |B. Whitman           |1811  |Practised also in Boston till 1831, then in
    |                     |      |  Hopkinton, d. in 1839.
    |                     |      |
  7 |Oliver Crosby        |1817  |Son of Hon. Amos Cogswell, born April 16,
    |                     |      |  1790. In Dartmouth Coll. three years,
    |                     |      |  Notary Public.
    |                     |      |
  8 |S. Moody           } |1829  |Removed to Boston and went into the
    |S. C. Lyford       } |      |  mercantile business.
    |R. M. Field        } |      |Asst. Clerk of House of Reps. 1843 to '45, and
    |                     |      |
  9 |H. Clossen         } |1841  |  also Clerk in 1845. Resides in Fishersville.
    |E. Burke           } |      |
    |                     |      |
 10 |Caleb Ellis        } |      |
    |H. Newton          } |1814  |He was born in March, 1790.
    |B. Chase           } |      |
    |                     |      |
 11 |Artemas Rogers     } |1827  |Practised also at Loudon and several other
    |S. Fletcher        } |      |  places, went South.
    |                     |      |
 12 |Weare Tappan         |1841  |In partnership with Weare Tappan, Esq.
    |                     |      |
 13 |A. Livermore         |      |See Clerks of Court of Sessions.
    |                     |      |
 14 |S. Moody           } |1828  |Removed to Wolfborough, Solicitor for Carroll
    |S. C. Lyford       } |      |  Co.
    |                     |      |
 15 |Samuel Livermore     |1783  |See Solicitors of Rockingham Co.
    |                     |      |
 16 |Samuel Livermore     |      |Counsellor 1788-89, removed to Boston, returned
    |                     |      |  and died at Concord.
 17 |James Sullivan       |1791  |See Solicitors of Hillsborough Co.
    |                     |      |
 18 |                     |1792  |See Judges of Superior Court.
    |                     |      |
 19 |John Pickering       |1793  |See Solicitors of Rockingham Co.
    |                     |      |
 20 |Peter Green        } |1793  |See Judges of Superior Court.
    |Jonathan Rawson    } |      |
    |                     |      |
 21 |E. St. L. Livermore  |1793  |Practised also at Gilmanton, Barrington, and
    |                     |      |  Pembroke.
 22 |A. Livermore         |      |See Clerks of Court of Sessions.
    |                     |      |
 23 |W. K. Atkinson       |1800  |See County Treasurers.
    |                     |      |
 24 |William Gordon     } |1804  |Practised also in Deerfield, and now resides in
    |Charles H. Atherton} |      |  Pembroke.
    |                     |      |
 25 |                     |      |He was at Concord in 1814.
    |                     |      |
 26 |Samuel Green         |1810  |Practised also at Dover, Clerk of Senate, Dep.
    |                     |      |  Sec., Rep. from Concord.
    |                     |      |
 27 |Phineas Walker       |1811  |Practised also at Gilford, Sol. of Strafford Co.
    |                     |      |  from 1819 to 1834, Rep. from Gilford, app'd
    |                     |      |  Att'y Gen'l Jan 10, 1843.
    |                     |      |
 28 |Samuel Green         |1815  |Practised in Concord but a short time, removed
    |                     |      |  to Sanbornton and to Bristol, Rep.
    |                     |      |  and Sen. Died in Concord in 1834, a. 52.
    |                     |      |
 29 |Samuel Green         |1815  |Rep. from Concord, Trustee of D. C., Trustee
    |                     |      |  and Treasurer of Phillips Academy, Andover,
    |                     |      |  where he now resides.
    |                     |      |
 30 |Baruch Chase         |1817  |See Registers of Deeds.
    |                     |      |
 31 |                     |      |Practised before at Epping, afterwards at New
    |                     |      |  Market and Kingston, and is now at Fitzwilliam.
    |                     |      |
 32 |Samuel Green       } |      |Rep. from Concord, Trustee of D. C., Cashier
    |William Sullivan   } |1817  |  of Concord Bank, Ed. of N. H. Statesman
    |                     |      |  and Concord Register, and of Boston Sun.
    |                     |      |
 33 |George Sullivan      |1818  |Sec. of State, N. H., 1825-'28, Clerk of Senate,
    |                     |      |  Rep. from Concord, removed to N. Y., and
    |                     |      |  d. in 1831.
    |                     |      |
 34 |George Sullivan      |1820  |Practised in Meredith to 1820, Chester 1830,
    |                     |      |  Concord 1839, Manchester, Rep. 1825, '26.
    |                     |      |  Sol. Rock. Co. 1823 to '28, Com. to revise
    |                     |      |  Statutes 1841, '42, Judge of the Police
    |                     |      |  Court of Manchester.
    |                     |      |
 35 |Richard Fletcher   } |1820  |Practised also at Plymouth, Ed. of Herald of
    |Parker Noyes       } |      |  Freedom. Died Oct. 16, 1846, a. 52.
    |                     |      |
 36 |David Barker         |1823  |See Judges of Superior Court.
    |                     |      |
 37 |Samuel Fletcher    } |1824  |Removed to Plymouth, where he now resides.
    |Parker Noyes       } |      |
    |                     |      |
 38 |H. B. Chase          |1826  |See Clerks of Superior Court.
    |                     |      |
 39 |H. B. Chase          |1826  |Practised in Concord till 1827, removed to
    |                     |      |  New Market, Rep. from New Market 1840,
    |                     |      |  '41, '42.
    |                     |      |
 40 |B. J. Gilbert        |1827  |Practised also at Hanover, Treasurer of D. C.,
    |                     |      |  Rep. from Concord.
    |                     |      |
 41 |Samuel Fletcher      |1827  |Practised also at New Hampton and Rochester.
    |                     |      |
 42 |Henry Hubbard      } |1827  |Practised also at Newport, Claremont, Sec. of
    |G. B Upham         } |      |  State, N. H. 1831 to '38, Clerk at Washington,
    |                     |      |  resumed the practice at Plymouth,
    |                     |      |  Bristol, Newport, Reg'r of Probate for Sul.
    |                     |      |  Co. 1845.
    |                     |      |
 43 |Artemas Rogers     } |1827  |See Bradford.
    |S. Fletcher        } |      |
    |                     |      |
 44 |S. Moody             |1827  |Rep. from Concord, Director and Clerk of C.
    |                     |      |  R. R. Corporation, Adj. Gen. from July 6,
    |                     |      |  1829, Trustee and Sec. of N. H. Asylum for
    |                     |      |  Insane, Director of Mechanics Bank,
    |                     |      |  Concord, Rep. in Cong. 1847.
    |                     |      |
 45 |J. Burnham         } |      |Practised in Hillsborough till 1838, Rep. 1829,
    |L. Woodbury        } |      |  '30, Speaker 1831, '32, Rep. in Cong. 1833 to
    |E. Parker          } |1827  |  '37, Sen. in Cong. 1837 to '42, Dis. Att'y U.
    |Dane Law School    } |      |  S. 1845, Maj. Gen. U. S. Army.
    |                     |      |
 46 |Richard Fletcher     |1830  |Treasurer of N. H. M. Fire Ins. Co.
    |                     |      |
 47 |N. G. Upham          |1831  |See County Treasurers.
    |                     |      |
 48 |George Sullivan      |1832  |Practised also in Pembroke, removed to
    |                     |      |  Michigan.
    |                     |      |
 49 |Henry A. Bellows   } |1835  |See Registers of Probate.
    |J. D. Stoddard     } |      |
    |                     |      |
 50 |S. Fletcher          |1837  |
    |                     |      |
 51 |C. H. Peaslee        |1837  |Clerk of Senate from 1835 to '40, Rep. from
    |                     |      |  Concord.
    |                     |      |
 52 |S. Fletcher          |1840  |
    |                     |      |
 53 |H. Hubbard         } |      |
    |J. J. Gilchrist    } |1840  |Practised also in Bristol.
    |S. D. Bell         } |      |
    |Ira Perley         } |      |
    |                     |      |
 54 |S. Butterfield       |1840  |Practised in Lucas Co., Ohio, and Gilmanton,
    |                     |      |  Asst. Clerk of Senate, 1845, '46, Editor of N.
    |                     |      |  H. Patriot, also of a paper in Lowell, Ms.,
    |                     |      |  and one in Nashua.
    |                     |      |
 55 |W. Lovell          } |      |Practised first in Gilmanton, Sec. of State, N.
    |S. C. Lyford       } |1841  |  H., 1846, Editor of Independent Democrat.
    |Dane Law School    } |      |
    |                     |      |
 56 |Pierce & Fowler    } |      |
    |Dane Law School    } |1842  |Editor of a paper.
    |                     |      |
 57 |J. Bartlett        } |1813  |Removed to Manchester, Editor of Manchester
    |Pierce & Fowler    } |      |  Democrat.
    |                     |      |
 58 |Pierce & Fowler    } |1846  |In partnership with C. H. Peaslee, Esq.
    |C. H. Peaslee      } |      |
    |                     |      |
 59 |Baruch Chase?        |1802  |He died in 1809 aged 36.
    |                     |      |
 60 |                     |1829  |Practised also in Pembroke and Concord,
    |                     |      |  Rep. from Dunbarton, previously admitted
    |                     |      |  to the Bar in Ohio.
    |                     |      |
 61 |Stephen Mooody       |1801  |
    |                     |      |
 62 |Jonathan Steele    } |      |See Solicitors of Rockingham Co.
    |C. H. Atherton     } |      |
    |                     |      |
 63 |T. W. Thompson       |1801  |See Solicitors of Hillsborough Co.
    |                     |      |
 64 |John Harris          |1808  |Practised in Canaan till 1822, also in
    |                     |      |  Salisbury, Rep. from Salisbury.
    |                     |      |
 65 |Parker Noyes         |1825  |Rep. from Franklin, 1831, '2, '4-'6, '8, '9, '44-6,
    |                     |      |  President of N. R. R. Corporation.
    |                     |      |
 66 |G. W. Nesmith        |      |In partnership with G. W. Nesmith, Esq.
    |                     |      |
 67 |J. H. Woodman        |1808  |Practised in Henniker till 1809, Northwood
    |                     |      |  till 1831, Exeter, Clerk of the House 1828,
    |                     |      |  Reg. Prob. Rock. Co. 1831 to '42, Rep. from
    |                     |      |  Northwood and Exeter, Counsellor 1846,
    |                     |      |  Editor of Exeter News Letter.
    |                     |      |
 68 |Joseph Locke       } |1813  |See Solicitors of Merrimack Co.
    |T. Rowe            } |      |
    |                     |      |
 69 |                     |      |
    |                     |      |
 70 |E. Parker          } |      |Practised also at Merrimack, Henniker, and
    |B. M. Farley       } |1837  |  Claremont, P. M. at Claremont.
    |                     |      |
    |R. M. Field        } |      |
 71 |H. Clossen         } |1841  |See Boscawen.
    |E. Burke           } |      |
    |                     |      |
 72 |Baruch Chase         |1817  |See Registers of Deeds.
    |                     |      |
 73 |Daniel French?       |1823  |Practised also at Sutton, Clerk of Judicial
    |                     |      |  Courts Sul. Co., Rep. from Newport, Asst.
    |                     |      |  Clerk and Clerk of H. of Reps, in Cong.,
    |                     |      |  Washington, D. C.
    |                     |      |
 74 |                     |1827  |Practised also in Sutton and Seabrook,
    |                     |      |  removed from State 1845.
    |                     |      |
 75 |E. Trowbridge      } |1770  |Practised in Hopkinton till 1772, where he
    |Francis Dana       } |      |  died, a. 33.
    |                     |      |
 76 |Bradley & Buck       |1789  |See Solicitors of Hillsborough Co.
    |                     |      |
 77 |Simeon Strong      } |1794  |See Judges of Superior Court.
    |Timothy Bigelow    } |      |
    |                     |      |
 78 |John Harris          |1807  |Removed to Mass.
    |                     |      |
 79 |John Harris          |1809  |Rep. from Hopkinton, Speaker of H. 1818-'20,
    |                     |      |  Pres. of Sen. 1827, Coun. 1828, Rep. in
    |                     |      |  Cong. 1821-25, Gov. 1830, District Judge U.
    |                     |      |  S. 1830.
    |                     |      |
 80 |Baruch Chase         |1817  |See Registers of Deeds.
    |                     |      |
 81 |Matthew Harvey       |1817  |See Judges of Probate.
    |                     |      |
 82 |M. Harvey          } |1833  |Removed to Boston, 1845.
    |H. Chase           } |      |
    |                     |      |
 83 |Samuel Fletcher      |      |
    |                     |      |
 84 |Artemas Rogers     } |1826  |Practised in Hillsborough 1826, Henniker 1827,
    |Samuel Hubbard     } |      |  Loudon till 1833. Studied at Gilm. Theo.
    |                     |      |  Sem., and settled as a minister in Warsaw, N. Y.
    |                     |      |
 85 |Artemas Rogers     } |1827  |See Bradford.
    |S. Fletcher        } |      |
    |                     |      |
 86 |B. Stevens           |1828  |Died several years since.
    |                     |      |
 87 |M. McDonald          |1844  |Practised in Loudon in 1844, removed to Pembroke.
    |                     |      |
 88 |H. B. Chase          |1826  |See Clerks of Superior Court.
    |                     |      |
 89 |Joseph Bell        } |      |
    |G. W. Nesmith      } |1835  |Rep. from New London 1841, '42.
    |J. D. Willard      } |      |
    |                     |      |
 90 |G. W. Nesmith        |      |See Solicitors of Merrimack Co.
    |                     |      |
 91 |Asa P. Cate          |1846  |Removed very soon after commencing practice to Gilmanton.
    |                     |      |
 92 |E. St. L. Livermore  |1793  |See Concord.
    |                     |      |
 93 |William Gordon     } |1804  |See Concord.
    |C. H. Atherton     } |      |
    |                     |      |
 94 |George Sullivan      |1806  |Practised also in Deerfield and Northwood.
    |                     |      |
 95 |Amos Kent            |1807  |See Judges of Probate.
    |                     |      |
 96 |                     |1829  |See Dunbarton.
    |                     |      |
 97 |Jonas B. Bowman      |1835  |Practised also in Hooksett and Bedford.
    |                     |      |
 98 |N. Clifford          |1844  |
    |                     |      |
 99 |M. McDonald          |1844  |See Loudon.
    |                     |      |
100 |Baruch Chase       } |1815  |Practised also in Chester and Barnstead, and
    |A. Kent            } |      |  in partnership with A. Kent, Esq.
    |                     |      |
101 |Isaac O. Barnes      |1831  |See Solicitors of Merrimack Co.
    |                     |      |
102 |M. Norris, Jr.       |1839  |Removed to Lowell, Ms.
    |L. B. Walker       } |      |
    |                     |      |
103 |I. Perley          } |      |
    |Hayes & Cogswell   } |1843  |
    |C. Merrill         } |      |
    |                     |      |
104 |I. Perley          } |1843  |Removed to Manchester, and died 1846.
    |C. Merrill         } |      |
    |                     |      |
105 |I. Perley          } |1844  |Practised a short time previous in Kentucky.
    |                     |      |
106 |James Sullivan       |1791  |See Solicitors of Hillsborough Co.
    |                     |      |
107 |T. W. Thompson       |1797  |See Clerks of Superior Court.
    |                     |      |
108 |John Harris          |1808  |See Franklin.
    |                     |      |
109 |Daniel Webster       |1809  |Removed to Boston, Rep. in General Court
    |                     |      |  from Boston, Rep. in Cong, from Mass.,
    |                     |      |  LL. D. at Dartmouth College.
    |                     |      |
110 |Richard Fletcher     |1819  |Practised in Salisbury till 1836, removed from
    |                     |      |  State.
    |                     |      |
111 |E. Webster         } |1831  |Practised in Danville, Columbia Co., Pa., to
    |R. Fletcher        } |      |  1838, went to Salisbury 1843, Rep. from
    |                     |      |  Boscawen 1843.
    |                     |      |
112 |John Harris          |1815  |Practised also in Warner.
    |                     |      |
113 |Daniel French?       |1823  |See Hooksett.
    |                     |      |
114 |                     |1827  |See Hooksett.
    |                     |      |
115 |Edmund Burke         |      |Removed to Chester, Vt.
    |                     |      |
116 |                     |1800  |Practised afterwards at Meredith, now at
    |                     |      |  Rochester, Rep. from Rochester.
    |                     |      |
117 |T. W. Thompson       |1801  |See Solicitors of Hillsborough Co.
    |                     |      |
118 |Baruch Chase         |1804  |See Registers of Probate.
    |                     |      |
    |                     |      |
119 |John Harris          |1815  |See Sutton.
    |                     |      |
120 |H. B. Chase          |1839  |Practised in Warner to 1841, removed to Manchester,
    |                     |      |  Rep. from Manchester.
    |                     |      |
121 |John Harris          |1814  |See Andover.




REASONS FOR GENEALOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS.

[COMMUNICATED FOR THE REGISTER.]


Perhaps at no time since the settlement of our country, has the public
mind been so deeply interested in genealogical research as it is at
the present. There is now perceived among all classes, a growing
disposition to make inquiries respecting the past. The National and
State archives are compelled to surrender the treasures which for
centuries have been locked up in their musty embrace. On every side
individuals are to be found, who are ransacking the homesteads of their
fathers, to acquire materials for biography and to settle the questions
respecting their ancestors which inquisitiveness suggests.

Some of these individuals appear to be urged on by curiosity alone. If,
through their inquiries, they ascertain that they have descended from
an old and celebrated family, the discovered fact seems to repay them
for all the toil at the expense of which that fact may be brought to
light. To establish their claim to descent from some noted warrior of
the age of chivalry, or from some distinguished statesman of a later
date, they are willing, not only to spend laborious days and sleepless
nights, but their purses are open, and their gratitude is freely
expressed, to any one who shall furnish them with a link to perfect the
chain which may connect them with their supposed ancestors.

A family pride, either innate or acquired, leads other inquirers
to their task. It is the height of their ambition to be able to
trace their lineage to the first settlers of our country. To have
derived their existence from the noble band who left a home rendered
insupportable by religious persecution, and crossed the stormy Atlantic
in the frail Mayflower, is to them a source of the highest pleasure. In
their efforts to establish this derivation, facts of great importance
in the local history of our country have been elicited. These efforts
have given birth to most of our town histories, whereby materials,
invaluable to our future historiographers and biographers are preserved
from the ravages of time. These men in consequence of their researches
become the _nuclei_ of associations for historical, genealogical,
and biographical pursuits, which, here and there, are springing into
existence. These associations are awakening the mass of the people to
a sense of the importance of the objects for which they were formed.
Many young men, naturally enthusiastic in every thing they undertake,
have caught the spirit of antiquarian research. From them we have much
to hope. New modes of investigation may be projected, new plans for
arranging and preserving historical and genealogical discoveries may be
proposed, and new deductions from these discoveries may be made. Such
are some of the advantages which may be confidently predicted as the
result of these labors in the genealogical field.

Other inquirers are inclined to the study of genealogy from the
_argumentum ad pecuniam_. The vast amount of property which remains
in abeyance in the old world, has arrested their attention. Every
announcement of estates wanting heirs stimulates anew their
investigations; and the presiding genius of the age suggests to them
the possibility of finding themselves entitled to this unclaimed
property.

How important, then, that a genealogical record should exist, wherein
the heirs of families should have a permanent place! How many bitter
controversies respecting heirship would thereby be prevented! How many
fraudulent distributions of property would thus be defeated! How many
of those who have been rendered destitute by the deceptions of false
claimants, would be restored to their legal rights, if such a record
had been hitherto properly kept!

The disputes of heirs relative to the distribution of estates have
frequently occasioned difficulty in our civil courts. In some cases
property has been carried to collateral heirs, because lineal
descendants could not sufficiently prove their derivation, and in other
cases, those who would have inherited at law as the representatives of
a deceased parent, are excluded by the intrigues of living co-heirs.
Frauds, as the reports of our courts attest, have been perpetrated
by those, who, from a similarity of name, though unrelated, have
emboldened themselves to step in and exclude others who were legally
entitled to the property, but who were unable to furnish sufficient
evidence to establish their claim.

The steamers from England often bring news of the extinguishment of
European resident heirs to estates in that country; and much money
has been expended in the research of ancestry, by our own citizens,
who have imagined themselves to be the true heirs to this property.
The families, from which the greater number of these estates descend,
are old families; branches of which came to this country prior to
the commencement of the eighteenth century, and the trans-atlantic
branch of the stock has run out. When this is the case, it is of high
importance that the American descendants of these families should be
able, clearly and conclusively, to prove their derivation. In this
view, is it not a matter of surprise, that until the present year,
the publication of a journal which could furnish information of so
important a character as that which now demands so great a share of the
public attention, has been delayed?

A Register which shall contain "Biographical Memoirs, Sketches,
and Notices of persons who came to North America, especially to
New England, before Anno Domini 1700; showing from what places in
Europe they came, their Families there, and their descendants in this
country;" which shall give "full and minute Genealogical Memoirs and
Tables, showing the lineage and descent of Families, from the earliest
dates to which they can be authentically traced down to the present
time, with their branches and connections," cannot but be invaluable.
If properly conducted, if the severest scrutiny is exercised by the
writers over the materials which come under their notice, in the
preparation of genealogical articles, the Register will become an
authority in our courts, and will save immense amounts of money to
the large number of individuals, who are attempting to trace their
descent from European families. The policy of the law which invests,
first, lineal descendants with intestate estates, and in the absence
of lineal descendants, carries the estates to collateral heirs, in
preference to an escheat to the State, is generally admitted. Were it
not so, one great incentive to industry would be destroyed. The desire
of securing their offspring against want, is a prevalent characteristic
of New England parents. Assiduity and energy in the pursuit of wealth,
which have overcome so many obstacles in our inhospitable climate,
have their origin in the desire to advance the interests of posterity.
How desirable, then, in order to carry out these views, does the
Genealogical Register become! Such a publication affords the only
permanent depository for such records as will serve to insure the
correct distribution of the property of deceased persons; and no parent
who wishes the avails of his labors to be transmitted to his remote
descendants can fail to perceive the utility of such a work, or can
decline to furnish such information for its columns, as will enable
those who come after him to prove their descent.

The frauds continually practised by those who assume to be heirs to
every unclaimed estate, have become a matter of notoriety in English
legal practice; and though there are many estates now in abeyance in
England for want of discovered legal heirs, the bar and the bench
in England are exceedingly distrustful of the evidence forwarded
by claimants in this country. No doubt many of these claimants are
sincere in the belief that they are true heirs to those estates;
but the evidence upon which that belief is founded generally proves
to be of too unsatisfactory a character to procure a judgment of
the English tribunals in their favor; whereas, had materials been
previously collected and given to the world through the columns of an
authoritative periodical, the evidence thus furnished would be almost
irresistible to any court of law.

We can ask with confidence the attention of all travellers to this
journal. Communications relative to the antiquities of the countries
they may visit; descriptions of monuments which exist, with the
inscriptions thereon; and such information as they may communicate
respecting themselves which may be interesting to the families to
which they belong: all these will be within the scope of this work.
It needs but an announcement of these facts, to obtain from those
interested, communications which will not only throw light upon the
pedigree of families, but will contain many accounts interesting to
genealogists, biographers, and historians, which otherwise would be
swept into oblivion; and in this department of the periodical, the
public will find amusing, entertaining, and instructive pages. In this
view of it, the New England Historical and Genealogical Register should
be extensively patronized; and we are happy to learn that thus far it
meets with the decided approbation of the community.




OUR ANCESTORS.


"Our ancestors, though not perfect and infallible in all respects, were
a religious, brave, and virtuous set of men, whose love of liberty,
civil and religious, brought them from their native land into the
American deserts."--_Rev. Dr. Mayhew's Election Sermon_, 1754.

       *       *       *       *       *

"To let the memory of these men die is injurious to posterity; by
depriving them of what might contribute to promote their steadiness
to their principles, under hardships and severities."--_Rev. Dr. E.
Calamy's Preface to his Account of Ejected Ministers._




COMPLETE LIST OF CONGREGATIONAL MINISTERS IN THE EASTERN PART OF
ROCKINGHAM COUNTY, NEW HAMPSHIRE, FROM ITS SETTLEMENT TO THE PRESENT
TIME; TOGETHER WITH NOTES ON THE MINISTERS AND CHURCHES.

BY THE REV. JONATHAN FRENCH OF NORTH HAMPTON.

(Continued from page 46.)


  -----------+--------------------+-----------------+--------------+----------
    _Towns._ |    _Ministers._    | _Native Place._ |    _Born._   |_Graduated_
  -----------+--------------------+-----------------+--------------+----------
  Exeter     |John Wheelwright    |England          |ab.       1594|Cam.  Eng.
             |Samuel Dudley       |England          |          1606|
  The present|John Clark          |Newbury, Ms.     |June 24,  1670|Harv. 1690
  1st Church |                    |                 |              |
             |John Odlin          |Boston, Ms.      |Nov. 18,  1681|Harv. 1702
             |Woodbridge Odlin    |Exeter, N. H.    |April 28, 1718|Harv. 1738
             |Isaac Mansfield     |Marblehead, Ms.  |          1750|Harv. 1767
             |William F. Rowland  |Plainfield, Ct.  |          1761|Dart. 1784
             |John Smith          |Wethersfield, Ct.|              |Yale, 1821
             |William Williams    |Wethersfield, Ct.|Oct. 2,   1797|Yale, 1816
             |Joy H. Fairchild    |Guilford, Ct.    |April 24, 1789|Yale, 1813
             |Roswell D. Hitchcock|E. Machias, Me.  |Aug. 15,  1817|Amh.  1836

[**continued]

  -----------+--------------------+--------------+--------------------
    _Towns._ |    _Ministers._    |  _Settled._  |_Dismissed or died._
  -----------+--------------------+--------------+--------------------
  Exeter     |John Wheelwright    |          1638|rem. to Wells, 1642
             |Samuel Dudley       |          1650|d.             1683
  The present|John Clark          |Sept. 21, 1698|d.   July 25,  1705
  1st Church |                    |              |
             |John Odlin          |Nov. 11,  1706|d.   Nov. 20,  1754
             |Woodbridge Odlin    |Sept. 28, 1743|d.   March 10  1776
             |Isaac Mansfield     |Oct. 9,   1776|dis. Aug. 22,  1787
             |William F. Rowland  |June 2,   1790|dis. Dec. 5,   1828
             |John Smith          |March 12, 1829|dis. Feb. 14,  1838
             |William Williams    |May 31,   1836|dis. Oct. 1,   1842
             |Joy H. Fairchild    |Sept. 20, 1843|dis. July 30,  1844
             |Roswell D. Hitchcock|Nov. 19,  1845|


NOTES.

EXETER. The settlement of Exeter commenced in 1638. The founder and
first minister of the place was the _Rev. John Wheelwright_, mentioned
by Dr. Belknap as "a gentleman of learning, piety, and zeal." He came
from Lincolnshire, England, and landed at Boston, Ms., May 26, 1636.
"He and Mary, his wife, were admitted to the Boston church, on the
12th of June." A settlement had been made, as early as 1625, at Mount
Wollaston, afterwards Braintree, Ms. In 1634, Boston was enlarged,
so as to include Mount Wollaston. Mr. Wheelwright became preacher to
the people at that place. These circumstances account for his being
mentioned in some publications, as having removed to New Hampshire
from Braintree; and in others from the church in Boston. Antinomian
sentiments were imputed to Mr. Wheelwright. He was a brother of the
famous Mrs. Ann Hutchinson, whose Antinomian zeal brought her into
public notice. At a Fast in Boston, in December, 1636, Mr. Wheelwright
preached one of the sermons. It gave offence, as it was judged to
reflect on ministers and magistrates. He was said to have asserted,
"that they walked in such a way of salvation as was no better than a
covenant of works:" and also, that "he exhorted such as were under a
covenant of grace to combat them, as their greatest enemies." [_Neal's
New Eng._, Vol. I. p. 186.]

Mr. Wheelwright was summoned, by the civil court, "to give in his
answer explicitly, whether he would acknowledge his offence, in
preaching his late seditious sermon, or abide the sentence of the
court." His answer was, "that he had been guilty of no sedition nor
contempt; that he had delivered nothing but the truth of Christ; and,
for the application of his doctrine, that was made by others, and not
by himself, he was not responsible." [_Neal's N. E._, I. 190.]

Not being inclined to comply with the request of the court, that he
would, "out of a regard to the public peace, leave the Colony, of his
own accord," he was sentenced "to be disfranchised, to be banished
the jurisdiction, and to be taken into custody immediately, unless he
should give security to depart before the end of March." Appeal not
being admitted, and declining to give bail, he was taken into custody,
but released the next day, on "declaring himself willing to submit to a
simple banishment." [_Neal's N. E._, I. 191.]

Mr. Wheelwright, having purchased lands of the Indians at Squamscot
Falls, with a number of his adherents began a plantation in 1638,
which, according to agreement made with Mason's agent, they called
Exeter. "Having obtained a dismission from the church in Boston, _they
formed themselves_ into a church; and judging themselves without the
jurisdiction of Massachusetts, they combined into a separate body
politic," &c. [_Belknap_, I. 37.] This combination continued three
years. The names of those dismissed from Boston were John Wheelwright,
Richard Merrys, Richard Bulgar, Philemon Purmont, Isaac Gosse,
Christopher Marshall, George Baytes, Thomas Wardell, William Wardell.
[_Dr. Belknap from Boston Chh. Records._] "When Exeter came under the
jurisdiction of Massachusetts, Mr. Wheelwright, being still under
sentence of banishment, with those of his church who were resolved
to adhere to him, removed into the Province of Maine, and settled at
Wells. He was soon after restored, upon a slight acknowledgment, to
the freedom of the Colony; and in 1647 accepted an invitation from the
church in Hampton, and settled as colleague with Mr. Dalton." "After
his dismission from Hampton church he went to England, where he was in
favor with Cromwell, with whom he had in early life been associated
at the University of Cambridge in England. After Charles II. came
to the throne, Mr. Wheelwright returned to New England, and took up
his residence at Salisbury, where he died, November 15, 1679, aged,
probably, about 85 years." [_Dow's Hist. Address at Hampton._]

Neal, although his sympathies were with the opponents of Wheelwright,
mentions him as being "afterwards an useful minister in the town of
Hampton." Dr. Cotton Mather, while he justifies the proceedings of
the court against Mr. Wheelwright, accounts him "a man that had the
root of the matter in him." Having quoted at large Mr. Wheelwright's
address to the government, Dr. Mather says, "Upon this most ingenious
acknowledgement, he was restored unto his former liberty, and
interest among the people of God; and lived almost 40 years after,
a valued servant of the church, in his generation." Referring to
some publications of the day, in which Mr. Wheelwright was charged
with being heretical, Dr. Mather said, "_this good man_ published a
vindication of himself, against the wrongs that had been done unto
him." In this vindication were quoted the words of Mr. Cotton--"I
do conceive and profess, that our brother Wheelwright's doctrine
is according to God, in the points controverted." Mr. Wheelwright
also produced "a declaration from the whole general court of the
Colony, signed by the secretary," in which "they now signify, that
Mr. Wheelwright hath, for these many years, approved himself a sound
orthodox, and profitable minister of the gospel, among the churches of
Christ." [_Magnalia_, II. 443.]

Dr. Mather's own opinion of Mr. Wheelwright was expressed in a letter
to G. Vaughan, Esq., in 1708. "Mr. Wheelwright was always a gentleman
of the most unspotted morals imaginable; a man of a most unblemished
reputation." "His worst enemies never looked on him as chargeable with
the least ill practices." [_Belknap's Biog._, III. 338.]

The sermon of Mr. Wheelwright which gave offence in 1636, is still
preserved in manuscript. The Hon. Jeremiah Smith, late of Exeter, N.
H., who had read it, and who was fully competent to judge of its legal
bearings, said that he found in it no ground for a charge of sedition.
The charge was "wholly groundless, there was not the least color for
it." [_Judge Smith's MS._]

Mr. Wheelwright was settled over the first church in Salisbury, Ms.,
Dec. 9, 1662. [_Rev. J. B. Felt._] In 1671, at the ordination of Rev.
Joshua Moody, at Portsmouth, Mr. Wheelwright gave the Right Hand
of Fellowship. One of Mr. Wheelwright's descendants, of the ninth
generation, Rev. Rufus Wheelwright Clark, is now pastor of that church
in Portsmouth. Mr. Wheelwright's last will "names his son Samuel,
son-in-law Edward Rishworth, his grandchildren Edward Lyde, Mary White,
Mary Maverick, and William, Thomas, and Jacob Bradbury." [_Farmer's
Geneal. Reg._] Thomas Wheelwright of Wells, was also a son of Rev.
John Wheelwright. For an interesting account, containing other facts
respecting Mr. Wheelwright, see "Collectanea" by Hon. J. Kelly, in
Exeter News Letter, May 24, 1842.

Two of the descendants of the Rev. Mr. Wheelwright, of the seventh
generation, are now living in Newburyport. Abraham Wheelwright, Esq.,
and Ebenezer Wheelwright, Esq., both merchants. The first is the oldest
man in the place who is still able to walk abroad, having attained to
the age of 90 years. He was a soldier in the Revolutionary war, and
was distinguished for patriotism and bravery. He was in the field with
Washington in most of his actions, and was several times taken prisoner
by the British, but always effected his escape.

"The first church formed in Exeter became extinct a few years after
its formation." [_Dow's Hist. Address; Farmer & Moore._] "An attempt
was made by the remaining inhabitants of Exeter to form themselves
into a church, and settle Mr. Batchelder, who had been minister at
Hampton." This the general court prohibited, on account of their
divisions; and directed them to "defer gathering a church, or any other
such proceeding, till they, or the court of Ipswich, upon further
satisfaction of their reconciliation and fitness, should give allowance
therefor." [_Belknap's Biog._, I. 58.]

The _Rev. Samuel Dudley_ was the _second minister_ in Exeter. It does
not appear that there was any formal church organization there, during
his ministry. In some circumstances, a minister labored with a people
several years, before a church was formally organized. Rev. Joshua
Moody was ten or twelve years in the ministry at Portsmouth, before a
church was gathered in that place.

Mr. Dudley was son of Gov. Thomas Dudley, who came to New England in
1630, and of whom Farmer speaks, as "a man of approved wisdom and
godliness." Gov. Dudley was, however, among the most zealous of those
who effected the banishment of Wheelwright. Cotton Mather says, "His
orthodox piety had no little influence unto the deliverance of the
country, from the contagion of the famalistical errors, which had like
to have overturned all." [_Mag._, I. 122.]

A short passage from Farmer should be introduced here, not merely as
relating to the persecution, which led to the settlement of Exeter,
by Wheelwright, but as it gives a just representation of the Puritan
character in those times. "Through the whole of his life, Governor
Dudley opposed and denounced what he deemed to be heresy with an honest
zeal, which, in these days of universal toleration, is sometimes
referred to, as a blot upon his fame. But the candid and judicious, who
are acquainted with the history of the Puritans, and the circumstances
under which 'they came into a corner of the new world, and with an
immense toil and charge made a wilderness habitable, on purpose there
to be undisturbed in the exercise of their worship,' will never be
found censuring and railing at their errors. They will rather wonder
at the wisdom of the views, the disinterested nobleness of principle,
and self-sacrificing heroism, displayed by these wonderful men, to whom
the world is indebted for the most perfect institutions of civil and
religious freedom known among men." [_Am. Quar. Reg._ Vol. XV. 301.]

Mr. Dudley of Exeter is noted in Fitch's MS. as "a person of good
capacity and learning." [_Belknap_, I. 53.] He was born in England
in 1606. In New England, he resided in Cambridge, in Boston, and in
Salisbury. He was Representative of Salisbury in 1644. His ministry
in Exeter he commenced in 1650, and died there in 1683, aged 77.
In 1656 the inhabitants of Portsmouth voted "to give an invitation
to Mr. Samuel Dudley, son of Thomas Dudley, the Deputy Governor of
Massachusetts, to be their minister, and to give him a salary of eighty
pounds a year." He accepted the proposition, and agreed to visit them
the next spring; but it does not appear that he ever came. [_Adams's
Annals of Portsmouth._] Mr. Dudley's first wife was Mary, daughter of
Governor Winthrop. She died at Salisbury, April 12, 1643. He had a
second and a third wife. Besides his descendants of the name of Dudley,
there are numerous families in New Hampshire, and elsewhere, who trace
their descent from Mr. Dudley of Exeter. Among his descendants were the
wife of Gen. Henry Dearborn; the wife of Rev. John Moody; the wife of
John Burgin; the wife of Gov. James Sullivan; the grandmother of Tobias
Lear, Washington's secretary; and also the mother of Gov. Langdon.
For a long list of descendants of Rev. Samuel Dudley, see Exeter News
Letter, Aug. 31, 1846.

The _Rev. John Clark_ was the _third_ minister in Exeter.

A church, which continues under the style of the First Church in
Exeter, was _organized_ in September, 1698. In the Hampton Church
Records is the following entry: "1698. Sept. 11, Dismissed, in order
to their being incorporated into a church state, in Exeter, Mr. Moses
Leavitt, Mr. Henry Wadley, Jno. Scribner, Mrs. Elisabeth Clark, Mrs.
Elisabeth Gilman, wife of Cap. Gilman, Mrs. Tipping, Mrs. Deborah
Coffin, Goodwife Bean, Mrs. Mary Gilman, Mrs. Elisabeth Wadley, Mrs.
Sarah Dudley, Sarah Sewal, Deborah Sinclar. And Mr. Wear and Cap. Dow
were chosen, messengers of the church, to assist in the ordination of
Mr. Jno. Clark, at Exeter." The persons who have been mentioned, as
having been formerly admitted to the church in Hampton, (most or all of
whom lived in Exeter,) constituted nearly half the number, who entered
into a church state at Exeter.

The most ancient volume extant of the records of the present "First
Church of Christ in Exeter" commences thus, "The order of proceeding in
_gathering_ a particular Church in Exeter."

"After conferring together, and being mutually satisfied in each other,
we drew up a confession of faith, and the terms of the covenant, which
we all signed, the sabbath before ordination. And having sent for the
Rev. Mr. J. Hale, (who preached the ordination sermon,) Mr. Woodbridge,
Mr. Pike, Mr. Rolfe, Mr. Cotton, and Mr. Toppan, who accordingly came;
and on the twenty-first of September, 1698, Mr. Hale, Woodbridge, Pike,
and Cotton, laid on hands, Mr. Pike praying before the imposition
of hands; Mr. Woodbridge gave the charge; Mr. Cotton gave the right
hand of fellowship; and we were, by the elders, and messengers, of
the several churches, _owned as a Church of Christ_, and John Clark
declared to be a minister of Christ Jesus." No doubt Mr. John Hale, of
Beverly, was the preacher. He had recently married the widowed mother
of Mr. Clark. The other ministers mentioned were undoubtedly Rev.
Messrs. Benjamin Woodbridge, minister first at Bristol, R. I., who
preached at Kittery in 1688, and, as early as 1699, in Medford; John
Pike of Dover; Benjamin Rolfe of Haverhill, Ms., who was killed by the
Indians; John Cotton of Hampton; and Christopher Toppan of Newbury. The
father of Rev. John Clark of Exeter was Nathaniel Clark, a merchant
of Newbury, and one of the early settlers of that town, who married,
Nov. 25, 1663, Elisabeth Somerby, daughter of Henry Somerby, one of the
grantees of Newbury. Nathaniel Clark was in the expedition to Canada in
1690, and died there, Aug. 25, aged 46, having been wounded on board
the ship "Six Friends." His widow, Elisabeth Clark, married Rev. John
Hale of Beverly, Aug. 8, 1698. Mr. Hale was chaplain in the expedition
in which Nathaniel Clark was mortally wounded. A particular account of
Mr. Hale does not belong to this article. Of his views and influence in
the affairs of the "Salem Witchcraft" see Amer. Quar. Reg. Vol. X. pp.
247, 248. In that account there is, however, doubtless a mistake as to
the original name of the widow of Nathaniel Clark. See also Magnalia,
II. 408, and Coffin's Newbury, p. 298. Rev. Mr. Clark of Exeter was
born at Newbury, June 24, 1670, gr. H. C. 1690, and ordained at Exeter,
Sept. 21, 1698; "married Elisabeth Woodbridge, a daughter of the Rev.
Benjamin Woodbridge, already mentioned, and granddaughter of Rev. John
Woodbridge, first minister of Andover, and also of Rev. John Ward,
first minister of Haverhill, June 19, 1694,--Rev. John Clark died July
25, 1705," aged 35. His children were Benjamin, Nathaniel, Deborah, and
Ward, who was the first minister of Kingston. The mother of Elisabeth
Woodbridge was Mary, daughter of John Ward.

The Woodbridge family has furnished a number of ministers distinguished
for talents, learning, piety, and an excellent spirit. Were the notices
of them collected, which are scattered in various publications, they
would form an interesting memoir.

_Rev. John Odlin_, the fourth minister of Exeter, and the second
minister of the present First Church, was son of Elisha, and grandson
of John Odlin, one of the first settlers of Boston. Rev. John Odlin
was born in Boston, Nov. 18, 1681, gr. H. C. 1702, ordained at Exeter,
Nov. 11, 1706. He married, Oct. 21, 1709, Mrs. Elisabeth Woodbridge
Clark, widow of his predecessor. Mr. Odlin was one of the proprietors
of Gilmanton. His son, Capt. John Odlin, was one of the settlers of
that town. Another of his sons, Dudley, was a physician. Elisha gr. H.
C. 1731, and settled in the ministry in Amesbury; Woodbridge was his
father's colleague and successor in Exeter. Mrs. Odlin, wife of Rev.
John Odlin, d. Dec. 6, 1729. His second marriage was Oct. 22, 1730,
with Elisabeth Briscoe, widow of Robert Briscoe, and formerly wife of
Lieut. James Dudley, and daughter of Samuel Leavitt. Mr. Odlin d. Nov.
20, 1754, aged about 73, nearly eleven years after his son became his
colleague. [_Farmer's Reg._; _Lancaster's Gilmanton_; _Exeter Church
Cov._] In 1743, May 18, the church "voted to concur with the vote of
the town in choosing Mr. Woodbridge Odlin to settle as a colleague
with his hon'd father the Rev. John Odlin." During the same month
"there were a number of the church separated from their communion."
The circumstances will be noticed in the account of the formation of
another church.

_Rev. Woodbridge Odlin_ was ordained colleague pastor Sept. 28, 1743.
The exercises were, Prayer by Rev. Wm. Allen of Greenland; Sermon
by Rev. Mr. Odlin from Col. i: 28; Charge by Rev. Caleb Cushing of
Salisbury; Right Hand by Rev. Mr. Rust of Stratham; and Prayer by Rev.
Joseph Adams of Newington. Rev. W. Odlin was born at Exeter, April 28,
1718; gr. H. C. 1738, m. Oct. 23, 1755, Mrs. Abigail Strong, widow
of Rev. Job Strong of Portsmouth, and daughter of Col. Peter Gilman.
Mr. W. Odlin d. March 10, 1776, aged 57. His children were Dudley,
Woodbridge, Peter, Elisabeth, Abigail, who was the first wife of Hon.
Nathaniel Gilman of Exeter, John, Mary Ann, who was wife of Thomas
Stickney of Concord, and Charlotte, wife of Jeremiah Stickney of Dover.
[_Lancaster's Gilmanton_; _Exeter Church Records_.] Rev. W. Odlin,
during his ministry of more than thirty-two years, baptized 1,276, and
admitted 36 persons to the church. [_Chh. Records._] The "Half-way
covenant," as it was often called, was then in use, and this accounts
for the great disproportion between the admissions to full communion
and the baptisms. "It provided that all persons of sober life and
correct sentiments without being examined as to a change of heart
might profess religion or become members of the church and have their
children baptized though they did not come to the Lord's table." [_Dr.
Hawes' Lectures_, p. 149.]

_Rev. Isaac Mansfield_ succeeded Rev. W. Odlin, and was ord. Oct. 9,
1776. The exercises were Prayer by the Rev. Mr. Tucker of Newbury;
Sermon by Rev. Mr. Thayer of Hampton, from Ezek. xxxiii: 7-9; Charge
by Rev. Mr. Fogg of Kensington; Right Hand by Rev. Mr. Webster of
Salisbury, 2nd chh.; Prayer by Rev. Edmund Noyes of Salisbury, 1st
chh. There were also invited on the ordaining council the churches in
Brentwood, Dover, Epping, Greenland, 1st in Cambridge, 2nd in Scituate,
and 2nd in Amesbury. Mr. Mansfield was born at Marblehead, Ms., in
1750, gr. H. C. 1767, also M. A. at D. C., 1770; married Mary, daughter
of Nathaniel Clap of Scituate, Ms. Mr. Mansfield, "according to his
agreement with the parish," was dismissed Aug. 22, 1787, by a council
of three churches, of which Messrs. Fogg, Langdon, then of Hampton
Falls, and Macclintock were pastors. The result is in the church
records. It does not state the circumstances which produced "such a
crisis as to render a separation eligible on both parts;" but the
council say, "We feel ourselves constrained by duty and love to testify
the sense we have of the valuable ministerial gifts and qualifications
with which God hath furnished Mr. Mansfield, and which have been well
approved not only among his own people, but by the churches in this
vicinity." During Mr. Mansfield's ministry of nearly eleven years, 245
were baptized, and 12 admitted to the church. Mr. Mansfield removed to
Marblehead. He became a magistrate, and was afterwards known as Isaac
Mansfield, Esq. His sons, Theodore and Isaac, were born in Exeter. Mrs.
Mansfield died in Marblehead, Feb. 11, 1806, aged 59. He d. in Boston,
Sept., 1826, aged 76. His father was also Isaac Mansfield, Esq., of
Marblehead: "a gentleman of handsome literary acquirements, and spent
his days in piety and usefulness." He died April 12, 1792, aged 72.
He is supposed to be the same who graduated at H. C., 1742. [_Alden's
Col._]

_Rev. William Frederick Rowland_ was born in Plainfield, Ct., in
1761, gr. D. C. 1784, also M. A. at Yale, 1787. He was ordained
in Exeter, June 2, 1790. The churches invited were Hampton Falls,
North Hampton, Hampton, 2nd Salisbury, 1st Newbury, 1st Newburyport,
Greenland, Stratham, 2nd Exeter, Brattle Street, Boston, Charlestown,
2nd Portland. The exercises were, Prayer by Dr. Macclintock; Sermon
by Dr. Thacher of Boston; Ordaining Prayer by Dr. Langdon; Charge by
Dr. Webster; Right Hand by Dr. Macclintock; Prayer by Dr. Morse. Mr.
Rowland m. Sally, daughter of Col. Eliphalet Ladd of Portsmouth. She
died Oct. 12, 1798, at the early age of 24. Extracts from the sermon
of Dr. Buckminster of Portsmouth at her funeral, may be found in
Alden's Collection, Vol. II., p. 66. Mr. Rowland's 2nd marriage was
with Ann, daughter of Col. Eliphalet Giddings of Exeter. She died June
13, 1811, aged 31. Her infant was buried with her. After a ministry of
thirty-eight years, Mr. Rowland asked and received a dismission. It
took place Dec. 5, 1828. The ministers of the council, whose result is
in the church records, were Rev. Messrs. Hurd of Exeter, Sanford of
Newmarket, Spofford of Brentwood, and Cummings of Stratham. Mr. Rowland
deceased June 10, 1843, aged 82, leaving four children, Sarah Ann, Mary
Elisabeth, William Frederick, and Theresa Orne. Mary Elisabeth died in
1845. The sermon at the funeral of Mr. Rowland was preached by the Rev.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Rowland's father was Rev. David S. Rowland, gr. Yale,
1743; settled first at Plainfield, Ct., and afterwards at Windsor, Ct.;
where his son, Henry A. Rowland, was ordained his successor, in 1790.
During Mr. Rowland's ministry at Exeter, there were 128 admissions
to the church, and 295 baptisms. He possessed good talents, was very
respectable as a preacher, and gifted in prayer.

_Rev. John Smith_ was born in Wethersfield, Ct.; gr. Y. C., 1821;
ordained at Trenton, N. J., March 7, 1826; dismissed Aug., 1828.
Inst. in Exeter, March 12, 1829. Exercises on the occasion: Prayer by
Rev. Abraham Burnham of Pembroke, N. H.; Sermon by Rev. N. Bouton of
Concord; Prayer, Rev. Mr. Miltimore of Newbury; Charge, Rev. Dr. Dana,
Newburyport; Right Hand, Rev. Mr. Hurd of Exeter; Address, Rev. Mr.
Withington of Newbury; Prayer by Rev. Mr. Winslow, then of Dover, now
of Boston. Mr. Smith's "relation to the people of his charge in Exeter,
continued nearly nine years with mutual harmony and affection and
with much advantage to the cause of religion." [_Result of Council._]
At his own request, he was dismissed Feb. 14, 1838, and accepted
an appointment from the Amer. Tract Society, to superintend their
operations in New Jersey, and in Southern New York and vicinity. He
was afterwards installed in Wilton, Ct. During Mr. Smith's ministry in
Exeter, the number of admissions to the church was 170, and the number
of baptisms 139. The number of church members reported to the General
Association in 1836, was 226. Of the children of the Rev. John and Mrs.
Esther Smith, there were baptized at Exeter, James Dickinson, Jan. 7,
1830; Esther Mary, June 9, 1833; a second Esther Mary, Oct. 5, 1835;
and Walter Mitchell, June 4, 1837.

_Rev. William Williams_ was born in Wethersfield, Ct., Oct. 2, 1797,
grad. Y. C., 1816; studied theology at Andov. Sem., and with Pres.
Timothy Dwight. Settled in Salem over the Branch, since the Howard St.
Church, July 5, 1821; dismissed Feb. 17, 1832; settled over the Crombie
St. Church, which had separated from the Howard St. Nov. 22, 1832.
[_Amer. Quar. Reg._, Vol. VII., p. 260.] He was installed at Exeter,
May 31, 1838. Exercises on the occasion: Prayer by Rev. S. T. Abbott of
Seabrook; Sermon by Rev. Milton P. Bramin of Danvers; Prayer by Rev. S.
W. Clark of Greenland; Charge by Rev. J. French of North Hampton; Right
Hand, Rev. J. Hurd of Exeter; Address by Rev. Edwin Holt of Portsmouth;
Prayer by Rev. Mr. Gunnison of Brentwood. Mr. Williams resigned his
ministry, Oct. 1, 1842, on account of the state of his health, taken
in connection with existing difficulties. Mr. Williams returned to
Salem, Ms., where he engaged in the study, and has been since in the
practice of medicine. The number of members of Mr. Williams's church,
as reported in 1841, was 217.

_Rev. Joy Hamlet Fairchild_ was born in Guilford. Ct., April 24,
1789, and was the youngest of sixteen children. His father was Lewis
Fairchild. His mother before marriage was Mehetabel Waterhouse of
Saybrook, Ct. Rev. Mr. Fairchild grad. Y. C. 1813, studied theology
with Dr. Ely of Monson, Ms., and settled in the ministry in East
Hartford, Ct., June, 1816; in South Boston, Phillips Church, Nov.,
1827. He was installed in Exeter, Sept. 20, 1843. Exercises on
the occasion were: Reading of the Scriptures, Rev. S. W. Clark of
Greenland; Prayer, Rev. R. W. Clark, Portsmouth; Sermon, Rev. N. Adams,
Boston; Prayer, Rev. J. French; Charge, Rev. Dr. Codman; Right Hand,
Rev. Mr. Hurd; Address, Rev. H. Winslow of Boston; Prayer, Rev. E.
D. Eldredge of Hampton. Mr. Fairchild resigned his office June 18,
1844. His reasons are thus assigned in his letter to the church. "I am
accused of a crime which I never committed, but which it is not in my
power to disprove. I do not wish to preach the gospel any longer than I
can be useful. And as my usefulness must now be ended, I hereby resign
my office as Pastor of this church." His pastoral relation was formally
dissolved by a Council, called at his own request, July 30, 1844. The
doings of the ecclesiastical and civil tribunals in his case are in the
hands of the public. After removing from Exeter he was installed over
the Payson Church, South Boston, Nov. 19. 1845.

Mr. Fairchild m. 1st, Cynthia Waterhouse of Saybrook, Ct., Oct., 1814.
Their children are Harriet Elisabeth, b. Sept. 2, 1815, m. Anthony
Ten Eyck, Esq., of Detroit, Mich., U. S. Commissioner at the Sandwich
Islands, where she d. Nov. 5, 1846; Lucius Hamlet, b. Jan. 26, 1819.
Mr. Fairchild m. 2nd, Mary Bradford, daughter of William Bradford,
Esq., of Philadelphia, July 18, 1825. Their children are William
Bradford, b. Nov. 2, 1828; Thomas Robbins, b. April 9, 1834, d. May 2,
1835; Florina Tomlin, b. March 13, 1838; Mary Joy, b. May 25, 1843, d.
July 10, 1843; Harriet Ten Eyck, b. Dec. 29, 1846.

_Rev. Roswell Dwight Hitchcock_, the present pastor, was born in East
Machias, Me., Aug. 15, 1817, gr. A. C. 1836, Tutor from 1839 to 1842,
theological education at Andov. Sem., before and after his tutorship;
stated supply at Waterville, Me., one year; ord. at Exeter Nov. 19,
1845. Exercises on the occasion were, Reading the Scriptures, Rev. J.
W. Newman of Stratham; Prayer, Rev. Homer Barrows of Dover; Sermon,
Rev. Orin Fowler of Fall River; Ordaining Prayer, Rev. J. Hurd; Charge,
Rev. O. Fowler; Right Hand, Rev. B. R. Allen of South Berwick, Me.;
Address, Rev. S. S. N. Greely of Newmarket; Prayer, Rev. James T.
McCollom, Somersworth. The father of Mr. Hitchcock, whose name was
also Roswell, was born in Hawley, Ms.; _his_ father removed from
Springfield, Ms. His mother's surname was, before marriage, Longfellow.
She was of Machias. Mr. Hitchcock m. Elisabeth Anthony Brayton, her
mother being of the Anthony family, which was ancient in Bristol Co.,
Ms.

(To be continued.)




THE NAMES OF THE PROPRIETORS OF NEW HAVEN, CT., IN THE YEAR 1685.


[This article has been kindly furnished us by Charles William Bradley,
Esq., the present Secretary of the State of Connecticut.]

    James Bishop, Esqr.
    William Jones, Esqr.
    Major John Nash,
    Mr. James Pierpont,
    Serjt. John Alling,
    Mr. James Alling,
    Phillip Alcock,
    John Alling Senr.
    Samuell Alling,
    Joseph Alsup, Senr.
    Joseph Alsup,[S] Junior,
    Serjt Nathan Andrews,
    David Atwater, Senr.
    David Atwater, Junr.
    John Atwater,
    Jonathan Atwater,
    Robert Augar,
    Nathan Andrews, Junr.
    John Austin,
    John Ball,
    Hannah Ball,
    John Barnes,
    Thomas Barnes,
    Daniell Barnes,
    John Bassett,
    Samuell Bassett,
    Isaac Beecher, Senr.
    Isaac Beecher, Junr.
    John Beecher,
    Eleazar Beecher,
    John Benham, Senr.
    John Benham, Junr.
    John Bishop,
    John Blackly,
    Samuell Blackly,
    Ebenezer Blackly,
    Benjamin Bouden,
    Nathanael Boykin,
    William Bradly,
    Joseph Bradly,
    Abraham Bradly,
    Isaac Bradly,
    Benjamin Bradly,
    Henry Bristoll,
    John Brockett,
    John Brockett, Junr.
    John Brooks,
    Henry Brooks,
    Eleazer Brown,
    Samuell Brown,
    Ebenezer Brown,
    Benjamin Bunnill,
    Samuell Burwell,
    Zacheus Cande,
    William Chatterton,
    John Chidsey,
    James Clark,
    John Clark,
    Samuell Clark,
    William Collins,
    John Cooper, Senr.
    John Cooper, Junr.
    Mrs. ---- Coster,
    Mr. John Davenports, heirs,
    Mr. James Dixwell,
    John Davids, or Dixwell,
    Robert Dauson,
    James Denison,
    Lt. Abraham Dickerman,
    Edmund Dorman,
    John Downs,
    Nicholas Elsey,
    Symon Egears,
    Samuell Ferns,
    Benjamin Fenns, heirs,
    Samuell Ford,
    Mathew Ford,
    Mark Fowler,
    John Frost,
    Mr. ---- Gibberts, heirs,
    Timothy Gibberts, heirs,
    John Gibbs,
    Henry Gibbons,
    William Gibbons,
    Mathew Gilbert's, heirs,
    Mathew Gilbert,
    Henry Glover,
    Mr. John Goodyear,
    John Hancock,
    Mr. John Harriman,
    James Heaton,
    Nathanael Heaton,
    Samuel Hemingway,
    Mrs. Hope Herbert,
    Eliakim Hitchcock,
    Nathanael Hitchcock,
    Richard Hingambottom,
    John Hill,
    Ebenezer Hill,
    Mr. John Hodson,
    John Holt,
    Eleazar Holt,
    Samuell Hotchkis,
    John Hotchkis,
    Joshua Hotchkis,
    Thomas Hotchkis,
    Daniell Hotchkis,
    Jerremiah How,
    Ephraim How's, heirs,
    Jerremiah Hull,
    Samuell Humerston,
    John Humerston,
    Thomas Humerston,
    Bartholomew Jacobs,
    Thomas Johnson,
    John Johnson, Senr.
    John Johnson, Junr.
    William Johnson,
    Samuell Johnson,
    Nathanael Jones,
    Joseph Ives,
    Edward Keely,
    Nathanael Kimberly,
    Thomas Kimberly,
    Jonathan Lamson,
    Thomas Leck,
    Richard Little,
    Ralph Loines, Senr.
    Samuell Loines,
    Ralph Loines, Junr.
    Joseph Loines,
    Benjamin Loines,
    Thomas Luddington,
    John Luddington,
    William Luddington,
    Peter Mallery, Senr.
    Peter Mallery, Junr.
    Thomas Mallery,
    Daniell Mallery,
    John Mallery,
    Joseph Mansfield,
    Capt. Moses Mansfield,
    Lt. Nathaniel Marriman,
    Ellis Mew's, heirs,
    Ens: John Miles,
    Thomas Mix,
    John Mix,
    Nathanael Mix,
    Daniell Mix,
    Caleb Mix,
    John Morris,
    Eleazer Morris,
    Joseph Morris,
    Mr. John Moss,
    Joseph Moss,
    Mercy Moss's, heirs,
    Mathew Multrop,
    Ens: Samuell Munson,
    Richard Newman,
    John Newman,
    Mr. Jerr: Osbourn's, heirs,
    Mrs. Mary Osbourn,
    Mr. Jerr: Osborn, Junr.
    Mr. John Prout,
    William Pains, heirs,
    John Pain,
    George Pardee, Senr.
    George Pardee, Junr.
    Mr. William Peck,
    Joseph Peck,
    Benjamin Peck,
    Edward Perkins,
    John Perkins,
    Jonathan Perkins,
    David Perkins,
    John Perry,
    Thomas Pimore,
    John Ponderson,
    John Potter,
    Nathanael Potter,
    Edward Preston,
    Joseph Preston,
    William Pringle,
    Joseph Pringle,
    Ely Robberts,
    William Robberts,
    Mr. Richd Rosewell,
    John Roe,
    John Sacket's heirs,
    John Sacket, Junr.
    Thomas Sandford,
    Ens: Danl Shermon,
    Thomas Smith,
    John Smith,
    Samuell Smith,
    Joseph Smith,
    Ebenezer Smith,
    Nathan Smith,
    Richard Sperry, Senr.
    John Sperry,
    Richard Sperry, Junr.
    Nathanael Sperry,
    Thomas Sperry,
    John Steevens,
    Henry Steevens,
    Robert Talmage's heirs,
    Serjt Thos. Talmage,
    Enos Talmage,
    John Talmage,
    James Taylor,
    William Thorps, heirs,
    Nathanael Thorp,
    John Thomson's heirs,
    John Thomson, marriner,
    John Thomson, farmer,
    John Thomson, Junr.
    Mr. William Thomson,
    John Thomas,
    Daniell Thomas,
    Samuell Thomas,
    Joseph Thomas,
    John Thomas, Junr.
    Christopher Todd,
    John Todd,
    Samuell Todd,
    Mr. Thomas Trowbridge,
    John Trowbridge,
    Mr. William Trowbridge,
    William Trowbridge, Junr.
    Thomas Trowbridge, Junr.
    James Trowbridge,
    Isaac Tumor,
    Thomas Tuttle,
    Jonathan Tuttle,
    Joseph Tuttle,
    David Tuttle,
    Nathanael Tuttle,
    John Tuttle,
    Samuell Tuttle,
    John Umphervile,
    John Watson,
    Samuell Whitehead,
    William Wilmott,
    Serjt John Winston,
    John Winston, Junr.
    William Wooden's heirs,
    Jerremiah Wooden,
    John Woolcott,
    Mr. John Yale,
    Mr. Nathanael Yale,
    The Trustees of the School Estate.

This List of names Compared with the List of 1685, and is a true Coppy,
attested by uss.

                               NATHAN ANDREWS,   } _Select men_
                               WILLIAM THOMSON,  } _of New Haven._
                               JONATHAN ATWATER, }

This List of the Proprietors of the Lands in the Township of Newhaven,
was Exhibited in the Generall Assembly on the Twentieth day of October,
in the third year of her Majesties reigne, Annoq. Dom: 1704, at the
Same time when a release of all the Lands in said Township to the said
proprietors was read and approved and ordered to be signed in the name
of the Gouernor and Company of her Majesties Colony of Connecticutt.

                                  Test. ELEAZER KIMBERLY, _Secry._

The aboue written, with what is Contained in the two next aforegoing
pages, relating thereunto, is a true Coppie of the Origenall, being
therewith Examin'd and Compared, and here recorded, May 20th, 1707. Pr
me ELEAZER KIMBERLY, _Secry._

[The foregoing is recorded in the Connecticut "Colony Records of
Deeds," Vol. III. fol. 397-399.]

                               STATE OF CONNECTICUT, SS.,    }
                               OFFICE OF SECRETARY OF STATE. }

I hereby certify, that the foregoing is a true copy of record in this
Office. In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and affixed
the Seal of said State, at Hartford, this sixth day of March, A. D.
1847, and in the 71st year of the Independence of the United States of
America.

[Illustration]

                         CHARLES WM. BRADLEY,
                                             _Secretary of State._

FOOTNOTES:

[S] The present orthography of such names as have materially changed
their forms is here given: Alsop for Alsup; Blakeslee or Blakeley,
Blackly; Bradley, Bradly; Bristol, Bristoll; Brackett, Brockett;
Bunnel, Bunnill; Candee, Cande; Dawson, Dauson; Gilbert, Gibberts;
Eaton, Heaton; Higgins?, contraction of Higginbottom, Hingambottom;
Hotchkiss, Hotchkis; Humaston, Humerston; Lines and Lynde, Loines;
Mallory, Mallery; Merriman, Marriman; Morse, Moss; Molthrop, Multrop;
Monson, Munson; Osborn, Osbourn; Payne, Pain; Punderson, Ponderson;
Prindle, Pringle; Thompson, Thomson; Turner, Turnor; Umberfield?,
Umphervile; Woodin, Wooden.

[Illustration: your most obediant servant

En: Parsons

AE 76]




MEMOIR OF ENOCH PARSONS, ESQ., OF HARTFORD, CT.


The name of PARSONS is found among the earliest emigrants to New
England, and it designated a family of high respectability in the
parent country. As early as 1481, John Parsons was Mayor of Hereford in
the county of Herefordshire, and Sir Thomas Parsons of Great Milton,
from one branch of the family, received the honor of knighthood from
Charles I., about the year 1634, and his descendants are still found
at Great Milton and in the city of London. The Coat of Arms granted to
Sir Thomas is thus described: "He beareth gules, two chevrons ermine,
between three eagles displayed, or;" Crest: "an eagle's leg erased at
the thigh, or, standing on a leopard's head, gules."

These armorial bearings are retained in the Parsons Family in the
United States, and by the descendants of Sir Thomas in London, among
whom were Sir John and Sir Humphrey Parsons, the former Lord Mayor of
London in 1704, and the latter in 1731 and 1740; also by the branch of
the family that settled in Barbadoes, of which Rev. John Parsons, M.
A., of Beybrook House in the county of Gloucester, Vicar of Marden,
county of Wilts, is a descendant, being the son of Daniel Parsons, M.
D., of Barbadoes.

ENOCH PARSONS, ESQ., of Hartford, Ct., the particular subject of this
memoir, was born at Lyme, Ct., Nov. 5, 1769. He was the third son of
Samuel Holden Parsons, an Aid to General Washington, a Major-General in
the Revolutionary army, and subsequently, Chief-Justice of the North
Western Territory. Mr. Parsons was also grandson of the Rev. Jonathan
Parsons, a distinguished clergyman first of Lyme, Ct., and secondly of
Newburyport, Ms. His mother, who was a daughter of Richard Mather of
Lyme, was lineally descended from the Rev. Richard Mather, the first
clergyman of Dorchester, Ms., ancestor of the Rev. Messrs. Increase and
Cotton Mather of Boston. His grandmother was sister to the Hon. Matthew
Griswold of Lyme, formerly Governor of the State, and was lineally
descended from Henry Wolcott, 1st, of Windsor, the progenitor of all
who bear that name in Connecticut.[T]

Mr. Parsons was distinguished in youth for mental vigor and accurate
discrimination, and for his devotedness to the more abstruse and severe
sciences, particularly the mathematics. This laid the foundation of
his future eminence as a financier. He did not receive a collegiate
education, but his academical course pursued at the Institutions at
Pomfret and Plainfield, was extensive and thorough. His favorite
studies naturally inclined him to commercial pursuits; and to qualify
himself for these, he engaged in the year 1785 and 1786, in the
service of Messrs. Broome and Platt, who, at that time, owned a great
commercial house in New Haven, where he acquired a complete mercantile
education. His proficiency and accuracy as an accountant soon brought
him into notice, and in the year 1787 he was employed by the late Gov.
Oliver Wolcott, Jun., who was at that time State Auditor of accounts,
to arrange and prepare for adjustment the Revolutionary claims of
Connecticut upon the United States. This was an arduous task for a
young man, requiring great methodical accuracy and precision, and it
was performed with ability and acceptance.

But Mr. Parsons was not confined to his favorite pursuits; he had a
thirst for knowledge generally, and improved every opportunity for
research in the various departments of science and the arts with a
proportionate zeal and accuracy. Evidences of this are furnished in a
Journal[U] which he, at the age of only nineteen, kept while on a tour
to the North Western Territory during the spring and summer of 1788, in
company with his father, who was about that time appointed by President
Washington Chief-Judge in and over the Territory, which included the
States of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Michigan. The geology of the
country, the customs, manners, and language of the native sons of the
forest, are described and commented upon with a minuteness and vivacity
interesting alike to the geologist, the antiquary, and the philosopher.

He was, we believe, one of the original investigators of the tumuli
at Marietta, the first and at that time the only settlement of
importance in that region of country. A description of one of these
remarkable mounds, excavated and explored by him, he communicated in
1789 to President Stiles of Yale College, and is preserved among his
manuscripts in the College Library.

May 14, 1789, Mr. Parsons was appointed by Gov. Arthur St. Clair,
Register and Clerk of the first Probate Record Office, established in
the county of Washington, which was the first county erected north-west
of the river Ohio. He there remained, faithfully discharging the
duties of this appointment, until April, 1790, when he resigned and
returned to Middletown, Ct., his family residence, and was appointed
by the General Assembly of the State at their ensuing session, in May,
High Sheriff of Middlesex County. This office he accepted, being then
only twenty-one years of age; and he continued to perform its duties
with fidelity and public acceptance, till he attained the age of 49,
a period of _twenty-eight_ years; when he was compelled by ill health
and various imperative avocations, to relinquish its fatigues and
solicitude.

During the period of his official duties as Sheriff, Mr. Parsons was
also actively engaged in various other public avocations, and in
mercantile business. He was called to preside over different local
institutions and organizations in the place where he resided; acted
a while as Secretary to an Insurance Company, and was repeatedly
elected an Alderman of the city of Middletown, and Representative
in the General Assembly of the State. He was also presented by his
Congressional friends as a rival candidate of the late President
Harrison in the year 1791 for the office of Secretary and ex-officio
Lieut. Governor of the N. W. Territory, but he declined the nomination.
He likewise declined the honor, though repeatedly solicited, to
represent his fellow-citizens in the councils of the nation. His own
private affairs too much required his attention to permit him to engage
in this high trust.

In the year 1816, when the late Bank of the United States was
incorporated, Mr. Parsons, believing that the establishment of
a Branch in Connecticut, (by many deemed impracticable,) would
materially promote the commercial interests of its citizens, visited
Philadelphia in company with other gentlemen, with a view to this
object. By the most persevering efforts, and through his active and
efficient influence and exertion, a Branch was located in Connecticut
at Middletown. He was chosen a Director of the institution immediately
upon its organization, and continued in the direction during the
existence of the Charter.

In 1818 he was elected President of the Connecticut Branch, on the
resignation of the Hon. Samuel W. Dana, then a Senator in Congress;
and was annually elected, until it was transferred from Middletown to
Hartford, in the spring of 1824. Having removed thither himself about
the same time, he was re-elected, and continued to preside over the
institution with acknowledged impartiality, ability, and firmness, and
the most unflinching integrity, during the operations of the Branch in
Connecticut, and until the expiration of the Charter.

Though educated a merchant and eminent as a financier, Mr. Parsons
was also a sound _lawyer_; not by profession or practice, but by the
acquisition of the requisite legal knowledge. The office of Sheriff,
when he was called to fill it, was one of honor as well as profit.
Its incumbent was the companion of the Judges. He attended at their
"chambers" as well as in the "court-room." He listened to, and
participated in, their deliberations and discussions. Thus Mr. Parsons
breathed a legal atmosphere. Being by his official duties, through
a period of _twenty-eight_ years, in familiar intercourse with the
_Bench_ and the _Bar_, and having read the best elementary writers,
endowed, as he was, with a remarkably retentive memory and a logical
and inquisitive mind, it is not surprising that he retained to the
close of life the principles and maxims of jurisprudence thus deeply
implanted. Though not a member of the Bar, his opinions on elementary
points were seldom questioned.

Mr. Parsons wrote some, but reflected more. His published writings are
few and chiefly _political_. His unpublished manuscripts are numerous
and mostly in an _epistolary_ form, relating principally to the subject
of _finance_.

In all the relations of domestic and social life, Mr. Parsons was
beloved and respected. He was twice married, and left three children
by the first marriage, and one by the second; two only of whom survive
him; namely, one residing in Hartford, Ct., Samuel H. Parsons, Esq.,
and one in the State of Ohio. In these relations, he was ever the
generous and affectionate husband, and the kind and faithful parent.
His habits and feelings were social and communicative; and in his
intercourse with his fellow-men, dignity was seen blended with the
utmost courtesy and kindness. He was a true gentleman of the olden
school, and every son of New England will understand what this means.

His personal appearance was dignified and commanding. His stature large
and well-proportioned; high forehead and bald, with dark blue eye, and
a countenance indicative of his mental characteristics of thought,
deliberation and energy, blended with mildness.

Mr. Parsons was a firm believer in the Christian religion. He adopted
the principles of the gospel as the standard of human action; and
frequently remarked, that through life he had made it an invariable
rule never to close his eyes in sleep without first communing with his
God.

About a year previous to the close of his interesting life, his system
became generally debilitated, and during the last three or four months
he was unable to leave the house. He expressed himself perfectly
resigned to the will of Heaven, and gradually sunk into a lethargy,
which continued until the morning of July 9, 1846, when he slept in
death, in the 77th year of his age.

FOOTNOTES:

[T] A more extended genealogical account of the Parsons Family may be
expected in some future No. of the Register.

[U] In his Journal, Mr. Parsons gives the following statistics of the
Aborigines, at that time inhabiting the Territory, which may not be
uninteresting to compare with their present condition. We present the
extract entire:

    "The _Delawares_ live at Sandusky, in a N. W. course and about 180
    miles from this place, (Marietta.) Their number is 400.

    "The _Wyandots_, living partly in the same region and partly at
    Detroit, 300 miles from Marietta, are about 260 in number.

    "The _Munsees_ live on the Alleghany river, about 310 miles N. E.
    from M. and number 100.

    "The _Miami_ tribe live at Miami town, W. S. W. 250 miles, and are
    about 100 in number.

    "The _Shawanoes_ live on the Miami river, S. W. 250 miles, and
    number 150.

    "The _Cherokees_, or _Chickewagas_, live on Paint Creek, S. S. W.
    250 miles, and are about 100 in number.

    "The _Wiahtanoes_ live on the Wabash river, W. S. W. 500 miles, and
    number 600.

    "The _Kickapoes_ live also upon the Wabash, S. S. W. 500 miles, and
    number 1100.

    "The _Piankishaws_ live upon the same river, S. and S. W. 600
    miles--number 400.

    "The _Kaskaskias_ live on the Mississippi, S. S. W. 800 miles.
    Their number is 150.

    "The _Peorees_ live upon the Illinois river, W. S. W. 900 miles.
    Number 150.

    "The _Meadow Indians_ live also upon the Illinois, about 900 miles
    W. by S. Number 500.

    "The _Iowas_ live upon the Illinois, S. W. 900 miles, numbering 300.

    "The _Foxes_ live on the S. side of Lake Superior, W. N. W. 900
    miles--number 1000.

    "The _Chippewas_ live W. of Lake Michigan, W. N. W. 800 miles from
    M. Number 4000.

    "The _Potowatomies_ live E. of Lake Michigan, W. N. W. about 450
    miles. Number 4000.

    "The _Ottawas_ live N. E. of Lake Michigan, N. W. 400 miles. Number
    1000.

    "The _Sieux_ live N. W. of Lake Superior. N. W. from Marietta 950
    miles. Number 6000."

In his Journal we have also a specimen of the fertility of the soil,
and the rapidity of the vegetation of the Territory, in the following
extracts:

    "June 7. Rode out with my father to his three-acre lot, which was
    sowed with rye in December last. About twenty days ago, it was four
    inches high. Ten days since, when we visited it, it was three and
    a half feet high; and to-day we found it seven and a half feet in
    height.

    "June 13. Measured a spear of flax growing on my city lot, and find
    that in six days it has grown seven inches. Mr. Converse informs
    me that about three weeks ago, he planted corn, which is at the
    present time four feet high."

On subsequent pages of the Journal, Mr. P. has extended remarks on the
philosophy of vegetation.

We have further space only for the following curious extract:

    "June 15. Last night the dogs made a most hideous clamor, and
    seemed to be exceedingly excited. Mr.----, who lives about forty
    rods N. of the Stockade, was about getting up to see what disturbed
    them, but did not; and in the morning, on opening the outer door to
    let in his dog, he found in his mouth a _purse filled with Brooches
    and Rings_."






THE PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE.


    My Muse has oft slumbered in life's busy day,
      And seldom I've sought her, as having no leisure;
    At the moment, however, while time glides away
      In the quiet of age, let me yield to the pleasure.

    And oh! in the scenes on my fancy that burst,
      And on which with delight or with sadness I linger,
    Say, what shall arrest my attention the first?
      Where, where shall I place me--where point the fixed finger?

    Shall I dwell upon childhood, or press on to youth,
      Or look only on manhood, or Death's lessons ponder?
    Shall I mourn, or rejoice, or administer truth,
      Or most at man's folly or GOD'S mercy wonder?

    I gaze on the palace, contemplate the cot,
      Mark the tower, see the ocean, view landscapes wide-spreading;
    And I feel, while I think on man's changeable lot,
      Compassion its influence o'er my heart shedding:

    And I cry, 'O ye triflers, ye murmurers, say,
      'Could your wishes be realized, what were the blessing
    'Most anxiously sought, to make happy your day
      'Of existence, and crown you with bliss worth possessing?'

    'I'd have power,' says the statesman; 'broad empire,' the king;
      'More lands,' shouts the rich; and 'no labor,' the peasant;
    And so through the catalogue! Hope seeks to bring
      Enjoyment from change, and depreciates the present:

    While yet, would we weigh our condition with care,
      And be just to that Wisdom our follies which chastens,
    We should see many blessings that fall to our share,
      Though the crown of our wishes its advent ne'er hastens.

    GOD denies in His love, and withholds what we seek,
      In tender compassion, well knowing our blindness.
    Let us yield, be submissive, and patient, and meek,
      Adoring His mercy, and trusting His kindness.

    This, this is our wisdom. Alone it deserves
      The name of philosophy; nor can the science
    Man proudly may boast, while as yet he but serves
      His passions, afford for his woes an appliance.

    This life is a trial. Our world cannot fill
      The void of the heart, which too surely is boundless.
    GOD will discipline, rectify, govern man's will,
      And eternity show our complaining is groundless:

    There, we may, when we _know_ what we see here in part,
      Life's philosophy prize, as we find it resulting
    In bliss springing forth from a purified heart,
      Without ceasing, in love, joy, and wonder exulting.

    Why should we not, then, as life hurries away,
      Submit us to GOD, and fall in with the measures
    His Wisdom employs, from His paths lest we stray,
      And fail to inherit His blood-purchased treasures?

  _January 30, 1847._                               BASIL.




GENEALOGIES.

THE COTTON FAMILY.

BY JOHN WINGATE THORNTON, ESQ., LL.B.


                                                     +-- Dau.          An infant,
                                                     |   =             d.: was she
                                                     |    =  --------- "Elisabeth,
                                                     |   =             bap. 10,
                                                     |   Egginton,     (16) 1637"?
                                                     |   a merchant.
                                                     |
                                                     |
                                                     +-- Roland,
                                                     |   d. Jan.
                                                     |   29, 1649.
                                                     |
                                                     |
                                                     +-- Sarah,
                                                     |   b. Sept.
                                                     |   12, 1635
                                                     |   d. Jan.
                                                     |   20, 1649.
                                                     |
                                                     |
                                                     |      2nd, Prudence,
                                                     |        widow of Dr.
                                                     |        Anthony Crosby,
                                                     |        dau. of Jonathan
                                                     |        Wade of Ipswich,
                                                     |        July 9, 1673.
                                                     |     =
                                                     |    =
                                                     |   =
                        1st, Mrs. Elisabeth,         +-- Rev. SEABORN COTTON
                          sister of Mr. James        |   b. at Sea, Aug. 12,
                          Horrocks, famous           |   1633; minister of
                          minister of Lancashire;    |   Wethersfield, Ct. 1655;
                          d. without issue.          |   ord. at Hampton, N. H.,
                        =                            |   1660: d. April 20, 1686:
                       =                             |   grad. H. C. 1651.
                      =                              |   =
                      Rev. JOHN COTTON, b. at        |   =            [_For the
                      Derby, Dec. 4, 1585. B. D. at  |    =           descendants
                      Cambridge: Fellow, Head        |    =  -------- of this Son,
                      Lecturer and Dean of Emmanuel  |    =           see the
                      College; Minister of Boston,   |     =          following._]
                      in Lincolnshire, for 20 years. |     =
                      Arrived at Boston, N. E.,      |      1st, Dorothy, dau.
  ROLAND COTTON,      Sept.3, 1633. Minister of the  |        of Gov. Bradstreet;
  a lawyer of     --- 1st Chh., Boston; d. Dec. 23,  |        m. June 14, 1654;
  Derby, Eng.         1652, a. 67. Rav. Anthony      |        d. Feb. 26, 1671.
  =                   Tuckney, a distinguished       |
                      divine and member of the       |
                      Westminster Assembly, of       +-- Rev. JOHN COTTON,
                      Boston, B. D., was styled      |   b. at Boston,
                      "cousin" by Cotton's children. |   March 15, 1639-40;
                      =                              |   gr. H. C. 1657;
                       =  ---------------------------+   preached at
                        =                            |   Wethersfield,
                         2nd, Mrs. Sarah Story,      |   Haddam, Killing-
                           widow. After his death,   |   worth, at Edgarton,
                           she married the Rev.      |   a year; ord. at
                           Richard Mather of         |   Plymouth, June 30,
                           Dorchester, father of     |   1669; d. Sept. 18,
                           Rev. Increase Mather,     |   1699, at Charleston,
                           D. D.; d. May 27, 1676,   |   S. C.
                           aged 75 years.            |   =
                           Gravestone in King's      |    =         [_For the
                           Chapel Burying Ground.    |     =  ----- descendants
                                                     |     =        of this Son,
                                                     |    =         see p. 165._]
                                                     |   =
                                                     |   Joanna, da. of
                                                     |   Dr. Brian Rossiter,
                                                     |   of Guilford, Ct.,
                                                     |   Nov.7, 1660:
                                                     |   born July 1642.
                                                     |   d. at Sandwich,
                                                     |   Oct. 12, 1702.
                                                     |
                                                     |
                                                     +-- Maria Cotton, b.
                                                         Feb. 15, 1641-42,
                                                         d. April 4, 1714,
                                                         at Boston.
                                                         =
                                                          =         [_For the
                                                           =  ----- descendants of
                                                           =        this Daughter,
                                                          =         see p. 166._]
                                                         =
                                                         Rev. Increase Mather,
                                                         D. D., b. June 21,
                                                         1639, gr. Har. Col.
                                                         1656; ord. at Boston,
                                                         May 27, 1669; Pres.
                                                         of Har. Col. 1685-1701;
                                                         agent of the colony
                                                         in England, &c. &c.;
                                                         d. Aug. 23, 1723.
                                                         Tomb on Copp's Hill,
                                                         Boston.


                      +-- Rev. JOHN COTTON,
                      |   b. May 8, 1658,           +-- Mary, b. Nov. 5, 1689,
                      |   gr. Har. Col. 1678:       |   d. May 29, 1731;
                      |   ord. at Hampton, N. H.    |   left six children.
                      |   Nov. 19, 1696; d.         |   =
                      |   March 27, 1710.           |   Rev. John Whiting
                      |   =                         |   of Concord, Mass.
                      |    =  ----------------------+
                      |   =                         |
                      |   Anne. dau. of Captain     +-- John, b. Sept. 5, 1687,
                      |   Thos. Lake, of Boston,    |   d. Sept. 8, 1689.
                      |   an eminent merchant,      |
                      |   b. Oct. 12, 1663.         |
                      |   Was 2nd wife of Rev.      +-- Dorothy, b. July 16,
                      |   Incr. Mather, D. D.;      |   1693; m. Dec. 21,
                      |   d. at Brookline,          |   1710 d. May 20, 1748,
                      |   March 29, 1737. Mr.       |   at Kingston, N. H.
                      |   Lake was descended        |   =
                      |   from Hugh de Caley,       |    =          [_For the
                      |   who d. 1286, and whose    |    =          descendants of
                      |   wife was Agnes, dau.      |     =  ------ this Grand-
                      |   of Hamo de Hamsted.--     |     =         granddaughter,
                      |   _Betham's Baronetage_,    |    =          see the
                      |   Vol. 3, p. 153.           |    =          following._]
                      |                             |   =
                      |                             |   Rev. Nathl. Gookin, of |
                      +-- Dorothy, b. Novem. 11,    |   Hampton, b. April 15,
                      |   1656, d. Dec. 20, 1706.   |   1687; d. Aug. 25, 1734;
                      |   No issue.                 |   gr. H. C. 1708; ord.
                      |   =                         |   Nov. 15, 1710.
                      |   Col. Joseph Smith, of     |
                      |   Hampton, N. H. He was     |
                      |   counsellor of N. H.       +-- Thomas b. Oct. 28, 1695,
                      |   in 1698.                  |   settled at Brookline.
                      |                             |
                      |                             |
                      +-- Sarah d. young,           +-- Anna, b. Nov. 13, 1697.
                      |   April 1, 1660.            |
                      |                             |
                      |                             +-- Simon, b. Dec. 21, 1701.
  [DESCENDANTS        +-- Anna, b. Aug. 22, 1661,   |
  OF REV.             |   d. Dec. 6-7, 1702,        |
  SEABORN COTTON,  ---+   in Boston.                +-- Samuel, } d.
  THE SON OF REV.     |   =                             Lydia,  } young.
  JOHN COTTON.]       |   Carr. 2nd, Johnson.
                      |
                      |
                      +-- Sarah, b. July 2, 1663.
                      |   d. Aug. 2, 1690,
                      |   =
                      |   Richard Pierce, of
                      |   of Boston, Aug. 27,
                      |   1680.
                      |
                      |
                      +-- Elisabeth, b. Aug. 13,
                      |   1665; d. 1698.
                      |   =
                      |   Rev. Wm. Williams
                      |   of Hatfield, Mass.
                      |
                      |
                      +-- Mercy, born Nov. 2, 1666,
                      |   d. June 18, 1715.
                      |   =                             Rev. John Tufts
                      |    =  ------------------------- of Newbury;
                      |   =                             Har. Col. 1708.
                      |   Capt. Tufts
                      |   of Medford.
                      |
                      |
                      +-- Maria, b. April 22, 1670,
                          d. 1729.
                          =
                          Atwater. 2nd.
                          Partridge.


                      +-- Seven children,
                      |   d. young and unmarried.
                      |
                      |
                      +-- Hannah, b. Feb. 28, 1724.
                      |   =
                      |   Patrick Tracy, a merchant
                      |   of Newbury.
                      |
                      |
                      +-- Dorothy, b. April 2,
                      |   1722; d. June 18, 1749.
                      |   =
                      |    =  -------------------------- Dorothy
                      |   =                              =
                      |   Rev Peter Coffin,              Dr. Jno. Parker,
                      |   of Kingston,                   gr. H. C. 1762.
                      |   N. H., Jan. 20, 1740;
                      |   gr. H. C. 1788.
                      |
                      |                              +-- Martha, d.
                      |      3d wife, Love dau. of   |   unmarried.
                      |        Col. Joshua Wingate,  |
                      |        of Hampton, N. H.;    |
                      |        b. April 4, 1728;     +-- Sarah, d. young
  [DESCENDANTS        |        m. Nov. 17, 1748;     |
  OF DOROTHY,         |        d. April 1, 1809.     |
  GRAND-GRAND-     ---+     =                        +-- Elisabeth.
  DAUGHTER OF REV.    |    =  -----------------------+   =
  JOHN COTTON.]       |   =                          |   Dr. Edmund Chadwick.
                      +-- Rev. Nathl. Gookin, of     |
                          N. Hampton; b. Feb. 6,     |
                          1713; gr. H. C. 1731; ord. +-- Hannah.
                          Oct. 31, 1739; d. Oct. 22, |   =
                          1763, at North Hampton.    |   Rev. Timothy Upham,
                          =                          |   _See p. 43, of Register_.
                           =                         |
                            =                        |
                             Judith Coffin. 2nd,     +-- Hon. Daniel Gookin of
                             Anne, dau. of Rev.          North Hampton, N. H.;
                             Mr. Fitch, of               b. March 2, 1756; at
                             Portsmouth.                 d. Sept. 4. 1831, atr in
                                                         Saco, Me.; an officer in
                                                         the Revolutionary Army,
                                                         State Counsellor, N. B.
                                                         Judge of C. C. Pleas, &c.
                                                         Judge of Probate, &c. &c.
                                                         =
                                                         Abigail, dau. of Dr.
                                                         Levi Dearhorn, an eminent
                                                         physician of North 0,
                                                         Hampton, b. March 10,;
                                                         1766; m. Dec. 4, 1787;
                                                         d. Jan. 9, 1836, at
                                                         Scarboro', Me.


                      +-- Rev. Jno., b. Aug. 3,
                      |   1661; gr. H. C., 1681;
                      |   settled at Exeter, N. H.
                      |   colleague of Rev, Tho.
                      |   Thornton, of Yarmouth;
                      |   d. Feb.  21, 1706.         +-- Joanna,
                      |   =                          |   =
                      |   Sarah, da. of Rich'd       |   Elias Pike, of Salisbury.
                      |   Hubbard, of Ipswich,       |
                      |   Mass.; dau. of Gov.        |
                      |   Bradstreet. Died at        +-- Mary,
                      |   Yarmouth, June 17, 1706.   |   =
                      |                              |   John Appleton of Ipswich.
                      |                              |
                      |      Rev. Jas. Alling, of    |
                      |        Salisbury, who died   +-- Elisabeth,
                      |        March 3, 1696.        |   =
                      |     =                        |   Samuel Moody, preacher
                      |    =  -----------------------+   at Isle of Shoals.
                      |   =
                      +-- Elisabeth,
                      |   =
                      |    =  -----------------------+-- Caleb Cushing, State
                      |     =                        |   Counsellor,
                      |      2d, Rev. Caleb Cushing, |   d. 1798, a. 94.
                      |        of Salisbury.         |
                      |                              |
                      |                              +-- Rev. James  of Plaistow,
                      |                              |   b. Nov. 20, 1705; gr.
                      |                              |   H. C. 1725.
                      +-- Sarah, b. June 17, 1665;   |
                      |   died Sept. 8, 1669.        |
                      |                              +-- Rev. John of Boxford;
                      |                                  grad. H. C. 1729.
                      |
                      +-- Rev. Roland, born Dec. 27,
                      |   1667; ord. Sandwich,
                      |   Novem. 2, 1694; died March
                      |   22, 1721-22; H. C. 1685.
                      |   =
                      |    =  -----------------------+-- Rev. John of Newton, b.
                      |   =                          |   July 15, 1693; gr. H. C.,
                      |   Elisabeth, widow of Rev.   |   1710; ord. Nov. 3, 1714;
                      |   John Denison, of Ipswich,  |   d. May 25, 1757, a. 64.
                      |   Sept. 1692. She was the    |   =
                      |   only dau. of Col.          |   Mary, da. of Rob. Gibbs,
                      |   N. Saltonstall, sister     |   b. May 28, 1699; m. Feb.
                      |   of Gov. G. Saltonstall;    |   19, 1719; d. Sept 28,
                      |   d. July 8, 1726,           |   1769.
                      |   at Boston.                 |
                      |                              |
                      |                              +-- Sarah, b. ab. 1694.
                      |                              |
                      |                              |
                      |                              +-- Rev. Nathl. of Bristol,
                      |                              |   grad. H. C., 1717; ord.
                      |                              |   Au. 30, 1721; d. July 3,
                      +-- Sarah, b. April 5, 1670.   |   1729, a. 30.
                      |   =                          |
                      |   Wm. Bradbury, & had issue. |
                      |                              +-- Abigail,
  [DESCENDANTS        |                              |   =
  OF REV.             |                              |   Rev. S. Bourne, of
  JOHN COTTON,     ---+                              |   Scituate; ord. Dec. 1724;
  THE SON OF REV.     |                              |   dis. 1761.
  JOHN COTTON.]       |                              |
                      |                              |
                      +-- Mariah, b. Jan. 14, 1672.  +-- Meriel, b. ab. 1698.
                      |   =                          |
                      |   Wymond Bradbury.           |
                      |                              +-- Rowland, grad. H. C.,
                      |                              |   1719.
                      |                              |   =
                      |                              |   Deborah Mason,
                      |                              |   Oct. 3, 1760.
                      |                              |
                      |                              |
                      +-- A son, b. Sept. 28, 1674.  +-- Rev. Josiah, gra. H. C.,
                      |                              |   1722; ord. at Providence,
                      |                              |   R. I. Oct. 23, 1728; then
                      |                              |   at Woburn, July 15, 1747;
                      |                              |   then at Sandown, N. H.,
                      |                              |   Nov. 28, 1759; d. May 27,
                      |                              |   1780; a. about 77 years.
                      +-- Josiah, b. Sept. 10, 1675, |
                      |   d. Jun. 9, 1677.           |
                      |                              +-- Rev. Ward, gr. H. C,
                      |                              |   1729; set. at Hampton,
                      |                              |   N. H.; dism. 1765; d.
                      |                              |   suddenly at Plymouth.
                      |                              |   Nov, 27, 1768, a. 57.
                      |                              |
                      |                              |
                      +-- Samuel, b. Feb. 16, 1678,  +-- Joanna,
                      |   d. Dec. 23, 1683.              =           [_For the
                      |                                  =           descendants
                      |                                   =  ------- of Joanna,
                      |                                   =          see the
                      |                                  =           following._]
                      |                                  =
                      |                                  Rev. J. Brown,
                      |                                  of Haverhill.
                      +-- Josiah, born Jan. 8, 1680;
                      |   gr. Har. Col. 1698; d. at
                      |   Plymouth, Aug. 19, 1756;
                      |   a. 76.
                      |   =
                      |    =  -------------------------- Rev. John Cotton, of
                      |   =                              Halifax, Plymouth Co.;
                      |   Hannah Sturtevant,             ord, Oct. 1755; b.
                      |   b. Jan. 8, 1708;               April, 1712; d. Nov. 4,
                      |   d. May 27, 1796, a. 89.        1789; grad. Har. Col.
                      |                                  1790; Reg. of Deeds.
                      |                                  =
                      |                                   =       [_For the
                      |                                    =  --- descendants of
                      |                                    =      John and Hannah,
                      |                                   =       see p. 166._]
                      |                                  =
                      |                                  Hannah Sturtevant.
                      |     Elisabeth Dumond of
                      |       Ipswich, Feb. 19, 1708.
                      |       She d. without issue,
                      |       Oct.30, 1710.
                      |    =
                      |   =
                      +-- Rev. Theophilus, b. May 5,
                          1682, ord. at Hampton
                          Falls, Jan. 2, 1712;
                          d. August 18, 1726, a. 45;
                          grad. Har. Col. 1701.
                          =
                           =
                            2nd, wid. Mary Gedney.


                      +-- Rev. Jno. Brown of
                      |   Cohasset, gr. H. C. 1741
                      |
                      |
                      +-- Rev. Colton Brown of
                      |   Brookline, ord. Oct. 26,
                      |   1746; died April 13, 1751.
                      |
                      |
                      +-- Ward Brown, gr. H. C.,
                      |   1748; d. 1748.
                      |
                      |
                      +-- Rev. Thomas Browne, H. C.,
                      |   1752; d. 1797;
                      |   min. of Stroudwater.
  [DESCENDANTS  ------+                              +-- Cotton Brown,
  OF JOANNA.]         |                              |   =
                      +-- A dau.                     |   Jane Williams.
                      |   =                          |
                      |   John Chipman.              |
                      |                              +-- Hon. Peter Chardon
                      |                              |   of Boston,
                      +-- A dau.                     |   =
                      |   =                          +   Anne Gorham.
                      |   Dana of Brookline.         |
                      |                              |
                      |                              +-- Mary,
                      +-- A dau.                     |   =
                          =                          |   Samuel Gray of Salem.
                           =  -----------------------|
                          =                          |
                          Rev. Edw. Brooks           +-- Joanna Cotton,
                          of North Yarmouth, Me.         =
                                                         Nath'l Hall of Medford.


                      +-- Rev. Ward Cotton of
                      |   Boylston, d. there
                      |   Nov. 15, 1843, a. 74;
                      |   gr. H. C. 1793.
                      |   =
                      |   Rebecca, da. of T. Jackson
                      |   of Plymouth.
                      |
                      |
                      +-- Elisabeth,
                      |   =
                      |   Lot Haskell of  Rochester.
                      |
                      |
                      +-- Lucy                       +-- Lydia,
                      |   =                          |   =
                      |   Chas. Jackson of Plymouth. |   Pope of Sandwich.
                      |                              |
                      |                              |
                      |      Lydia Parker            +-- Josiah,
                      |      of Falmouth.            |   =
                      |     =                        |   ----, at Nantucket.
                      |    =  -----------------------+
                      |   =
                      +-- Rev. Josiah of Wareham,
                      |   d. April, 1819, a. 71
                      |   =
                      |    =  -----------------------+
                      |     =                        +-- Hon. John, M. D., grad.
                      |     2nd, Rachel, da. of Rev. |   H. C. 1810, d. at
                      |        Dr. Barnes of         |   Marietta, O.,
                      |        Scituate.             |   April 2, 1947,
                      |                              |   =
                      |                              |   ----.
                      |                              |
                      +-- Hannah,                    |
                      |   =                          +-- Son, d. young.
                      |   Nye of Falmouth.           |
                      |                              |
                      |                              +-- Mary Ann,
                      |                                  =
                      |                                  Isaac Hedge of Plymouth.
                      +-- John, lost at sea, in 1800.
                      |   =
                      |    =  -----------------------+
                      |   =                          +-- Experience.
  [DESCENDANTS OF  ---+   Experience Jackson         |
  JOHN AND HANNAH.]   |   of Plym.                   |
                      |                              +-- Son. d. young.
                      |                              |
                      +-- Mary,                      |
                      |   =                          +-- Hannah,
                      |   J. Jennings of Plym.           =
                      |                                  Haskel.
                      |
                      +-- Dr. Rossiter. Rg. of
                      |   Deeds, d. Aug. 1837.       +--Thomas
                      |   =                          |  =
                      |    =  -----------------------+  Stevens.
                      |   =                          |
                      |   Priscilla, dau. of Thos.   |
                      |   Jackson of Plymouth.       +-- several d. young.
                      |                              |
                      |                              |
                      |                              +-- Dr. Chas. Har. Col. 1808.
                      |                              |   =
                      +-- Sophia,                    |   ----, at Newport.
                      |   =                          |
                      |   S. Parker, of Falmouth.    |
                      |                              +-- Edwin, Reg. of Deeds.
                      |                              |   =
                      |                              |    1. Watson.
                      +-- Joanna.                    |    2. ....
                      |                              |    3. Hammond.
                      |                              |
                      |                              |
                      |                              +-- Rossiter.
                      +-- Sally,                     |
                          =                          |
                          Capt. J. Harlow            +-- Sophia,
                          of Plymouth                    =
                                                         Gordon.


                            Capt. R. Green.
                           =
                          =
                      +-- Mariah. adm. to the
                      |   church, 1682.
                      |   =
                      |    =
                      |     2nd, Capt. Fifield.
                      |
                      |
                      |     Capt. Greenough.
                      |    =
                      |   =
                      +-- Elisabeth,
                      |   =
                      |    =  -------------------------- Rev. Mather Byles,
                      |     =                            gra. H. C. 1725.
                      |      2nd. Josiah Byles
                      |        of Boston.
                      |                              +-- Nehemiah, d. young.
                      |                              |
                      +-- Sarah,                     |
                      |   =                          +-- Increase Walter.,
                      |    =  -----------------------+   H. C. 1711.
                      |   =                          |
                      |   Rev. Nehemiah Walter       |
                      |   of Roxbury.                +-- Thos. Walter Roxbury, H.
                      |                              |
                      |                              |
                      |     Newcomb Blake.           +-- Nathl Walter,
                      |    =                             H. C., 1729.
                      |   =
                      +-- Abigail,
                      |   bap. April 2, 1677.
                      |   =
  [DESCENDANTS OF  ---+    =
  MARIA COTTON,       |     2nd. Rev. J. White
  THE DAUGHTER OF     |       of Gloucester.
  JOHN COTTON.]       |
                      |
                      +-- Hannah,
                      |   bap. July 16, 1680.
                      |
                      |
                      +-- Jerusha, baptized
                      |   April 20, 1684.
                      |
                      |
                      +-- Rev. Cotton Mather, D.D.,
                          born Feb. 12, 1663; H. C.
                          1678; ord. eol. with his
                          father, May 13, 1685;
                          d. Feb. 13, 1728, a. 65;
                          had 15 children. C., 1713.
                          =
                           Abigail, da. of Colonel
                           John Phillips of
                           Charlestown; nine children;
                           five d. young. She d. 1702.
                          =
                           Widow Elisabeth Hubbard,
                           da. of Dr. John Clark,
                           Aug. 18, 1703; six children.
                           She d. Nov. 18, 1713.
                          =
                           Widow George, da. of
                           Mr. Sam. Lee. July 5, 1715;
                           she survived the Doctor.

[In a future number of the Register, the pedigree of Roland Cotton, in
England, may be given, with the Emblazonry of the Armorial Bearings.]




THE BUTLER FAMILY.

PREPARED BY PROFESSOR JAMES DAVIE BUTLER OF NORWICH, VT.


               [V][(1)]STEPHEN BUTLER, = Jane ----.
                        d. in Boston.   |
                                        |
                    +---------------+---+--------------+
                    |               |                  |
            [(2)]Benjamin,        Isaac,         [(3)]James,    =  Grace ----.
                 Aug. 2, 1653;    Oct. 9, 1661;       Aug. 2, d.|
                 Feb. 10, 1658.   May 29, 1664;       1665;     |
                                  Aug. 10, 1667.      Boston.   |
                                                                |
    +------------+----------+----------------+------------------+
    |            |          |                |
  Mary,   [(6)]Grace,  Elisabeth,  [(5)]James, Aug. 21,  = [(4)]Abigail Eustice,
  Feb. 21,     May 2,  Dec. 23,         1688; d. Boston. |   d. Dec. 15, 1713.
  1683.        1685.   1686.                             |
                                                         |
     +----------------+--------------+-------------------+
     |                |              |
  Abigail,     [(7)]Eliza,     [(8)]James,   =  [(9)]Elisabeth Davie.
  Jan. 26,          March 3,       Dec. 4,   |  = ---- Wakefield.
  1710-11.          1711-12.       1713;     |  |
                                   d. Boston.|  |
                                             |  |
                  +--------------------------+  +---------+
                  |                                       |
           [(10)]James,  =  [(11)]Mary Sigourney.        Sarah.
               Feb. 15,  |
               1739;     |
               d. at     |
             Oxford, Ms. |
                         |
      +-----+------+-----+----+----------+-------+------+-------+-------+
      |     |      |          |          |       |      |       |       |
    Mary.   |   Anthony.  Elisabeth.  Hannah.  John.  Peter.  Sarah.  Celia.
            |
  [(12)] James Davie. = Rachel Harris.
                      |
     +----------------+--+------------+--------------+
     |                   |            |              |
  Mary Sigourney.  Sophia Gedney.  Chloe Harris.  James Davie,
                                                  Jan. 6, 1814;
                                                 March 15, 1815. = Anna Bates.
                                                                 |
                                               [(13)]James Davie, June 25, 1846.


REMARKS.

The following details are published not as being complete, but with
the hope that the publication of them may be as a magnet attracting
to itself, and thus supplying the wanting links which might otherwise
perish from the chain of a family history. Any information, however
slight, respecting any of the lines, whether direct or collateral,
hereby brought to light, will be welcomed by the author of this
article, or the editor of this journal.

We are still in the dark as to the family history of not a few among
the first fathers of New England. Much of this darkness might be
dispelled were all the written memorials still extant sought out,
compared, and committed to the keeping of the art preservative of all
arts. Winthrop in his Journal speaks of a letter from the Yarmouth
pilgrims to their brethren, with their names, as printed at London in
1630. The instructions to Endecott, the first Governor of Massachusetts
Bay, were "Keep a daily register in each family of what is done by all
and every person in the family."

In Young's Chronicles of Plymouth, (p. 36) and of Massachusetts Bay,
(p. 157), lists of names of emigrants are referred to, but the lists
themselves are not given.

Notwithstanding several good works upon the Huguenots have recently
appeared, much genealogical labor remains to be performed in tracing
the lineage of particular families to France, and investigating their
condition there before their emigration. I have often sought, though
without success, for the records of the Old French Church in Boston,
which stood on the site of the Universalist Church in School street.


NOTES.

1. Neither the family name of Stephen Butler's wife nor any other
particulars respecting him have been ascertained, except the record of
the births of his children, which is extracted from the city registers
of Boston, formerly kept in the Old State House. As he became a
father in Boston within little more than twenty years after its first
settlement, it may be presumed that he was an emigrant from Europe.

2. Benjamin Butler. The different dates in this and similar cases
denote the births of different children bearing the same name; the
former in all probability died before the birth of the latter.

3. James Butler probably died before 1692, if the Grace Butler, married
to Andrew Rankin, April 15th, of that year, by Simon Bradstreet, was
his widow.

4. Information as to the kindred of Abigail Eustice may doubtless be
found in the public records of Boston.

5. James Butler was a proprietor in a rope-walk at West Boston; was
married April 6, 1710, by Rev. E. Pemberton of the Old South. He was
probably admitted to the First Church Jan. 24, 1703-4. A folio Bible
with Clarke's annotations, now in my possession, as an heirloom from
my father and grandfather, bears the name of this James Butler, my
grandfather's grandfather, and the date 1713, doubtless written by his
own hand.

6. Grace Butler was married Dec. 26, 1706, to Thomas Jackson, by
Benjamin Wadsworth, minister of the first church. She had several
children, Grace, Thomas, and Elisabeth, and died March 15, 1759.

7. Eliza Butler was admitted to the first church Nov. 25, 1706, and was
married to Capt. Ephraim Savage, Jan. 8, 1712. Nothing further is known
of her.

8. James Butler was by trade a goldsmith. About 1750 he removed to
Halifax, Nova Scotia, but proving unfortunate in his enterprise, soon
returned to Boston. He afterwards lived awhile in Sutton, Ms., but died
in Boston, in 1776, aged 63.

9. Although I have abstained from full details of collateral lines, I
am constrained to give them respecting Elisabeth Davie, since her line
of ancestry is so long.


  John Davie of Exeter, Eng. = = Julian Strode.
                              |
    |-------------------------|
    |                         |
  John.                      Mary, = = Humphrey, a London
                                    |  merchant.
                                    |
     |------------------------------+---------------|
     |                                              |
    John, removed from = = Elisabeth Richards.    Ann, d. Sept.
  London and settled    |                         12, 1662.
  in Groton, Ms., 1662. |
                        |
         |--------------+------+--------------+---------+---------+---------|
         |                     |              |         |         |         |
  (a) John, graduated   (b) Humphrey of      Mary.    William. Elisabeth. Sarah.
      at Harvard,1681,      Dorchester, = = (c) Hannah Gedney.
      became baronet                     |
      in 1713, presented                 |
      books to Yale College.   |---------|
                               |
                           Elisabeth, d. Feb. == (8) James Butler.
                           15, 1739.

(a) The lineage of this nobleman, his heraldic emblazonings and the
like, may be found in Burke's Peerage of England; "vix ea nostra voco."

(b) Humphrey Davie was a captain in the London trade. Hence his
daughter had many fine dresses. One of these now belongs to her
granddaughter, Mrs. Sarah Kingsbury of Oxford, Ms.

It is of brocade, with many-colored figures embroidered upon a ground
of green. It has two skirts, each of seven breadths, a long bodice
to be worn with a satin stomacher, sleeves short at the elbows, with
flowing ruffles. A silver tabby christening, or to use a better
expression, _baptismal_, blanket, now in my possession, is said to
have been made of another of my great-grandmother's dresses. There is
a family tradition that these dresses were pawned by her husband after
her death, and redeemed by her son.

(c) Hannah Gedney's lineage so far as I can trace it is as follows;

       John Gedney, b. 1603; d. Aug. 5, 1688; == Mary ----.
  admitted to church in Salem, Nov. 19, 1637. = = Catherine ----.
                                               |
    |------+--------+------------+--------+----|
    |      |        |            |        |
  Sarah.  Eli.  Bartholomew,  Eleazer.  John, lost at sea, = = ----.
               baptized, June                               |
               14, 1640,                                    |
               Freeman,1669; d.                             |
               March 1, 1698.                               |
                                                            |
           |------------------------------------------------|
           |
         William, b. 1668; m. 1690; d. 1730. = = Hannah Gardner.
                                              |
                                              |
                                              |
                                           Hannah, == (b) Humphrey Davie.

10. James Butler was brought up to the trade of a hatter; was married
May 10, 1763, by Rev. Andrew Eliot of New North Church; in Aug.,
1774, fled with his wife and six children under ten years of age, to
Georgetown, Me., a four days' voyage. He was driven to this flight by
the Boston port-bill, which brought all business to a stand. After
remaining four years in Maine, he returned to Boston, and soon removed
to Oxford, Ms.; where he resided till his death, Dec. 20, 1827, aged 88.

11. Mary Sigourney was great-granddaughter of a Sigourney, who, being
a Huguenot, fled from Rochelle in France, with his wife and four small
children, in 1685. This first emigrant was among the first settlers
in Oxford, Ms., and some of his children married there. Through fear
of Indians, he removed to Boston. I have made out an extensive table
of his posterity, but on account of its length, must refrain from
inserting it here, except so far as relates to my own family. Among
the descendants of this Huguenot exile, are the Brimmers, the Inches,
and the Dexters, of Boston; the Commander of the Schooner Asp, killed
by the British in the Potomac, in 1813; and the husband of our most
popular poetess.

                      ---- Sigourney, = ----.
                                      |
                    |-----------------|
                    |
                  Andrew, m. ab. = Germaine ----.
                1701, at Oxford. |
                                 |
           |---------------------|
           |
        Anthony, b. Boston, Aug. 17, 1713, =[W]Mary Waters.
                                           |
                                           |
       |-----------------------------------|
       |
  (11) Mary, b. March 23, 1741; m., May 18, 1763; = (10) James Butler.
       was early taught French by her grandmother,
       as the tongue of her ancestors;
       consulted by Dr. Holmes as to Huguenot
       annals; had the covenant propounded to
       her at the New North church, Feb. 22, 1761.

12. James Davie Butler was born in Boston, Oct. 5, 1765. In 1786, left
a school he was teaching in Oxford, to be a volunteer against Shays.
Emigrated to Rutland, Vt., in Aug., 1787; was at first a hatter; in
1792, became a merchant, and continued in trade fifty years, till his
death, June 3, 1842.

He was married, Aug. 22, 1802, to the widow Rachel Maynard, and March
15, 1827, to Lois Harris. He represented the town of Rutland in the
Vermont Legislature, for the years 1812 and 1813. In the year 1814, he
was a member of the State Council.

His first wife was daughter of Capt. Israel Harris of Williamstown,
Ms., who went with Ethan Allen's Green Mountain Boys to take
Ticonderoga, and was an officer in the battle of Bennington.

13. This infant of days may be noticeable as being the seventh of those
who, in one unbroken line during one hundred and eighty-one years, have
born the name of James.

FOOTNOTES:

[V] This and the other figures at the head of names refer to the notes
following this Table.

[W] Mary Waters was of Welsh extraction. She owned a copy of Flavel in
two volumes folio, (London, 1740,) which is now in my hands. One of her
brocade dresses is still preserved by Miss Mary Butler of Rutland, Vt.




THE MINOT FAMILY.

BY LEMUEL SHATTUCK, ESQ.


_Explanation of the Plan in preparing the Memoir_.

In the following Memoir the numbers inserted in the parentheses on the
left, are the numbers of the paragraphs, each, generally, containing
a notice of one entire family. The Roman numbers immediately after
indicate the generation of the family, including the first person
named. The descendants are doubly numbered--first in consecutive order,
and secondly by each family separately. The figures in brackets after
the name refer back to these numbers of the descendants, indicating the
family and connections to which the individual belongs. The numbers
inserted in the parentheses on the right, against the name of a child,
show the subsequent paragraph where a notice of the family of such
child may be found.

It is impossible to present a memoir of this kind, which shall be
entirely free from error, perfect and complete. In existing families,
births, marriages, and deaths, are constantly occurring, and in more
ancient ones new facts are often discovered. Such facts it is desirable
to have entered; and such a plan as would allow their insertion without
re-writing the memoir will be preferred. By leaving some space in the
original entries, the plan admits of correction, amplification, and
extension, without marring its simplicity and beauty.


MEMOIR.

(1) All by the name of Minot in America are supposed to have descended
from George Minot, whose posterity forms the subject of this Memoir.
There was a Thomas Minot, probably a brother, who was a proprietor of
Barbadoes in 1638, but I can neither trace his history, nor ascertain
that he left posterity. None of the name could be found in the New York
or Philadelphia Directories for 1846. The family are all descended from
Thomas Minot, Esq., Secretary to the Abbot of Walden, England, by whom
he was advanced to great possessions.


FIRST GENERATION.

(2) I. Elder George Minot was the son of Thomas Minot, Esq., of
Saffron-Walden, Essex, England, and was b. Aug. 4, 1594. He was among
the first Pilgrim emigrants to Massachusetts, and the first settlers
of Dorchester. His place of residence was near Neponset Bridge, and
he owned the land which has been known as "Squantum." He was made a
freeman in 1634, and represented the town in 1635 and 1636. He was
a ruling elder in the church thirty years, and d. Dec. 24, 1671, in
the 78th year of his age. He left a will, which is recorded in the
Suffolk Records, Vol. VII. p. 189. The inventory of his estate amounted
to L277. 7. 7. "His death," say the records, "was much lamented by
the town, whose weal he sought and liberties defended." He was a
cotemporary with Elder Humphrey; and it is said the following lines
were once to be found on a gravestone in the ancient burying-ground in
Dorchester:--

    Here lie the bodies of Unite Humphrey and Shining Minot,
    Such names as these, they never die not.

Mr. Minot's wife, Martha, d. in Dorchester, Dec. 23, 1657, a. 60. He
left the following children;

  2--1 John,     b. April 2, 1626,  m. Lydia Butler,         May  19,
          1647. (3)
  3--2 James,    b. Dec. 31, 1628,  m. Hannah Stoughton,     Dec.  9,
          1653. (4)
  4--3 Stephen,  b. May 2, 1631,    m. Trucrosse Davenport,  Nov. 10,
          1654. (5)
  5--4 Samuel,   b. Dec. 18, 1635,  m. Hannah Howard,        June 23,
          1670. (6)


SECOND GENERATION.

(3) II. Capt. John Minot [2--1] was m. by Governor Dudley to Lydia
Butler of Dorchester, May 19, 1647. She d. Jan. 24, 1667, at the birth
of her sixth child. He m. a second time Mary Biggs of Boston, widow of
John Biggs who d. in 1666, and the daughter of John Dasset. He d. in
Dorchester, Aug. 12, 1669, a. 43. She d. about 1677. They both left
wills. His is recorded in Suffolk Records, Vol. VI. p. 39, and hers,
Vol. VI. p. 262. His estate was prized at L978. 5. An anecdote in
relation to John Minot is found in Dwight's Travels, Vol. III. p. 125,
and in Hutchinson's Hist. Mass. Vol. I. p. 288. He left the following
children;

   6--1 John,       b. Jan. 22, 1647,   m. Elisabeth Brick,  March 11,
          1670. (7)
   7--2 James,      b. Sept. 14, 1653,  m. Rebecca Wheeler. (8)
   8--3 Martha,     b. Sept. 22, 1657,  d. single,           Nov. 23,
          1678, a. 21. She was engaged to be married, but d. unmarried,
          leaving a will, in which she directed that at her funeral her
          betrothed husband, "John Morgan Jr. be all over mourning, and
          follow next after me."
   9--4 Stephen,    b. Aug. 10, 1662,   m. Mary Clark,       Dec. 1,
          1686. (9)
  10--5 Samuel,     b. July 3, 1665,    m. Hannah Jones of Concord. (10)
  11--6 An infant,  d. in infancy.

(4) II. James Minot [3--2] d. in Dorchester, March 30, 1676, a. 48. He
left no will. His estate was prized at L555. 18. 6. He m. 1st, Dec.
9, 1653, Hannah Stoughton, dau. of Col. Israel Stoughton, and sister
of the Hon. Wm. Stoughton, Lieut. Gov. of Massachusetts. She was b.
April, 1637, admitted to the church, 1662, and d. March 12, 1670, a.
33. He m. 2nd, Hephzibah Corlet, sister of Arnis Corlet, May 21, 1673,
in Cambridge. After Mr. Minot's death, she m. Daniel Champney, June 4,
1684. Mr. Minot had the following children;

  12--1 Israel,     b. Oct. 18, 1654,   d. unmarried.
  13--2 George,     b. Nov. 14, 1655.
  14--3 Hannah,     b. ---- --, 1657,   d. Feb. 16, 1659.
  15--4 James,      b. April 2, 1659,   m. Rebecca Jones, Feb. 9, 1686.
          (11)
  16--5 William,    b. Sept. 18, 1662.
  17--6 Elisabeth,  b. Dec. 27, 1663,   m. John Danforth, Nov. 21, 1682.
  18--7 Mehetabel,  b. Sept. 17, 1668,  m. 1. Thomas Cooper, 2. Solomon
         Stoddard, Esq.

(5) II. Stephen Minot [4--3] d. in Dorchester, Feb. 16, 1671, a. 40,
intestate, leaving an estate of L651. 4. 7. He m. Truccrosse Davenport,
Nov. 10, 1654. She d. Aug. 3, 1692, a. 58. They had

  19--1 Martha,     b. Sept. 22, 1657,  d. Oct. 11, 1683.
  20--2 Jonathan,   b. Sept. 11, 1658,  d. Nov. 29, 1658.
  21--3 Elisabeth,  d. Nov. 24, 1663.
  22--4 Mehetabel,  b. June 4, 1665,    m. Edward Mills of Boston. She
          d. Aug. 16, 1690, leaving one son, Stephen Mills.
  23--5 Elisabeth,  b. June 10, 1672, after the death of her father. She
          and Stephen Mills inherited Mr. Minot's property.

(6) II. Samuel Minot [5--4] d. in Dorchester, Dec. 18, 1690. He m.
Hannah Howard, June 23, 1670. They had two children;

  24--1 George,  b. ---- 1675.
  25--2 Samuel,  b. Nov. 23, 1688,  d. June 1, 1689.


THIRD GENERATION.

(7) III. John Minot [6--1] d. Jan. 26, 1690. His will is recorded in
the Suffolk Records, Vol. VII. p. 64. His estate was prized at L680.
17. He m. Elisabeth Brick, March 11, 1670, who d. April 6, 1690. They
both d. in Dorchester of the small-pox. Their children were

  26--1 John,     b. Oct. 10, 1672,  m. Mary Baker, May 21, 1696. (12)
  27--2 Israel,   b. Aug. 23, 1676.
  28--3 Josiah,   b. Dec. 27, 1677.
  29--4 Jerusha,  b. Jan. 28, 1679.
  30--5 George,   b. Aug. 16, 1682.

(8) III. James Minot, Esq., [7--2] was b. Sept. 14, 1653, and
graduated at H. C. in 1675. He studied divinity and physic. He kept
the grammar-school in Dorchester in 1679, but soon after removed to
Concord, where he was employed as a teacher and physician. In 1685,
he was hired to preach in Stow, "for 12. 6 per day, one half cash and
one half Indian corn;" and again in 1686 for "what older towns had
given their ministers--L13 for 13 sabbaths." In 1692 he had another
application to preach there, which he declined. Relinquishing the
profession soon after, he was appointed Justice of the Peace in 1692,
and a Captain of the militia, then offices of much distinction. He
represented the town several years in General Court, was much employed
in various public trusts, and distinguished himself for his talents
and excellent character. He d. Sept. 20, 1735, a. 83. He m. Rebecca,
dau. of Capt. Timothy Wheeler, the founder of the ministerial fund in
Concord, and inherited the homestead of his father-in-law, near the
residence of the Hon. Daniel Shattuck, where he d. She d. Sept. 23,
1734, a. 68. The following are the epitaphs on the gravestones erected
to their memories, now standing in the "Hill Burying-Ground," in
Concord.

           Here is interred the remains of
            JAMES MINOTT, Esq., A. M. an
            Excelling Grammarian, Enriched
        with the Gift of Prayer and Preaching,
        a Commanding Officer, a Physician of
         Great Value, a Great Lover of Peace
        as well as of Justice, and which was
    His greatest Glory, a Gent'n of distinguished
      Virtue and Goodness, happy in a Virtuous
       Posterity, and living Religiously, Died
         Comfortably, Sept. 20, 1735, AEt. 83.

            Here is interred the body of
           Mrs Rebecca Minott ye virtuous
             Consort of James Minott Esq.
       (and daughter of Capt. Timothy Wheeler)
                 She was a person of
             Serious piety and abounding
            charity, of great usefulness
              in Her Day, and a pattern
                of Patience and holy
               Submission under a long
            Confinement, and resigned Her
                Soul with Joy in her
                Redeemer Sept 23, 1734
                       aged 68.

The following were children of James Minot, Esq.;

  31--1 Rebecca,        b. Feb.   9, 1685,  m. Joseph Barrett,
          Dec.  27, 1701.      (13)
  32--2 Lydia,          b. March 12, 1687,  m. Benjamin Barrett,
          Jan.   3, 1705.      (14)
  33--3 Mary,           b. Nov.  16, 1689,  m. Ebenezer Wheeler,
          Sept. 26, 1706.
  34--4 Timothy,        b. June  18, 1692,  m. 1. Mary Brooks--2.
          Beulah Brown.       (15)
  35--5 James,          b. Oct.  17, 1694,  m. 1. Martha Lane--2.
          Elisabeth Merrick.  (16)
  36--6 Elisabeth,      b. Jan.  29, 1697,  m. Daniel Adams,
          April 23, 1715.          (17)
  37--7 Martha,         b. April  3, 1699,  m. James Lane,
          April 30, 1719. She d. Jan. 18, 1739, in Bedford, a. 40.
  38--8 Love, } twins.  b. April 15, 1702,  m. John Adams,
          Dec. 13, 1722.           (18)
  39--9 Mercy,}                             m. Samuel Dakin,
          Dec. 13, 1722.           (19)
  40--10 Samuel,        b. March 25, 1706,  m. 1. Sarah Prescott,
          2. Dorcas Prescott. (20)

In the above family, two sisters married two brothers by the name of
Barrett; two other sisters married brothers by the name of Adams; a
brother and a sister married a brother and sister by the name of Lane,
and two were born the same day and married the same day.

There are few parents who have so great reason to be "happy in a
virtuous posterity," as had these. One son was a minister, another
was a deacon, and eight of the grandchildren were deacons or married
to deacons; several were clergymen or married to clergymen. Very
many of the great-grandchildren sustained the same offices, or were
otherwise distinguished in military, civil, or religious life. A large
proportion of those who arrived at mature age professed religion; and
the succeeding and numerous families were among the most respected,
useful, and influential in the towns in which they lived. Very many
distinguished men descended from them; among whom were Rev. Stephen
and Hon. Timothy Farrar of New Ipswich, N. H., Roger Minot Sherman, of
Fairfield, Ct., and several eminent physicians by the name of Adams;
and Hon. Roger Sherman, and several other distinguished men of New
Haven married descendants.

(9) III. Stephen Minot [9--4] d. in Sudbury street, Boston. He left a
will, recorded in Suffolk Records, Vol. XXXI. p. 82. He was a merchant
and member of Brattle Street Church; married Mary Clark, dau. of Capt.
Christopher Clark, Dec. 1, 1686. They had the following children;

  41--1 Rebecca,  b. Aug.  20, 1687, d. Aug. 26 of the same year.
  42--2 Stephen,  b. Oct.  27, 1688, m. 1. Sarah Wainwright; 2. Mary
          Brown. (21)
  43--3 John,     b. Dec.  27, 1690, d. at Brunswick, Jan. 11, 1764.
  44--4 Mehetabel, b. Dec.  6, 1692,     was engaged to be married to
          Richard Bills, when her father made his will.
  45--5 Lydia,    b. May   15, 1695, m. Joseph Eaton, May 10, 1720; had
          one dau.
  46--6 Rebecca,  b. Nov.   6, 1697, m. Samuel Miller, Oct. 8, 1724.
  47--7 George,   b. Jan.  21, 1700, d. Nov. 13, 1702, of the small-pox.
  48--8 Peter,    b. March  4, 1702, d. Oct. 30, 1702, of the small-pox.
  49--9 George,   b. Jan.  29, 170-, m. Elisabeth Moore of North
          Carolina, by whom he had a son who d. in infancy, and a
          dau. Sarah who m. Nathaniel Taylor, Esq., an officer of the
          customs in Boston. Mr. Minot d. Jan. 18, 1785. He was a
          merchant, and owned the T wharf in Boston.
  50--10 Christopher, b. gr. at H. C. 1725, was an officer of the
          customs in Boston until 1776, when he removed to Halifax,
          where he d. unmarried, May 12, 1783, a. 77.
  51--11 Peter, b. m. was drowned at Halifax with his wife.
  52--12 James, b. was a merchant at Jamaica where he d. unmarried.

(10) III. Samuel Minot [10--5] m. Hannah Jones of Concord. He d. young,
and his only son Jonathan Minot was in Concord, in 1707, being then
14 years old, when he chose his uncle John Minot of Dorchester his
guardian.

(11) III. James Minot [15--4] lived in Concord, where he m. Rebecca
Jones, Feb. 9, 1688. She was the dau. of John Jones. He d. leaving one
son, and she m. for her second husband Capt. Joseph Bulkeley, March
9, 1696, by whom she had several children. She d. July 12, 1712, a.
50. Two of her children, Rebecca and Dorothy, mentioned below, were
by Capt. Bulkeley, her second husband, and are therefore not numbered
with the Minot Family, not being descendants. That there may be no
misunderstanding, their surname is inserted.

  54--1 Jonathan,          b.                 m. Elisabeth Stratton,
          Jan. 26, 1714. (22)
  54--2 Rebecca Bulkeley,  b. Dec. 25, 1696,  m. Joseph Hubbard,
          Nov. 10, 1713.
  54--3 Dorothy Bulkeley,  b. Jan.  7, 1699,  m. Samuel Hunt,
          Nov. 14, 1716.

About 1725 Jonathan Minot of Westford, (then part of Chelmsford,) and
Joseph Hubbard sold to Thomas Jones of Concord, "the whole of the
right of their mother, Rebecca Bulkeley, deceased in Acton, allowed
to the heirs of her father John Jones, and to Dorothy Hunt, deceased,
the former wife of Samuel Hunt, one of the heirs of Rebecca Bulkeley."
Joseph Hubbard was the ancestor of most of the name in Concord.


FOURTH GENERATION.

(12) IV. John Minot [26--1] m. Mary Baker of Dorchester, where he
lived as a farmer. She d. Feb. 18, 1717. He m. for his 2nd wife Hannah
Endecott, Nov. 14, 1717, and d. soon after. His wife administered on
the estate, prized at L1221. He had the following children all by his
first wife;

  55--1 Elisabeth, b. June  6, 1699, d. young.
  56--2 John,      b. June  1, 1701.
  57--3 George,    b. Sept. 7, 1703, m. Abigail Fenno, Dec. 24, 1724.
          (23)
  58--4 Mary,      b. Dec. 10, 1705, d. in infancy.
  59--5 Mary,      b. March 9, 1708.
  60--6 Elisabeth, b. Feb. 23, 1711, m. Thomas Wyer, Jan. 27, 1729.

(13) IV. Capt. Joseph Barrett, son of Dea. Humphrey Barrett, and a
grandson of Humphrey Barrett, who came from England to Concord ab.
1640, b. in Concord, Jan. 31, 1678, m. Rebecca Minot [31--1] Dec. 27,
1701. He was a farmer and lived where Abel B. Haywood now [1847] lives.
He d. April 4, 1736, a. 58. She d. June 23, 1738, a. 53. Their children
were

  61--1 Mary,      b. April 6, 1706, m. Dea. George Farrar. (24)
  62--2 Joseph,    b. Jan. 30, 1708, m. and settled in Grafton, where he
          d. leaving two daughters.
  63--3 Rebecca,   b. July 12, 1710.
  64--4 Oliver,    b. Jan. 12, 1712, m. Hannah Hunt, Dec. 8, 1738. (25)
  65--5 Humphrey,  b. Oct. 24, 1715, m. Elisabeth Adams, Dec. 9, 1742. (26)
  66--6 Elisabeth, b. Jan.  9, 1717, m. Col. Charles Prescott. (27)
  67--7 John,      b. Feb. 14, 1720, m. Lois Brooks, Nov. 15, 1744. (28)
  68--8 Samuel,    b. July  8, 1725, d. Jan. 1728.

(14) IV. Capt. Benjamin Barrett, brother of the preceding, b. May 7,
1681, m. Lydia Minot [32--2] Jan. 3, 1705. He was a farmer, and lived
in Concord, where James Barrett now (1847) lives, and where he d. of
the pleurisy fever, Oct. 28, 1728, a. 47. His widow m. Samuel Stow. Mr.
Barrett had the following children;

  69--1 Benjamin,  b. Nov.  15, 1705,  m. Rebecca Jones. (29)
  70--2 Thomas,    b. Oct.   2, 1707,  m. Mary Jones. (30)
  71--3 James,     b. July  31, 1710,  m. Rebecca Hubbard,    Dec. 21,
          1732. (31)
  72--4 Lydia,     b. Aug.   2, 1712,  m. Dea. Samuel Farrar, Jan. 31,
          1732. (32)
  73--5 Rebecca,   b. March 29, 1714,  m. Elnathan Jones,     Jan. 31,
          1732. She d. Feb. 8, 1733, without issue.
  74--6 Timothy,   b. Jan. 13, 1716,    m. widow Dinah Witt, lived in
          Paxton, was a deacon, had one dau., Persis, b. Feb. 3, 1752,
          who m. Ithamer Bigelow of Shrewsbury, Feb. 16, 1769, had 7
          children. Mrs. Barrett d. ab. 1754. He was afterwards twice
          m. but had no other children. He d. Jan. 4, 1800, a. 83.
  75--7 Mary,      b. Dec. 27, 1717,    d. without issue.
  76--8 Stephen,   b. April 18, 1720,   m. Elisabeth Hubbard, then widow
          Howe of Concord, and settled in Paxton. He left 3 sons and
          1 daughter; Stephen, Israel, Benjamin, and Lydia. The sons
          removed to Whitestown near Utica, N. Y., all married and had
          families. The dau. m. Israel Stone of Portland, and went to
          Ohio. She had a large family.

(15) IV. Rev. Timothy Minot [34--4] gr. H. C. 1718, m. 1. Mary Brooks,
who d. Feb. 15, 1760, a. 61, and "her name," says the record of her
death, "is like precious ointment." His 2nd wife was widow Beulah Brown
of Sudbury, who d. April 13, 1786, a. 92. He d. Nov. 30, 1778, a. 86.
A biographical notice of this distinguished man is given in Shattuck's
History of Concord, p. 244. He gr. H. C. 1718. His children were

  77--1 Timothy,  b. April 8, 1726,   m. Mary Martin. (33)
  78--2 Mary,     b. Dec.  27, 1730,  m. Tilly Merrick, July 30, 1752.
          (34)
  79--3 Stephen,  b. Jan.  30, 1732, gr. H. C. 1751, was about to settle
          as a minister at Portland, but d. Sept. 3, 1759, a. 27.

(16) IV. Hon. James Minot [35--5] d. in Concord, Feb. 6, 1759, a. 64.
He m. 1. Martha Lane of Billerica, Nov. 14, 1716. She d. Jan. 18,
1735, a. 40. He m. 2. Elisabeth Merrick of Brookfield, in 1736. She
d. Jan. 26, 1746. He m. a third wife, but her name is not recorded.
The following epitaph is copied from his gravestone in the "Hill
Burying-Ground," in Concord; and tradition awards to him all the praise
it pays to his distinguished character. He held a military commission
thirty years.

    Here lye the remains of Col. James Minott
    Esqr.} who departed this life Feb. 6, 1759
    in the 65th year of his age. He was of
    Honl. Descent, early improved & advanced
    in Civil and Military Affairs. Divers years
    Represented this Town at the General Court
    was a Justice of the Peace, and one of the Hon.
    His Majesties Council for many years, which
    Offices he Sustained until his death.
    In all which Stations and relations of life he
    behaved as the Christian, the Patriot, and the
    benevolent friend, and as he merrited so he
    was much loved and honored in his life
    and Lamented at his death.
    Memento mori.
    'From death's arrest no age is free.'

The following were the children of Hon. James Minot, the first three by
his first, and the last two by his second wife;

  80--1 John,    b. Aug. 31, 1717, m. Sarah Stow,          Jan.  26,
          1744. (35)
  81--2 Rebecca, b. May  15, 1720, m. Benjamin Prescott,   Aug.  12,
          1741. (36)
  82--3 James,   b. Jan. 20, 1726, m.
                (37)
  83--4 Martha,  b. Feb.  1, 1738, m. Rev. Josiah Sherman, Jan.  24,
          1757. (38)
  84--5 Ephraim, b. June 17, 1742, m. Abigail Prescott,    Sept. 25,
          1764. (39)

(17) IV. Capt. Daniel Adams lived in the south part of Lincoln, then
within the limits of Concord, on the road from Waltham to Stow, where
he d. Feb. 9, 1780, a. 90. He was the son of Joseph, and grandson of
John Adams, one of the eight sons of Henry of Quincy. He m. Elisabeth
Minot, [36--6] April 23, 1715. She d. Nov. 12, 1764, a. 67. They had
the following children;

  85--1 Daniel,    b. Oct.  15, 1720, m. Keziah Brooks and two others.
          (40)
  86--2 Elisabeth, b. Oct.   1, 1722, m. Humphrey Barrett,  Dec.   9,
          1742. (26)
  87--3 Joseph,    b. Oct.   5, 1724, m. Mary Eveleth of Stow,   ----
          1746. (41)
  88--4 Rebecca,   b. Sept.  2, 1727, m. Nathan Brown,      March 10,
          1747. (42)
  89--5 James,     b. March 19, 1732, m. 1. Keziah Conant--2. Delia
          Adams.  (43)
  90--6 Lydia,     b. Sept.  1, 1735, m. Abel Miles,        Feb.  26,
          1756. (44)
  91--7 Martha,    b. April 13, 1738, m. Joseph Wellington, April  1,
          1760.
  92--8 Mary,      b. May   18, 1730, m. 1. Peter Hubbard--2. Capt.
          Timothy Wheeler, who had Martha, m. Joel Dix, who died in
          Boston in 1837, Joseph, and perhaps others. He was captain
          of the militia in Concord on April 19, 1775. See Hist. of
          Concord, p. 107.

These individuals had 69 children, averaging eight and five eighths
each.

(18) IV. John Adams, a brother of the above, lived near the centre
of Lincoln, where he d. Oct. 25, 1725, a. 28. He was buried in "Hurd
Burying-Ground" in Concord. He married Love Minot, [38--8] sister to
his brother's wife. They had two children.

  93--1 John,  b. Nov. 11, 1723,  m. Lucy Hubbard, Dec. 12, 1749. (45)
  94--2 Lucy,  b. Jan. 23, 1725,  m. Rev. Wm. Lawrence of Lincoln. (46)

(19) IV. Capt. Samuel Dakin was b. in Concord and lived in Sudbury.
He went as commander of a military company, commissioned by Governor
Pownall, and was slain in a battle with the French and Indians at Half
Way Brook, near Lake George, July 20, 1758. He m. Mercy Minot, [39--9]
Dec. 13, 1732. Their children were

   95--1  Oliver,    b. March 30, 1727.
   96--2  Mercy,     b. Sept. 12, 1729,  d. young.
   97--3  Samuel,    b. May   17, 1731.
   98--4  Amos,      b. Jan.  29, 1732.
   99--5  Mercy,     b. April 24, 1733.
  100--6 Elisabeth,  b. Aug.   9, 1734.
  101--7 Beulah,     b. March 22, 1735,  m. Thomas Baker, Jan. 15, 1755.
  102--8 Timothy,    b. June   7, 1737.
  103--9 Hannah,     b. Aug.  28, 1739.
  104--10 Mary,      b. Aug.      1741.
  105--11 Samuel,} twins.  b. June 21, 1744,  m. 1. Ann Wheeler,
                 }                               2. Mehetabel ----.
  106--12        }

(20) IV. Dea. Samuel Minot [40--10] was a deacon in the Concord church,
where he d. March 17, 1766. He m. 1. Sarah Prescott of Westford, March
7, 1732, who d. in childbirth, March 22, 1737, a. 24, having had three
children. He m. 2. Dorcas Prescott, sister of his first wife, in 1738.
She d. June 16, 1803, a. 91. They had the following children;

  107--1 Samuel,           b. Dec.  23, 1732,  m. Elisabeth Davis, lived in
          Boston, had several children, all of whom d. young except
          Joanna.
  108--2 Jonas,            b. April 25, 1735,  m. Mary Hall of Westford.
          (47)
  109--3 Sarah Thankful,   b. March  4, 1737,  m. Dea. Ama Dakin of
          Mason, N. H.
  110--4 Dorcas Prescott,  b. March 24, 1739,  m. Thomas Barrett, Jr.,
          Jan. 15, 1761.
  111--5 George,           b. Oct.  23, 1741,  m. three wives by the
          name of Barrett. (48)
  112--6 Rebecca,          b. Jan.  14, 1744,  m. Charles Barrett of New
          Ipswich, 1799.
  113--7 Daniel,           b. Aug.  29, 1748,  d. Dec. 20, 1753, a. 5.
  114--8 Mary,             b. Oct.   5, 1755,  m. Elnathan Jones.

(21) IV. Stephen Minot [42--2] lived in Boston. He m. for his first
wife Sarah, eldest daughter of Col. Francis Wainwright. They lived
together ten months, when she d., Oct. 21, 1711, in childbirth, leaving
one child, Stephen. He m. for his second wife, Mary, daughter of
Capt. John Brown of Marblehead, Jan. 1, 1713. They had the following
children;

  115--1 Stephen,    b. Sept. 21, 1711,  m. Sarah Clark, June 10, 1736.
          (49)
  116--2 John,       b.           1712,  d. in infancy.
  117--3 John,       b.           1714,  d. in infancy.
  118--4 John,       b.           1716.
  119--5 Mary,       b. May   28, 1718.
  120--6 William,    b.           1720.
  121--7 Elisabeth,  b. June,     1722.
  122--8 Mehetabel,  b.           1724.  m. Walter Logan, Esq., an
          officer of the Customs of Boston. He d. in Glasgow in
          Scotland, Nov. 10, 1788.
  123--9 Jane,       b. Sept. 11, 1726,  m. Capt. Nathaniel Williams of
          Roxbury. He d. 1774. They had one child, who d. in infancy.
          She m. again Elisha Brewster, merchant of Middleton, Ct., in
          1778.
  124--10 George,    b.           1728,  d. in infancy.
  125--11 George,    b.           1730, gr. H. C. in 1752.
  126--12 Sarah,     b.           1732.

(22) IV. Jonathan Minot [54--1] lived in Westford, where he d. He m.
Elisabeth Stratton of Concord, Jan. 26, 1714, by whom he had children.

  127--1 Samuel,    b. Sept. 10, 1714,  m. Elisabeth ----.
  128--2 Elisabeth, b. Jan.  30, 1717.
  129--3 Rebecca,   b. April  2, 1719.
  130--4 Jonathan, b. Jan. 19, 1723, m. Esther Proctor of
          Chelmsford. (50)
  131--5 Anna,      b. Sept. 13, 1725.
  132--6 John,      b. Dec.  16, 1730.

                          (To be continued.)




BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES OF DECEASED PHYSICIANS IN MASSACHUSETTS.

BY EBENEZER ALDEN, M. D.

(Continued from page 64.)


IV.--DR. HENRY WELLS OF MONTAGUE.

Few physicians have enjoyed a more enviable reputation than the subject
of this Notice. He was the personal friend of Professor Nathan Smith of
Dartmouth College, who was accustomed to speak of him in terms of the
highest respect, and not unfrequently to allude, in his lectures, to
his medical opinions and modes of practice.

Although Dr. Wells was in the habit of keeping a record of his more
important cases, and of his views on medical subjects, he published but
little, and his papers having become by an unfortunate accident a prey
to the devouring element, materials are wanting from which to prepare a
notice adapted to do full justice to his merits.

Soon after his death, Rev. Samuel Willard, D. D., of Deerfield,
published in the Franklin Herald a brief but very just obituary notice
of him; and more recently Dr. Williams has prepared a memoir, which has
been transferred to his Medical Biography, from his address before the
Massachusetts Medical Society.

From these sources principally, the following facts have been obtained.

Dr. Wells was born in New York, in 1742; studied medicine partly under
the direction of Dr. Hull at Lebanon, Ct., and completed his medical
studies in New York, having made himself well acquainted with medical
science.

At the age of twenty-one, he commenced the practice of his profession
in New York, and according to the custom of that day, had under his
charge an apothecary's shop. After a short residence there, he removed
to Brattleborough, Vt., where he continued eighteen years, and acquired
an extensive practice and high reputation.

In the year 1782 he removed to Montague, with a view of obtaining a
more central situation as to his business, and, perhaps, to diminish
somewhat his labors in advancing life.

In 1785 he was elected a Fellow of the Massachusetts Medical Society;
and Dr. Williams states, that in 1806 he received the honorary degree
of M. D. from Dartmouth College, which may be a mistake, as his name
does not appear in the Triennial Catalogue.

In his profession, Dr. Wells attained the most distinguished rank. His
natural powers were good; his medical reading extensive and judicious;
his application methodical and patient. His eminent skill, however, in
the management of disease, was derived chiefly from his own observation
and experience. Possessing a clear and discriminating mind and an
accurate judgment, his practical deductions were remarkably just. In
difficult cases, his advice was much sought and highly appreciated.
Punctual in his professional engagements, courteous in his manners,
modest and unassuming in his intercourse with his medical brethren, he
was highly respected by the profession and the public.

As a man, he was much beloved. He professed a firm belief in the
gospel, and was much attached to the moral and religious institutions
of his country. He was a pattern of temperance; his general influence
was salutary; and his example such as might be safely imitated.

He was a kind husband and father. He was not exempt from domestic
affliction, three of his children being deaf mutes.

In the latter years of his life, he suffered much from disease, which
he bore with exemplary resignation, and, having passed the allotted
period of human life, died August 24, 1814, at the age of 72; leaving
behind him that _good name_ which is _better than precious ointment_.


V.--DR. GRIDLEY THAXTER OF ABINGTON.

He was a native of Hingham; born in 1756; studied medicine with his
brother, Dr. Thomas Thaxter of Hingham; and was a surgeon on board some
armed vessels during the Revolutionary war.

About the year 1780, he settled in Abington, and as a physician for
more than half a century enjoyed a very extensive practice. He probably
rode more miles, and visited more patients, than any other physician
who ever resided in the county of Plymouth.

He retained his faculties in very vigorous exercise until within a few
years of his death, when he became superannuated, and suffered under
alienation of mind, probably in consequence of bodily injury occasioned
by a fall.

He was remarkable for his iron constitution and power of endurance. He
rarely used a carriage in making his professional visits, preferring to
ride on horseback as long as he was able to attend to business.

In his habits he was frugal and temperate, never using distilled
liquors, not merely from choice, but from necessity, they being
extremely offensive and odious to him.

He was much beloved by his patients; was an estimable citizen, and
worthy man. His professional charges were moderate, especially for
attendance on persons in straitened circumstances.

He was a pleasant companion; a kind father, and fast friend.

His first wife was the daughter of Gen. Benjamin Lincoln of Hingham, by
whom he had a numerous family.

Ezekiel Thaxter, M. D., (H. C., 1812,) now resident in Abington, is his
son.

He died Feb. 10, 1845, aged 89.


VI.--DR. EZEKIEL DODGE CUSHING, OF HANOVER.

Dr. Cushing, a classmate and personal friend of the writer, was
descended from

1. Mathew Cushing, a son of Peter Cushing of Norfolk, Eng., who was
born in 1588, and in 1638 came to Boston, in the ship Diligent, with
his wife and five children; namely, Daniel, Jeremiah, Matthew, Deborah,
and _John_2. They settled at Hingham in the autumn of that year.
Matthew Cushing died at Hingham in 1660; his widow survived to 1681,
aged 96.

2. John Cushing{2} was born in England, in 1627, married Sarah, daughter
of Nicholas Jacob, and settled in Scituate. He was many years a deputy
in the Colony Court, and Representative to the Court at Boston after
the Colonies were united, in 1692 and several succeeding years. He died
1708, and his wife in 1678.

3. John Cushing{3}, son of the above, was born 1662, and died 1737. He
was Chief-Justice of the Inferior Court of Plymouth, from 1710 to 1728;
and Judge of the Supreme Court, from 1728 to the time of his decease.
John Cotton says, "he was the life and soul of the Court." He married
Deborah Loring of Hull, in 1687, who died 1713. Their children were
Sarah, Deborah, John, _Elijah_4, Mary, Nazareth, Benjamin, Nathaniel.

4. Elijah Cushing{4}, settled in Pembroke, and married Elisabeth Barker,
1724. They had sons, Elijah, _Nathaniel_5, Joseph, (H. C., 1752,) and
daughters, Mary, wife of Gen. Benjamin Lincoln, Deborah, wife of Rev.
Dr. Shute, and Elisabeth, wife of Major Cushing, all of Hingham.

5. Nathaniel Cushing{5} had sons, _Nathaniel_6, Benjamin, and Charles.

6. Nathaniel Cushing{6}, Esq., father of the subject of this Notice,
resided at Pembroke, now Hanson; married Mary, daughter of Rev. Ezekiel
Dodge of Abington, who graduated at H. C., 1749, and died 1770, aged
48. Their children were _Ezekiel Dodge_7, Mehetabel, Lucy, George, and
Elijah.

7. Ezekiel Dodge Cushing{7}, was born in 1790; graduated at Harvard
University, in 1808; commenced the study of medicine under the tuition
of Dr. Gad Hitchcock, of his native town; and after one year, became a
pupil of Dr. Nathan Smith, Professor in the Medical School of Dartmouth
College, where he received the degree of Bachelor in Medicine, in 1811.

His education was extended by attendance on the Hospitals and Lectures
in Philadelphia. He then visited London and Paris; in the former
city, acting as a dresser in St. Thomas' Hospital, while attending
the Lectures of Abernethy, Sir Astley Cooper, and others; and in the
latter, was present when it was occupied by the allies, witnessing
daily in the crowded hospitals a most extensive surgical practice.

Thus furnished for the practical duties of his profession, he returned
to his native country and settled in Boston, where he acquired the
reputation of an able and successful physician, and obtained a
respectable circle of business.

After a few years, perhaps being too impatient "to bide his time,"
and desirous of pursuing a more active life, he removed to Hanover,
where his services were much sought, and highly appreciated in a
widely extended circle. He was frequently called to advise with his
professional brethren in cases of difficulty, and to them as well as
to his employers, his opinions gave great satisfaction. It could not
well be otherwise, for he possessed eminent skill and tact in his
profession, and with it that urbanity and kindness of manner, which
secured the confidence of all with whom he had intercourse.

Just as his reputation had become established, and when his prospects
for long life and extended usefulness appeared most fair, he was
smitten with disease, appearing first in the form of an epileptic
affection, and then of partial paralysis, which issued in an entire
loss of tone in the digestive organs, and ultimately terminated in his
death, on the fifth of April, 1828, at the age of 38.

Thus died an amiable man and accomplished physician. Possessing
naturally a vigorous constitution, he probably in early life exposed
himself to unnecessary dangers; and when disease fastened upon him its
iron grasp, relying too much on his former experience, he failed to
exercise that care in his own case, which he would have recommended to
others in like circumstances. His memory will be cherished by all who
knew him, and his virtues may well be emulated by every aspirant to
honest fame, in the profession of which he was an ornament.

He married Delia Sawyer, daughter of Capt.---- Sawyer of Boston, and
left seven children; all of whom, except two who died young, with
their widowed mother survive to mourn his early death.

The following lines of his Epitaph, written by one who knew him well,
are remarkably just.

    "Where'er the scenes of woe were laid,
      His presence brightened hope and health;
    Enough for him that duty bade,
      Without the _line_ of sordid wealth."

See History of Scituate, and a Dissertation of George C. Shattuck, M.
D., in the Communications of the Massachusetts Medical Society, Vol. IV.




SKETCHES OF ALUMNI AT THE DIFFERENT COLLEGES IN NEW ENGLAND.

REV. ETHAN SMITH OF BOYLSTON, MS.


Ethan Smith was born in Belchertown, Ms., Dec. 19, 1762, and while
young, was a soldier for one summer in the Revolutionary war, and
was at West Point when the traitor Arnold sold that fortress to the
British. Having attended to the preparatory studies, he entered
Dartmouth College in 1786, and graduated in 1790. Soon after taking his
degree, Mr. Smith was licensed to preach, and spent the first Sabbath
of October, 1790, at Haverhill, N. H., where he was first settled
in the ministry. In about a year from that time, he was married to
Bathsheba Sandford, second daughter of Rev. David Sandford, of Medway,
Ms. He remained at Haverhill nine years, and was then dismissed for
want of support. He was installed in the ministry at Hopkinton, N.
H., March 12, 1800, and continued there about eighteen years, during
sixteen of which he was Secretary of the New Hampshire Missionary
Society. He was afterwards settled at Hebron, N. Y., about four years;
at Poultney, Vt., about five years; at Hanover, Ms., a number of years;
and then spent a season as a city missionary in Boston. Occasionally,
he has since preached as a supply, but has now retired from the labors
of the ministry, and resides with his children. Mr. Smith has always
been a laborious, and, in many respects, a very successful minister
of Christ. His publications are as follows; namely, 1. A Dissertation
on the Prophecies, 2 editions; 2. A View of the Trinity, 2 editions;
3. A View of the Hebrews, 2 editions; 4. Lectures on the Subjects
and Mode of Baptism, 2 editions; 5. A Key to the Figurative Language
of the Bible; 6. Memoirs of Mrs. Abigail Bailey; 7. A Key to the
Revelation, 2 editions; 8. Prophetic Catechism; 9. Two Sermons on
Episcopacy; 10. Farewell Sermon at Haverhill, N. H.; 11. First Sermon
after Installation at Hopkinton; 12. Two Sermons on the Vain Excuses
of Sinners, preached at Washington, N. H.; 13. Sermon on the Moral
Perfection of God, preached at Newburyport, Ms.; 14. Sermon on the
Daughters of Zion excelling, preached before a Female Cent Society; 15.
Sermon on the happy Transition of Saints, preached at the funeral of
Mrs. Jemima, consort of Rev. Dr. Harris of Dunbarton; 16. Sermon at the
Ordination of Rev. Stephen Martindale, at Tinmouth, Vt.; 17. Sermon at
the Ordination of Rev. Harvey Smith, at Weybridge, Vt.

The Genealogy of this branch of the Smith family is as follows;
namely, Joseph Smith removed from Wethersfield, Ct., to Hadley, Ms.,
about the year 1659. He had four sons, who lived to maturity; namely,
Joseph, _John_, Jonathan, and Benjamin. _John_ was born 1686, settled
in Hadley, and died 1777, aged 91 years. He had five sons, and five
daughters. The sons were, John, Abner, father of the late Rev. Abner
Smith of Derby, Ct., Daniel, Joseph, who was father of Rev. Eli Smith
of Hollis, the late Rev. Amasa Smith, and the late Rev. Dr. John Smith
of Bangor, Me., and also _Elijah_. _Elijah_ was born 1723, was married,
in 1751, to Sibil, daughter of Daniel Worthington of Colchester, Ct.,
and had by her six sons and three daughters. He served as Captain in
the French war, in 1756, under Gen. William Johnson, in the Regiment
of Col. Ephraim Williams. He was deacon of the church in Belchertown,
Ms., and died April 21, 1770. He was "a man," says Rev. Mr. Forward,
in the Church Records, "of sound judgment, ready utterance, pleasing
deportment, and ardent piety." His children were Asa, father of Rev.
Asa Smith of Virginia, and Rev. Theophilus Smith of New Canaan, Ct.;
Sibil, wife of the late Joseph Bardwell of South Hadley, Ms.; Sarah,
wife of the late Elijah Bardwell of Goshen, Ms., and mother of Rev.
Horatio Bardwell of Oxford, and of Sarah, wife of the late Rev. Wm.
Richards of the India Mission; Elijah, Elisabeth, _Ethan_, Jacob, now
deacon of the church in Hadley, and father of Elisabeth, wife of the
late Rev. William Hervey of the India Mission, of Esther, wife of Rev.
Mr. Dunbar of the Pawnee Mission, of Martha, wife of Rev. O. G. Hubbard
of Leominster, Ms., and of Miranda, wife of Rev. P. Belden of Amherst,
Ms.; William and Josiah;--all of whom lived until the youngest was 56
years of age, and all had large families of children, and their mother
saw of her descendants of the fifth generation, before she died, at the
age of 101 years, May 26, 1827.

_Ethan_, the particular subject of this Sketch, married, as stated,
Bathsheba, daughter of the late Rev. David Sanford of Medway, Ms.
Their children were Myron, born at Haverhill, N. H., 1794, and died
1818, aged 24; Lyndon Arnold, born at Haverhill, 1795, graduated at
D. C., married a daughter of Rev. Dr. Griffin, and is now settled as
a physician, in Newark, N. J.; Stephen Sanford, born at Haverhill,
1797, and is now pastor of the Congregational church, Westminster, Ms.;
Laura, who died in infancy; Carlos, born in Hopkinton, 1801, graduated
at Union College, and is now pastor of the Presbyterian church in
Massillon, Ohio; Grace Fletcher, wife of Rev. Job H. Martin, died in
Haverhill, Ms., 1840; Sarah Towne, 2nd wife of Rev. J. H. Martin of
New York; Harriet, wife of Rev. William H. Sanford of Boylston, Ms.;
and Ellen, wife of C. B. Sedgewick, Esq., of Syracuse, died May 23,
1846, aged 33.

The wife of Mr. Smith died in Pompey, N. Y., April 5, 1835, aged 64; he
is still living.


REV. ASA RAND OF PETERBOROUGH, N. Y.

Asa Rand was born at Rindge, N. H., August 6, 1783, being the youngest
son and ninth child of Col. Daniel and Mrs. Susanna Rand. Daniel Rand
was the eldest son of Solomon Rand, of Shrewsbury, Ms., who married a
daughter of the Rev. Mr. Dodge of Abington, Ms. Solomon's father also
resided in Shrewsbury, and married a daughter of Capt. Keyes of that
place; who, in the early settlement of the town, lost his unfinished
house by fire, when his two sons, a hired man, and a journeyman joiner
perished in the flames. Mrs. Susanna Rand was the only daughter of
Daniel Hemmenway, also of Shrewsbury. Col. Rand was one of the early
settlers of the town of Rindge, where he ever resided after his
marriage, in 1767. He died in 1811, aged 69. The ancestors of both the
parents of the subject of this Sketch, it is believed, were emigrants
from England; but their genealogy we can trace no farther back with
certainty.

After enjoying the usual advantages of a common school, Mr. Rand
prepared for college principally at Chesterfield Academy, New
Hampshire, under the instruction of Hon. Levi Jackson. He entered the
Sophomore Class in September, 1803, and was graduated at Dartmouth
College, in 1806. After leaving college, he taught the children of
the Hon. Elijah Paine and a few others, at Williamstown, Vt., about
nine months; studied theology with Rev. Dr. Burton of Thetford,
seven months; and in January, 1808, received the approbation of an
association as a preacher of the gospel.

He preached several months in 1808 to the Congregational church and
society in Gorham, Me., which were in a state of serious and alarming
division. Having received a unanimous invitation from both, he was
ordained their minister Jan. 18, 1809; where he was favored with a
prosperous and happy ministry during thirteen years. His health,
however, was precarious for the greater part of that time, and in June,
1822, he resigned the charge of an affectionate and united people to a
successor, believing that his work as a public speaker was done.

In August, 1822, he took the editorial charge of the Christian Mirror,
on its first establishment at Portland, Me., Mr. Arthur Shirley
being proprietor and publisher. In July, 1825, finding his health
still suffering on the sea-coast, he removed to the interior of
Massachusetts, and took charge of the new Female Seminary at Brookfield.

In July, 1826, he succeeded Gerard Hallock, as co-editor and
co-proprietor with Nathaniel Willis, of the Boston Recorder; Dea.
Willis having the charge of the printing and publishing, and Mr. Rand
of the editorial department. He was also acting-editor of the Youth's
Companion and Education Reporter, published by the same company; each
being the earliest paper of its kind established in the country. On
leaving the Recorder, in 1831, Mr. Rand continued the Reporter till it
was transferred to William C. Woodbridge and united with the Annals
of Education. He was also publisher and principal conductor of the
Volunteer, a monthly religious magazine; which, at the end of two
years, was united with the Evangelical Magazine, at Hartford, Ct.

In April, 1833, Mr. Rand removed to Lowell; where he had a connection
with a bookstore and printing office, and the publication of the Lowell
Observer, a weekly religious paper, which was subsequently transferred
to Mr. Porter, publisher of the N. E. Spectator at Boston.

On the restoration of his health, he returned in 1835 to his chosen
employment of public preaching. He lectured in the employment of
anti-slavery societies in Cumberland county, Maine, and the counties
of Hampshire and Hampden, Massachusetts. From September, 1837, he
ministered to the Congregational church in Pompey, N. Y., five years;
and is now preaching to the Presbyterian church in Peterboro, Madison
Co., N. Y.

Mr. Rand was married in November, 1812, to Grata Payson, eldest
daughter of Rev. Seth Payson, D. D., of Rindge; who died suddenly
at Gorham, April 29, 1818. Feb. 8, 1820, he was married to Clarissa
Thorndike, daughter of Nicholas Thorndike, Esq., of Beverly, Ms.;
who died at Portland, July 7, 1825. July 6, 1826, he married Mary
Coolidge, widow of Elisha Coolidge, merchant, of Boston, and daughter
of Rev. John Cushing, D. D., of Ashburnham, Ms. His third wife is still
living; also her only son by her first husband, Elisha T. Coolidge, of
Cincinnati, O.

The children of Mr. Rand's first wife were three; namely, a son, who
died on the day of his birth; Harriet Newell, who united with the
church in Lowell, was principal of the female department in Pompey
Academy several years, became, in January, 1841, the second wife of
Rev. Russell S. Cook, one of the Secretaries of the Am. Tract Society
at New York, and died suddenly in February, 1843; William Wilberforce,
who was educated at the Public Latin School in Boston, Bowdoin College,
and Bangor Theological Seminary. He was four years pastor of the
Reformed Dutch Church at Canastota, Madison Co., N. Y., and is now
preaching in Maine. He married Marcia S. Dunning, of Brunswick, Me.; of
whom, with her two children, it has pleased God to bereave him.

By his second wife Mr. Rand had also three children, who are all
living. Thorndike is a clerk in the Suffolk bank, Boston, and married
Hannah P. Nourse of Beverly. Charles Asa is clerk in a bookstore at St.
Louis, Mo. Anna Thorndike is the wife of John F. Nourse, Principal of
Beverly Academy.

While Mr. Rand resided at Gorham, a quarterly religious Magazine was
published at Portland, of which David Thurston, Edward Payson, Asa
Rand, and Francis Brown were joint conductors. In the "day of small
things" among the churches of Maine, it did good. It was published five
years, from 1814 to 1818, inclusive.

The publications of Mr. Rand are, a Sermon to Children; a Sermon
at the Ordination of Rev. Francis Brown at North Yarmouth, Jan.
11, 1810; a Sermon before the Maine Missionary Society, 1815; two
Sermons on Christian Fellowship; "A Word in Season in behalf of the
Holy Scriptures," (reviewing Quaker principles;) a pamphlet on the
Controversies in the First Church of North Yarmouth; a volume entitled
"Familiar Sermons"; a review of Finney's Sermon on making a New Heart,
entitled "New Divinity tried"; a "Vindication of the same, in reply to
Rev. Dr. Wisner"; and a "Letter to Rev. Dr. Beecher, in relation to his
ministerial course in Boston."


HON. OLIVER WENDELL OF BOSTON.

Oliver Wendell was born in Boston, March 5, 1733, [N. S.] His father,
Hon. Jacob Wendell, was born in Albany in 1691, and was a descendant of
the first of the name and family in America, that has been transmitted
to us. Evart Janson Wendell came from Embden[X] to the New Netherlands
when possessed by the Dutch, and settled at Beverwyck, the site of
Fort Orange, afterward called Albany, on Hudson river. The arms of the
family were painted on nine panes of glass in the east window of the
ancient church in Albany; namely, a ship riding at her two anchors. By
an engraved copy of these arms, in possession of the family, it appears
that Evart Janson Wendell was an officer in that church the same year
in which New Amsterdam, afterwards called New York, was laid out in
small streets eight years before the Dutch garrison at Fort Orange
capitulated to the English. The inscription is, _Regerendo Dijakin_,
1656.

Evart J. was the father of John, who was the father of Jacob. This
grandson of Evart J., the father of Oliver, was placed, while in his
minority, under the care of Mr. John Mico, an eminent merchant in
Boston, and was trained up to mercantile business. He afterwards became
settled in Boston as a merchant, and was very prosperous. He was highly
respected in the town and province; and, among other offices, was
repeatedly employed by the government in the negotiation of treaties,
and exchange of prisoners, with the Indians. He married Sarah Oliver,
the daughter of Dr. James Oliver of Cambridge, and lived in School
street, near the Episcopal church. He possessed a handsome estate in
Oliver street, where, after the destructive fire of 1760, he built a
brick house, (still standing,) in which his son Oliver lived. Since the
incorporation of the city, a street leading from Oliver street, and
passing by this place, has been named Wendell street. Mr. Wendell had
several children. His son Oliver, after finishing his education at
Harvard College, entered into mercantile business with his father, from
whose experience and counsels he may have derived no less benefit, than
from his stock in trade.

Mr. Wendell possessed a rare combination of talents and virtues,
alike adapted to the offices of public and of private life. Mild in
temper, benevolent in disposition, upright in principle, and resolute
in action, he was conciliatory in address, and exemplary in life; and
uniformly had the esteem and confidence of his friends and of the
community. He was in the consultations of the early patriots of the
American Revolution, and contributed to the acquisition and maintenance
of the liberty and independence of the Commonwealth and country. After
the Constitution was settled, he was often a member of the Senate,
and of the Council, in the government of the Commonwealth. During
his public life, he was Judge of Probate for the county of Suffolk;
President of Union Bank; a Fellow of the Corporation of Harvard
College; President of the Society for propagating the Gospel among the
Indians and others in North America; and a Trustee of Phillips Academy,
Andover. Retiring from the city, he spent several of his last years in
Cambridge, where he died, January 15, 1818, aged 85.

The evening of his days was serene and tranquil. While conscious of
uprightness, he relied not on his integrity as meritorious, but founded
his hope of future happiness on the propitiation made for sin by
Jesus Christ; this hope was a steadfast anchor to his soul. Religious
contemplation, and devotional exercises, habitual to him in public and
active life, were cherished by him in secrecy and the stillness of
retirement. Easy and gentle, at last, was his descent to the grave,
and the observer might "see in what peace a Christian can die." His
remains were deposited in the family tomb, in the Chapel burial-ground
in Boston.

To the public notice of his death was annexed the following sketch
of his character, written in the Council Chamber at the State House,
on the reception of the intelligence of his death, by a highly
respected friend,[Y] who, by long intercourse with him in public
and private life, was a competent judge of his character. "In all
relations of life, as a man, citizen, and magistrate, Judge Wendell
was distinguished for uncommon urbanity of manners, and unimpeached
integrity of conduct. During the course of a long life he had been
successively called to fill many high and responsible offices. The
punctuality and precision with which he fulfilled all the duties
connected with them, were highly exemplary. Full of years, he has
descended to the grave regretted and beloved by all who knew him;
happy in the consciousness of a life well spent, and rejoicing in the
prospect of felicity in a future state, of which a firm faith in his
Redeemer gave him the assurance."

Judge Wendell married, in 1762, Mary, a daughter of Edward Jackson, who
graduated at H. C. 1726, married Dorothy Quincy, and was a merchant of
Boston. He was the son of Jonathan, who was a brazier and nail-maker,
and married Mary Salter, March 26, 1700, lived in Boston, and left
an estate of about L30,000. He was the son of Jonathan, who married
Elizabeth---- and settled in Boston. He was born in England, and was
the son of Edward, born in 1602, who emigrated from White Chapel, a
parish in London, to this country about 1642, took the freeman's oath,
May, 1645, and in 1646 purchased of Gov. Bradstreet a farm of 500 acres
of land in that part of Cambridge which is now Newton, for L140. For
his second wife he married March 14, 1648, Elisabeth Oliver, widow of
Rev. John Oliver, the first minister of Rumney Marsh, (Chelsea,) and
daughter of John Newgate of Boston. He was one of the most respectable
men of the Colony, and was much engaged in public life. He died July
17, 1681, aged 79. Judge Wendell had several children, most of whom
died young. Oliver and Edward never married, and have deceased. Sarah
married the Rev. Dr. Abiel Holmes of Cambridge, by whom she had five
children; namely, Mary Jackson, who married Usher Parsons, M. D., of
Providence, R. I.; Ann Susan, who married Rev. Charles W. Upham of
Salem; Sarah Lathrop, who died 1812, aged 6 years; Oliver Wendell, M.
D., of Boston, who married Amelia Lee Jackson, daughter of Hon. Charles
Jackson of Boston; and John, an Attorney at law, living in Cambridge.

For the above facts we are indebted principally to the late Rev. Dr.
Holmes of Cambridge, and Francis Jackson, Esq., of Boston.


HON. JONATHAN LAW, GOVERNOR OF CONNECTICUT.

    [The facts in this Memoir were obtained through the obliging
    instrumentality of Prof. Kingsley of Yale College.]

Jonathan Law, Governor of the Colony of Connecticut, descended from
Richard Law, who came from England in the year 1640, and was one of
the first settlers in the town of Stamford, Ct., in 1641. He left one
son, Richard, who afterwards moved to Milford in that State, where his
son Jonathan, his only son and the subject of this Memoir, was born,
Aug. 6, 1674. His mother was Sarah, daughter of George Clark, Sen., a
planter. He was educated at Harvard College, then the only Academical
Institution in New England, and received his degree of Bachelor of
Arts in 1695. The law was the profession which he selected, and after
passing through the course of studies usual at that period, he was
admitted to the bar, and fixed his residence in his native town in
1698. He soon became distinguished as a lawyer and an advocate, and
after a few years was made Chief-Judge of New Haven County Court. This
office he held for five years, and in May, 1715, he was transferred to
the Bench of the Superior Court of the Colony, as one of the Associate
Judges, where he continued, with the exception of one year, till 1725.
At the annual election in 1717, he was chosen an Assistant, an office
of great trust and importance, being ex officio a Legislator, a member
of the Governor's Council, and a judicial Magistrate throughout the
Colony. This station he resigned in 1725, on his election to the
office of Lieutenant-Governor, and the same year he was appointed by
the General Assembly CHIEF-JUSTICE of the Superior Court, both which
offices he held until the year 1742; when he was elected Governor, and
continued in that office until his death, which, after a short and
painful sickness of three days, occurred at Milford, Nov. 6, 1750, at
the age of 76 years. He left seven sons and a widow, his fifth wife.

A funeral Oration in Latin was delivered on the occasion in the chapel
of Yale College, by Mr. Stiles, then senior Tutor in that Institution,
and afterwards its distinguished President. It portrays in the most
glowing colors, the mild virtues of his private life, and the singular
success of his public administration.

During this period, there was a time when religious dissensions, which
originated in the excessive zeal of itinerant preachers, had made their
way into sober and regular ecclesiastical communities, by which means
they were greatly disturbed, and the Colony was convulsed almost to its
centre.

Early in the eighteenth century, a wonderful attention to religion
had been excited in various parts of Connecticut. It seems to have
been a genuine revival, not unmingled, perhaps, with some slight alloy
of enthusiasm. Soon after this the celebrated Mr. Whitefield, whose
sincere and honest piety Cowper has immortalized in the most glowing
colors, whose eloquence vanquished on one occasion even Franklin's
philosophical caution, after preaching with the greatest applause and
effect, at the South, came to New England at the pressing invitations
of the clergymen of Boston. On his return, he passed through
Connecticut, where the people crowded to hear him, and sunk under the
weight of his powerful Christian eloquence. His example seems to have
been followed by others of weaker intellect and less judgment; by
men, who mistook the illusions of their own minds, for the operations
of the Holy Spirit. There was particularly a Mr. Davenport of Long
Island, who had been a sound and faithful minister, but, unfortunately,
partook of the same spirit, and by his precepts and example, encouraged
the wildest extravagances of sentiment and conduct. Some of the "New
Lights," (as they were called,) boldly proclaimed their intimate
communion with the Almighty, in raptures, ecstacies, trances, and
visions. A few of the clergy were not free from these errors, and
forsook their own charge to labor in the vineyards of others. In some
counties, lay-preachers sprang up, who pretended to divine impulses and
inward impressions, and professed a supernatural power of discerning
between those that were converted, and those that were not. Confusion
prevailed at their meetings, and instead of checking these unseemly
disorders, the leaders labored to increase and extend them. Such
excesses threw a shade on real piety, and threatened to subvert the
foundations of pure and genuine Christianity throughout the Colony.
The Legislature, between whom and the church there was then a much
closer connection than at this day, in consequence of the numerous
applications made to them for their interference and protection,
enacted laws, the severity of which was not justifiable, but may, in
some measure, be palliated when we consider the magnitude of the evil.
A heated zeal and a misguided conscience, rather, perhaps, than a
contempt of the authority of government, gave rise in some counties to
loud murmurs and great dissatisfaction.

Governor Law, although an ardent friend of the gospel system in its
original purity, opposed with all the energy he possessed, this wild
spirit of fanaticism. To him was its suppression, in no small degree,
to be attributed. With the skill of an experienced pilot, he kept
his eye always fixed on the star of civil and religious liberty, and
steered the political bark unhurt, amidst the dangers that surrounded
it. It was to these troubles that President Stiles alluded in the
Eulogy before spoken of, when, after paying a just compliment to his
predecessors, he adds:

    "_Sed gloria Conservandae reipublicae ac perite per procellas
    intestinas periculosissimasque confusiones fortiter et clementer
    administrandae sit soli sapienti et illustrissimo_ LAW."

It was during this term of service, likewise, that the expedition
against Cape Breton was undertaken. The plan was formed by Gov. SHIRLEY
of Massachusetts, and was executed by raw, undisciplined troops,
ignorant of the arts of regular warfare, with the most brilliant
success. He saw the great importance of this enterprise, and labored,
with unwearied industry, to prevent its failure.

Governor Law was unquestionably a man of high talents and
accomplishments, both natural and acquired. He was well acquainted with
civil and ecclesiastical subjects, and gradually rose, by the force of
his own exertions, to the highest honors of the State. He was of a mild
and placid temper, amiable in all the relations of domestic life, and
seems to have well discharged the duties imposed on him.

       *       *       *       *       *

    First-love is pure without a stain,
    The heart can never fondly love again;
    One holy shrine will in the bosom rest,
    And only one within a faithful breast.
    True love's a steady, bright, unchanging ray,
    And not the idle preference of a day;
    A fadeless flower which will for ever bloom
    Through years, in absence, and beyond the tomb.

                            _Sacred Poems, by Mrs. Bruce, London._

FOOTNOTES:

[X] A town of great commercial importance in the Dutch trade, formerly
belonging to the United Provinces of the Netherlands.

[Y] President Quincy.




DR. WATTS'S LETTER OF CONDOLENCE TO MADAM SEWALL.


    [The following letter of Dr. Watts was written to Madam Sewall,
    the wife of Maj. Samuel Sewall, a highly accomplished merchant of
    Boston, upon the sudden and affecting death of her two sons. These
    were children by her first husband, Mr. Nathan Howell, and her only
    children, for she never had any by Maj. Sewall. For the letter and
    a number of the facts in relation to the sad event, we are indebted
    to Charles Ewer, Esq.; and through his instrumentality also the
    likenesses of the youth drowned were procured from Mrs. Loring, the
    wife of Henry Loring, Esq., of this city, and are now deposited
    in the Rooms of the New England Historic, Genealogical Society.
    The Rev. Samuel Sewall of Burlington informs us that the Rev. Dr.
    Sewall of the Old South Church, in his diary, notices the event as
    follows: "1727-8 January 8, (Monday,) George and Nathan Howell abt
    15 & 14 yrs old, went a skating at the bottom of ye Common, and
    were both drowned. O Ld Sanctify this awful Providce to the near
    Relations; Support & Comfort ym: Be to yne _Handmaid_ better yn 10
    Sons: To ye Town! Awaken our young people to Remr yr Creator and
    fly to X yt yy may be safe under ye Shadow of his wings. Jany 14
    (Sabbath) I endeavoured to improve ye late awful Providce fr. Eccl.
    9. 12."

    Nathan Howell and Katherine George were married by Rev. Dr. Colman,
    Aug. 11, 1708: George and Nathan, their sons, were born,--George,
    Nov. 1, 1712, and Nathan, March 21, 1713-14.

    In Pemberton's Manuscript Chronology we find the following entry:
    "1728, January 8th, George and Nathan Howell of Boston, brothers
    about 14 and 15 years old, in skating at the bottom of the Common,
    fell through the ice and were both drowned."]

                                                 _November 7, 1728._

  MADAM,

Yesterday from Mr Sewall's hand I Received the favor of several Letters
from my Friends in New-England, and a particular account of that
sharp and surprising Stroak of Providence that has made a painful and
lasting Wound on your Soul. He desir'd a Letter from my hand directed
to you which might carry in it some Balm for an afflicted spirit. By
his Information I find that I am not an utter stranger to your Family
and Kindred. Mr Lee your Venerable Grandfather was Predecessor to Mr
Thomas Rowe my Honour'd Tutor and once my Pastor in my younger years.
Mr Peacock who married your eldest Aunt was my intimate Friend. Mrs
Bishop and Mrs Wirly were both my Acquaintance tho' my long Illness and
Absence from London has made me a stranger to their Posterity whom I
knew when Children. But now I know not who of them are living or where.
Docr Cotton Mather your late Father in Law was my yearly Correspondent,
and I lament the loss of him. But the loss you have sustained is of a
more tender and distressing kind; yet let us see whether there are not
sufficient Springs of Consolation flowing round you to allay the smart
of so great a sorrow. And may the Lord open your Eyes as he did the
Eyes of Hagar in the Wilderness so to Espy the Spring of Water when she
was dying with Thirst and her Child over against her ready to expire.
Gen. 21, 19.

Have you lost two lovely Children? Did you make them your Idols? if you
did, God hath sav'd you from Idolatry; if you did not, you have your
God still and a Creature cannot be miserable who has a God. The short
words My God have infinitely more sweetness in them than My Sons or My
Daughters. Were they desirable Blessings? Your God calls you then to
the nobler Sacrifice. Can you give up these to him at his call? God
delighteth in such a Sacrifice. Were they your All? So was Isaac when
Abraham was required to part with him at God's Altar. Are not you a
Daughter of Abraham? Then imitate you his Faith, his self-denial, his
Obedience, and make your Evidences of such a Spiritual Relation to him
shine Brighter on this solemn occasion. Has God taken them from your
Arms? had you not given them to God before? had you not devoted them
to him in Baptism? are you displeas'd that God calls for his own? was
not your heart sincere in the Resignation of them to him? Show then,
Madam, the sincerity of your Heart in leaving of them in the Hand of
God--Do you say they are lost? not out of God's sight, and God's World,
tho' they are out of our sight and our World. All live to God. You may
hope the spreading Covenant of Grace has shelter'd them from the second
Death. They live tho' not with you. Are you ready to say you have
brought forth for the Grave? it may be so, but not in vain. Isaiah 65,
23. _They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for trouble_; (that
is for Sorrow and without hope) _for they are the seed of the Blessed
of the Lord and their offspring with them_. This has been a sweet Text
to many a Mother when their Children have been called away betimes.
And the Prophet Jeremy Chap. 31, 15-17, has very comfortable words
to allay the same sorrow. Did you please yourself in what comforts
you might have derived from them in maturer years? But Madam, do you
consider sufficiently that God hath taken them away from the evil to
come, and hid them in the Grave from the prevailing and mischievous
Temptations of a degenerate age. My Brother's Wife in London has buried
seven or eight Children, and among them, all her Sons. This tho't has
reconciled her to the Providence of God, that the Temptations of young
men in this Age are so exceeding great, and she has seen so many young
Gentlemen of her acquaintance so shamefully degenerate, that she wipes
her Tears for the Sons she has buried, and composes herself to Patience
and Thankfulness with one only Daughter remaining. Perhaps God has by
this stroak prevented a thousand unknown Sorrows. Are your Sons dead?
but are your Mercies dead too? A worthy Husband is a living Comfort
and may God preserve and restore him to you in safety. Food, Raiment,
Safety, Peace, Liberty of Religious access to the mercy seat, Hope of
Heaven;--All these are daily matters of thankfullness. Good Madam, let
not one sorrow bury them all. Shew that you are a Christian by making
it appear that Religion has supports in it which the World doth not
enjoy and which the World doth not know. What can a poor Worldling do
but mourn over earthly Blessings departed, and go down comfortless
with them to the Grave. But methinks that a Christian should lift up
the Head as partaking of higher hopes. May the Blessed Spirit be your
Comforter. Endeavour Madam to employ yourself in some Business or
Amusement of life continually. Let not a solitary frame of Mind tempt
you to set Brooding over your Sorrows and nurse them up to a dangerous
Size; but turn your Thoughts often to the brighter Scenes of Heaven and
the Resurrection. Forgive the freedom of a stranger, Madam, who desires
to be the Humble and faithful Servant of Christ and Souls.

                                                    ISAAC WATTS.

  Postscript.

Madam, You have so many excellent Comforters round about you that I
even Blush to send what I have wrote; yet since the narrowness of my
Paper has excluded two or three thoughts which may not be impertinent
or useless on this mournful Occasion I will insert them here. You know
Madam that the great and blessed God had but one Son, and he gave him
up a Sacrifice and devoted him to a bloody Death out of Love to such
Sinners as you and I. Can you shew your gratitude to God in a more
evident & acceptable manner than by resigning willingly your two Sons
to him at the call of his Providence? This Act of willing Resignation
will turn a painful Affliction into a holy Sacrifice. Are the two
dearest things torn from the heart of a Mother, then you may ever set
looser by this World, and you have the fewer dangerous Attachments
to this life. 'Tis a happiness for a Christian not to have the heart
strings tyed too fast to any thing beneath God and Heaven. Happy the
Soul that is ready to move at the Divine summons. The fewer Engagements
we have on earth, the more we may live above, and have our thoughts
more fixed on things Divine and heavenly. May this painful stroak thus
Sanctified lead you nearer to God. Amen.

                                                                  I. W.

       *       *       *       *       *

"A boate going out of Hampton River was cast away and the psons all
drowned who were in number eight: Em. Hilliar, Jon. Philbrick and An
Philbrick his wife; Sarah Philbrick there daughter; Alice the wyfe of
Moses Cox and John Cox his sonne, Robert Read; who all perished in ye
sea ye 20th of the 8 mo. 1657."--_Norfolk County Records._

       *       *       *       *       *

From the same Records, we learn that "Capt. Benjamin Swett of Hampton
was slain at Black Point by the barbarous Indians the 29th June, 1677."




LIST OF ANCIENT NAMES IN BOSTON AND VICINITY.

_An Alphabetical List of the Ancient Names in the towns of Boston,
Charlestown, Roxbury, Watertown, Dorchester, Cambridge, Dedham,
Weymouth, Braintree, Concord, Sudbury, Hingham, and Woburn._

BY THE LATE JOHN FARMER, ESQ.


[This List embraces the names in the above towns from 1630 to 1644, and
contains most of the names in each town.

ABBREVIATIONS.--Bo. Boston, Ch. Charlestown, Co. Concord, Ca.
Cambridge, Br. Braintree, De. Dedham, Do. Dorchester, H. Hingham, M.
Medfield, R. Roxbury, S. Sudbury, Wa. Watertown, We. Weymouth, and Wo.
Woburn.]


    A.

    Abell, We.
    Adams, Bo. De. We. Br. M.
    Amadoun, Bo. We.
    Allison, Bo.
    Aspinwall, Bo.
    Alexander, Bo.
    Armitage, Bo.
    Awkley, Bo.
    Allen, Bo. Ch. De. H. Br. M.
    Addington, Bo.
    Astwood, R.
    Alcock, R. De.
    Ambler, Wa.
    Arnold, Wa.
    Ames, Ca. Br.
    Aldridge, De.
    Alleyn, De.
    Atkinson, Co.
    Axdell, S.
    Aldreth, Br.
    Abie, Br.
    Atherton, Br.


    B.

    Baldwin, Bo. De.
    Baker, Bo. Ch. R.
    Barrell, Bo.
    Baxter, Bo. R.
    Beareley, Bo.
    Beck, Bo.
    Bourne, Bo.
    Bridge, Bo. Ch. R.
    Bendall, Bo.
    Bell, Bo. R.
    Bishop, Bo.
    Blanchard, Bo.
    Bosworth, Bo.
    Briggs, Bo. We.
    Briscoe, Bo. Wa.
    Burden, Bo.
    Buttolph, Bo.
    Button, Bo.
    Brimsmeade, Ch.
    Brown, Ch. S. H. Br.
    Burrage, Ch.
    Batchelor, Ch. De.
    Barret, Ch. Co.
    Burnet, R.
    Brewer, R. Ca.
    Blacksley, R.
    Burrill, R.
    Bugbee, R.
    Bartlett, Wa.
    Beech, Wa.
    Bernard, Wa.
    Boyden, Wa.
    Beeres, Wa.
    Bright, Wa.
    Bullard, Wa. De.
    Barron, Wa.
    Boyls[t]on, Wa.
    Bradbrook, Wa.
    Benjamin, Wa.
    Barsham, Wa.
    Broughton, Wa.
    Barnard, We.
    Billings, Do.
    Bird, Do.
    Buck, Ca.
    Bridgham, Ca.
    Barker, De.
    Barstowe, De.
    Bullen, De. M.
    Barber, De. M.
    Bayes, De.
    Blandford, S.
    Belcher, Ca. S. Br.
    Burr, Do. H.
    Bliss, H.
    Bridgeman, H.
    Bagnley, Co.
    Blood, Co.
    Bowstree, Co.
    Brooks, Co.
    Bulkley, Co.
    Busse, Co.
    Bennet, Co.
    Butterfield, Wo.
    Barron, Wo.
    Bass, Br.
    Blage, Br.
    Bracket, Br.
    Barnes, Br.
    Britan, Wo.
    Barber, M.


    C.

    Carter, Bo. Ch. Wo.
    Cole, Bo. Ch.
    Cooke, Bo. Ca.
    Coggan, Bo.
    Copp, Bo.
    Cotton, Bo.
    Clarke, Bo. R. Wa. De. H. M.
    Cource, Bo.
    Crabbtree, Bo.
    Cranwell, Bo.
    Cretchley, Bo.
    Call, Ch.
    Carrington, Ch.
    Cary, Ch.
    Carter, Ch. Bo.
    Coytmore, Ch.
    Curtis, R. Do. S.
    Coddington, R.
    Craft, R.
    Chandler, R. Co.
    Corey, R.
    Crane, R.
    Cheney, R. M.
    Crosse, Wa.
    Cutter, Wa.
    Church, Wo.
    Coolidge, Wo.
    Claise, Wa.
    Cooper, Wa.
    Crisp, Wa.
    Capen, Do.
    Clap, Do. We. M.
    Clement, Do.
    Collicott, Do.
    Cunlithe, Do.
    Champney, Ca.
    Collins, Ca.
    Corlet, Ca.
    Chickering, De.
    Colbourne, De.
    Calver, De.
    Carpenter, We.
    Cakebread, S.
    Coulton, H.
    Collier, H.
    Chamberlain, Br. Co. Wo.
    Cheesborough, Bo.
    Coney, Br.
    Coskin, Co.
    Convers, Co.
    Cram, M.


    D.

    Davies, Bo. S. Wo.
    Dennis, Bo.
    Dineley, Bo.
    Dowse, Bo.
    Dane, Ch. Co.
    David, Ch.
    Danforth, R. Ca.
    Dexter, Ch.
    Dudley, R.
    Dennison, R.
    Davis, R.
    Dikes, Wa.
    Dow, Wa.
    Davenport, Do.
    Dickerman, Do.
    Dwight, De.
    Daniel, Ca.
    Dixon, Ca.
    Dana, Ca.
    Dyer, We.
    Darvill, S.
    Dorchester, H.
    Doggett, Co.
    Draper, Co.
    Dasset, Br.
    Dawes, Br.
    Devel, Br.


    E.

    East, Bo.
    Eaton, Bo. Wa. De.
    Elliot, Bo. R. Br.
    Eyre, Wa.
    Eddie, Wa.
    Else, Wa.
    Evans, Do.
    Eccley, C.
    Eames, Do. H.
    Elderkin, De.
    Everard, De.
    Edwards, H. Co.
    Ellis, Br. M.
    Edmunds, Co.
    Evarts, Co.


    F.

    Fairfield, Bo.
    Fairweather, Bo.
    Farmside, Bo.
    Flack, Bo.
    Franklin, Bo.
    Fish, Bo.
    Flowd, Bo.
    Fowle, Bo. Ch. Co.
    Furnell, Bo.
    Frothingham, Ch.
    Fiske, Wa.
    Ffleg, Wa.
    Farnum, Do.
    French, Do.
    Fower, Do.
    Fareworth, Do.
    Fuller, Do. Co. Wo.
    Foorde, Ca.
    Francis, Ca.
    Fisher, De. M.
    Fairbank, De. M.
    Frarey, De. M.
    Foster, We.
    Fry, We.
    Freeman, S.
    Flatman, Br.
    Flint, Br.
    Farwell, Co.
    Foye, Co.
    Farley, Wa.


    G.

    Garrett, Bo. Ch.
    Gibbons, Bo.
    Gill, Bo.
    Goordley, Bo.
    Greames, Bo.
    Green, Bo. Ch.
    Guttridge, Bo. Wa.
    Gridley, Bo.
    Griggs, Bo.
    Gross, Bo.
    Grubbs, Bo.
    Gunnison, Bo.
    Gould, Ch.
    Grover, Ch.
    Graves, Ch.
    Greenland, Ch.
    Greems, Ch.
    Gookin, R. Ca.
    Gamblin, R.
    Gorton, R.
    Garner, R.
    Goard, R.
    Garfield, Wa.
    Goffe, Wa.
    Gass, Wa.
    Grant, Wa.
    Godfrey, Wa.
    Gibson, Ca.
    Grissell, Ca.
    Gay, De.
    Griffin, S.
    Goodnow, S.
    George, Br.
    Gamlin, Co.


    H.

    Hayborne, Bo. R.
    Harvey, Bo.
    Halsall, Bo.
    Harwood, Bo.
    Hawkins, Bo. Wa.
    Hill, Bo.
    Hide, Bo. Ca.
    Hilliard, Bo.
    Hough, Bo.
    Holland, Bo.
    Hutchinson, Bo.
    Hogg, Bo.
    Houchin, Bo.
    Howen, Bo.
    Hudson, Bo.
    Hunn, Bo.
    Henrickson, Bo.
    Hadlock, Ch.
    Hale, Ch.
    Harrington, Ch.
    Heiden, Ch.
    Hills, Ch.
    Hubbard, Ch.
    Haule, Ch.
    Hemingway, R.
    Heath, R.
    Harris, R. Ca.
    Hewes, R.
    Holmes, R.
    Howe, R. S.
    Hawkins, Wa. Bo.
    Holden, Wa.
    Hubbard, Wa.
    Homes, Ca.
    Homwood, Ca.
    Hildreth, Ca.
    Hutchin, Ca.
    House, Ca.
    Hancock, Ca.
    Hinsdell, De.
    Hunting, De.
    Hunt, De. We. Co.
    Hart, We.
    Haine, S.
    Holyoke, H.
    Hobart, H.
    Hansett, Br.
    Hastings, Br.
    Herknell, Br.
    Herman, Br.
    Hoyden, Br.
    Halsted, Co.
    Harsey, Co.
    Heyward, Co.
    Hosmer, Co.
    Hayward, Wo.
    Harvard, Ch.


    I.

    Ives, Wa.


    J.

    Johnson, Bo. Ch. R. Wo. S.
    Joy, Bo.
    Jacklin, Bo.
    Jackson, Bo. Ch. Ca.
    Judkins, Bo.
    Jones, Ch. Do. Co.
    James, Ch. De.
    Jennison, Wa.
    Jeffrey, We.
    Jenkins, Br.
    Jewell, Br.


    K.

    Kenrick, Bo.
    Kade, Bo.
    Kerby, Bo.
    Knight, Bo. Br. Wo.
    Kettle, Ch.
    Kingslow, Do.
    Kalem, De.
    Kingsbury, De.
    Kimball, Wa.
    Knowles, Wa.
    King, Wa. S. We.
    Keyes, Wa.
    Kingsley, Br.
    Kendal, Wo.


    L.

    Leverett, Bo.
    Lyall, Bo.
    Luin, Bo.
    Lugg, Bo.
    Lawson, Bo.
    Long, Ch.
    Lawdon, Ch.
    Lewis, Ch. Wa.
    Luddington, Ch.
    Lynde, Ch.
    Larkin, Ch.
    Lawrence, Ch.
    Lusher, De.
    Langton, H.
    Lincoln, H.
    Leavitt, H.
    Lyon, R.
    Lamb, R. Wa.
    Linens, R.
    Lettin, Co.
    Lefingwell, Wa.
    Larnit, Wo.
    Lockwood, Wa.
    Lovering, Wa.
    Ludden, Wa.
    Lowell, M.


    M.

    Marshall, Bo.
    Mason, Bo. R. Wa.
    Manning, Bo.
    Mears, Bo.
    Merry, Bo.
    Milam, Bo.
    Messinger, Bo.
    Mingo, Bo.
    Munt, Bo.
    Marble, Ch.
    Manley, Ch.
    Maverick, Ch.
    Mellowes, Ch. Br.
    Merrich, Ch.
    Mellers, Ch.
    Mather, Do.
    Maudsley, Do.
    Millet, Do.
    Mumings, Do.
    Meane, Ca.
    Mitchelson, Ca.
    Meigs, We.
    Melim, We.
    Matthew, H. R.
    Mireck, H.
    Morril, R.
    Miller, R.
    Meadows, R.
    Mosse, Wa.
    Merchant, Wa. Br.
    Marian, Wa.
    Mayhew, Wa.
    Mandsley, Br.
    Mekins, Br.
    Motson, Br.
    Moore, Br. S.
    Male, Br.
    Mousall, Wo.
    Morse, De. M.
    Metcalf, M.


    N.

    Newgate, Bo.
    Negus, Bo.
    Nash, Ch.
    Nowell, Ch.
    Nichols, Ch.
    Nowman, We.
    Norton, We.
    Newton, S.


    O.

    Oliver, Bo.
    Odlin, Bo.
    Osborn, We. Do.
    Onion, R.
    Ong, Wa.
    Oakes, Ca.


    P.

    Palgrave, Ch.
    Palmer, Ch.
    Phillips, Do. Wa. We.
    Phipps, Ch.
    Pasmer, Bo. Ch.
    Powell, Ch. De.
    Power, Ch.
    Parker, Wo. Bo. R.
    Painter, Bo.
    Pratt, Ch. We.
    Paitor, Bo.
    Perry, Bo.
    Pell, Bo.
    Pierce, Bo. Do. Wa.
    Phippin, Bo.
    Plain, Bo.
    Porter, Bo.
    Portmont,[Z] Bo.
    Poole, Bo.
    Pilsbury, Do.
    Procter, Do.
    Pope, Do.
    Prentiss, Ca.
    Parish, Ca.
    Pickering, Ca.
    Pelham, Ca.
    Picke, Ca.
    Paine, Do. Br.
    Penniman, Br.
    Perrin, Br.
    Pocher, Br.
    Potter, Co.
    Posmore, Co.
    Prentice, Co.
    Parsus, H.
    Pierpont, R.
    Peake, R.
    Payson, R.
    Pigg, R.
    Perkins, R.
    Prichard, R.
    Porter, R. Wa. We.
    Peirson, Wa. Wo.
    Prescott, Wa.
    Page, Wa.
    Picknam, Wa.
    Prest, We.
    Petty, We.
    Parmeter, S.


    R.

    Ruggles, R. Br.
    Rogers, Wa. We. Bo. Co.
    Randall, We.
    Ralins, We.
    Reed, We. Br.
    Rutter, S.
    Redyate, S.
    Reaver, H.
    Rainsford, Bo.
    Rice, Bo. Co.
    Russell, Ch. Ca. Wo.
    Robbins, Ca.
    Ross, Ca.
    Richards, De.
    Roper, De.
    Ray, Br.
    Rocket, Br. M.
    Richardson, Bo. Ch. Wo.
    Roman, Ca.


    S.

    Savell, We. Br.
    Shaw, We. Ca.
    Shepard, We. Ca. Br.
    Silvester, We.
    Stoppell, We.
    Stone, S.
    Stowe, S. Wa. Ch. Br.
    Sewill, H.
    Stebbin, H. R. Wa.
    Sharp, R. Br.
    Sener, R.
    Smith, H. R. Wa. Ch. Do. De.
    Scarboro[ugh], R.
    Sheffield, R.
    Starkweather, R.
    Sanderson, Wa.
    Stearns, Wa.
    Stowers, Wa.
    Sawtell, Wa.
    Sherman, Wa. Bo.
    Story, Wa.
    Stow, Wa. Ch.
    Sanford, Bo.
    Savage, Bo.
    Scott, Bo. Br.
    Scottow, Bo.
    Salter, Bo.
    Seabury, Bo.
    Seavern, Bo.
    Sellick, Bo.
    Seamond, Bo.
    Sherburne, Bo.
    Sinet, Bo.
    Spurr, Bo.
    Stanbury, Bo.
    Stanion, Bo.
    Snow, Bo.
    Sunderland, Bo.
    Symonds, Bo. Co.
    Shrimpton, Bo.
    Stevens, Bo. Br.
    Stevenson, Bo. Ca.
    Stoddard, Bo.
    Stodder, M.
    Sergeant, Ch. Br.
    Shorthouse, Ch.
    Swain, Ch.
    Sweetzer, Ch.
    Symmes, Ch. Br.
    South, Do.
    Sumner, Do.
    Swift, Do.
    Saunders, Ca.
    Sparhawk, Ca.
    Stedman, Ca.
    Streeter, Ca.
    Shaw, Ca.
    Stacey, De.
    Savel, Br.
    Sellein, Bo.
    Spalding, Br.
    Seer, Wo.
    Squiers, Co.


    T.

    Thomas, Bo. H.
    Terne, Bo.
    Tyng, Bo.
    Townsend, Bo.
    Tapping, Bo.
    Turner, Bo. Do. M.
    Tuttle, Bo.
    Trerrice, Ch. Wo.
    Tidd, Ch.
    Topliff, Do.
    Tolman, Do. R.
    Trumble, Ca.
    Towne, Ca.
    Thurston, De. M.
    Tomson, Br. Wa.
    Twing, Co.
    Turney, Co.
    Tompkins, Co.
    Thompson, Wo.
    Trerice, Wo.
    Totenham, Wo.
    Train, Wa.
    Torrey, We.
    Tucker, We.
    Toll, S.
    Treadway, S.
    Tailor, H.


    U.

    Upham, We.
    Underwood, Co.
    Upsall, Do.
    Usher, Ca. and after of Bo.
    Ulting, De.


    V.

    Viall, Bo.
    Vines, S.
    Vane, Bo.


    W.

    Waite, Bo. Wa.
    Walker, Bo. Ch. R.
    Wendell, Bo.
    Winbourne, Bo.
    Walton, Bo. We.
    Wheeler, Bo. Ch. Co. De.
    Webber, Bo.
    Williams, Bo. R.
    Wilson, Bo. Br.
    Wing, Bo.
    Winthrop, Bo.
    Woodhouse, Bo.
    Woodward, Bo. Wa.
    Willis, Bo. Ch.
    Wilde, Ch.
    Waffe, Ch.
    Willoughby, Ch.
    Wood, Ch. De. Co. M.
    Woorie, Ch.
    Wise, Ch.
    Worward, Ch.
    Wright, Do.
    Wyllys, Ca.
    Winship, Ca.
    Whiting, De.
    Wheelock, De. M.
    Wight, De.
    Weld, Br. R.
    Winchester, Br.
    Wiseman, Br.
    Wheat, Co.
    Willard, Co.
    Wyman, Wo.
    Winn, Wo.
    Whittemore, R.
    White, R.
    Woods, R. S.
    Waterman, R.
    Watson, R.
    Wellengton, Wa.
    Waters, Wa.
    Withington, Do.
    Webb, We.
    Whitman, We.
    Warren, We.
    Ward, S.
    Whitton, H.


FROM A MONUMENT IN THE BURYING-GROUND AT EASTPORT, ME.

In memory of Margaret Nickels, who died April 26, 1817, AE. 87, dau. of
Samuel Breck of Boston, and relict of William Nickels of Naraguagus,
who was lost, as was his grandson, Geo. W. Shaw, AE. 12 years, on Grand
Manan Island, where they were buried, Dec. 18, 1789.

This monument erected in 1845, by Robert G. Shaw of Boston, grandson to
the deceased, through the agency of George Hobbs, Esq.

FOOTNOTES:

[Z] This name is spelt differently, as Purmont, Pormont, Pormon, and
Pomont.




FAMILY INCREASE.


The following facts published in a note in Vol. II. of Haliburton's
"Historical and Statistical Account of Nova Scotia" are believed to be
unparalleled in the increase of any family on record. It can at once
be seen that at this rate of multiplying population it would take only
a short period to people the earth. Any one, curious enough to make
a calculation, will be astonished at the multitude of persons after
the lapse of a few generations which could trace their descent from a
common ancestor. The note is as follows:

"In the Spring of the year 1760, A. Smith, Esq., a native of Cape
Cod, landed at Barrington,[AA] for the purpose of making arrangements
for the reception of his family, but finding the Indians numerous, he
abandoned the idea of emigrating and returned home. Shortly after his
departure, his wife arrived in a vessel bound on a fishing voyage,
and was landed with her family. Here she remained five weeks, until
the arrival of her husband, during which time she was kindly and
hospitably treated by the Savages. She died at Barrington, in March,
1828, leaving at the time of her death 5 children, 56 grandchildren,
297 great-grandchildren, 64 of the fifth, and 1 of the sixth generation
living, exclusive of a daughter, in the United States, who had a large
family, and of several grandchildren who have removed from Barrington."




INSTANCES OF LONGEVITY IN ONE HOUSE.


The following persons have died in the same house since 1781. The house
is situated in Hingham, and was formerly owned by Peter Tower. Peter
Tower, aged 84; Anna Tower, 95; Deborah Tower, 95; Joshua Tower, 77;
Grace Cushing, 95; Laban Tower, 73; Esther Tower, 71; Deborah Dunbar,
80. Total, 670.--_Hingham Gazette, April 6, 1837._ We are informed that
the Tower estate has been held in the name of Tower since 1637, and is
now occupied by Mr William Tower.


LONGEVITY OF THE MARSH FAMILY IN HAVERHILL, MS.

Dea. David Marsh of Haverhill, Ms., was born Jan., 1698, and his
wife Mary Moody was born Aug., 1703. They were the parents of twelve
children. The father, mother, and children died as follows:

  _Parents._

  The father died,      aged 80
  The mother,            "   90

  _Children._

  Elisabeth died,       aged 85
  Mary,                  "   89
  Judith,                "   80
  Cutting,               "   89
  David,                 "   82
  Moses,                 "   88
  Jonathan,              "   89
  Enoch,                 "   69
  Nathaniel,             "   76
  John,                  "   79
  Lydia,                 "   84
  Abigail,               "   84
                           ----
  Total of years,         1,165
  Average age,               83

       *       *       *       *       *

Below is an exact copy of an inscription on the tomb-stone of Mary Buel
in the burying-ground, north-west of the village in Litchfield, Ct.

Here lies the body of Mrs. Mary Buel, wife of Dr. John Buel,
Esqr.}--She died Nov. 4th 1768 AEtat. 90. having had 13 Children--101
Grand Children--274 Great G. Children, 22 Great G. G. Children--410
Total--336 survived.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Historical Magazine for 1799, by Bissett, a marriage of some
interest to Americans is thus given.

"William Cockburn, Esq. American merchant, to the fair Miss Lorimer,
dau. of Mr. Lorimer of the Strand, and sister to the beautiful Mrs.
Graham, lady of Col. Graham, Sloane St., well known in the literary
world as the author of a History of the American State of Vermont."

FOOTNOTES:

[AA] Barrington, Nova Scotia, was settled by about eighty families from
Cape Cod and Nantucket, in 1761, '62, and '63.




MARRIAGES AND DEATHS.


We propose to give in future in each Number of the Register a brief
List of Marriages and Deaths, confining ourselves principally to those
which occur in the New England States, or among those persons who are
of New England origin. We give this quarter a few as a sample.


MARRIAGES.

  ALLEN, REV. SAMUEL H., of Windsor Locks, and JULIA A., daughter of
    Dr. William S. Pierson of Windsor, Ct., Feb. 16.

  BUSH, REV. CHARLES P., of Norwich, Ct., and PHILIPPA, daughter of I.
    Call, Esq., Charlestown, Dec. 31, 1846.

  EDMONSTON, DR. EDWARD, of Abington, and MISS BETHIA BREWSTER of
    Hanson, Dec. 25, 1846.

  FLETCHER, SAMUEL, ESQ., of Andover and MRS. HANNAH C. BRIGGS of
    Dedham, Feb. 23.

  GARDNER, NICHOLAS R., ESQ., in the 79th year of his age, and MRS.
    ABIGAIL ATWOOD in the 66th year of her age, both of Providence,
    R. I. It was the fifth time he had taken the solemn vow at the
    hymeneal altar. There were present his children, his grandchildren,
    and his great-grandchildren.

  MCKENNEY, REV. SABIN, of Poultney, Vt., and ELISABETH S., daughter of
    Dr. Hiram Corliss of Union Village, Washington Co., N. Y., Jan. 27.

  MORSE, ABIAL, a Revolutionary pensioner, a. 86, and MRS. LUCY MILLER,
    a. 43, Barnard, Vt.

  PEARSON, COL. L. T., of Collinsville, and MISS JENNETTE M. CADWELL of
    Hartford, Ct., Jan. 25.

  PENNELL, REV. LEWIS, of Weston, and MISS MARY C. SHERWOOD of
    Greenfield, Ct., Dec. 30, 1846.

  PICKERING, C. W., Lieut. U. S. N., and MARY P., daughter of John
    Stevens, Esq., of Boston.

  UNDERHILL, HENRY B., teacher in Quaboag Seminary, Warren, and
    HARRIETTE T. FISK of Athol, Feb. 18.

  WASHBURNE, J. W., ESQ., of Osage Prairie, Arkansas, and MISS SUSAN C.
    RIDGE, a Cherokee, Jan. 27.


DEATHS.

  ABBOT, JACOB, ESQ., Farmington, Me., Jan. 21, a. 70. He was the
    father of the Abbots, whose writings are so generally diffused.

  ALEXANDER, QUARTIUS, Hartland, Vt., Feb. 28, a. 86, a Revolutionary
    pensioner.

  ANDREWS, MRS. JOANNA, Gloucester, Jan. 20, a. 102. She was probably
    the oldest person in the State.

  ATWELL, CAPT. ZACHARIAH, Lynn, a. 67. He commanded a vessel at the
    age of 24, crossed the Atlantic 70 times, and never lost a mast or
    a man.

  BRIGGS, WILLIAM, ESQ., Charlestown, N. H., Jan. 27, 1847, a. 74, D.
    C. 1799. Attorney.

  BUCK, DR. EPHRAIM, JUN., Boston, Feb. 13, a. 33.

  CLARK, MRS. ELMA H., Fryeburg, Me., Feb. 9, wife of Rev. William
    Clark, Gen. Agent A. B. C. F. M.

  COE, REV. DANIEL, Winstead, Ct., Jan. 11.

  DAVIS, HON. JOHN, LL. D., Boston, Jan. 14, a. 86, H. C. 1781, Judge
    of the Dist. Court U. S.

  DAWES, REV. HOWLAND, of Windsor, in Lynn, Y. C. 1835.

  EVELETH, JOSEPH, ESQ., Salem, Feb. 3, a. 91.

  EASTMAN, LUKE, ESQ., Lowell, Feb., a. 57, D. C. 1812. Attorney.

  EDSON, DR. ALEXANDER, New York, Feb. 13, a. 42, of inflammation of
    the lungs, known as the "Living Skeleton," and a brother of the
    celebrated Calvin Edson.

  ELLSWORTH, TIMOTHY, ESQ., East Windsor, Ct., Jan. 5, a. 69.

  FISK, JOHN, ESQ., Middletown, Ct., Feb. 15, a. 76. He was Town Clerk
    fifty years, Treasurer twenty-four, and Clerk of the County and
    Supreme Court about the same time.

  FORD, ZELOTES, M. D., Maiden, N. Y., Feb. 13, a. 44, W. C. 1825. He
    was an Elder in a Presbyterian chh.

  FISHER, EBENEZER, JUN., ESQ., of consumption, Dedham, Jan. 4, a. 58,
    more than twenty years Cashier of Dedham Bank.

  GAIR, SAMUEL STILLMAN, ESQ., Liverpool, Eng., Feb., son of Rev.
    Thomas Gair, the fourth pastor of the Baldwin Place Chh., Boston.
    He was connected in business with the house of Baring, Brothers &
    Co.

  GAY, MRS. MARTHA, Medway, Dec. 31, 1840, widow of the late Willard
    Gay, Esq., of Dedham, President of the Bank, and daughter of the
    late Rev. Dr. Emmons of Franklin.

  GEORGE, JOHN, ESQ., Georgia, Jan. 27, a. 30, D. C. 1838. Attorney.

  GILMAN, HON. NATHANIEL, Exeter, N. H., Jan. 26, a. 88. He had been a
    Representative and Senator in Gen. Court and State Treasurer.

  GILMAN, DR. JOSEPH, Wells, Me., Jan. 4, a. 75. He was the eldest
    son of Rev. Tristram Gilman of North Yarmouth, Me., and had been
    President of the Maine Medical Society, and Dea. of the Cong. Chh.
    for more than thirty years.

  GREENWOOD, FRANCIS W., Cambridge, March 13, a. 21, H. C. 1845, and
    member of the Law School. He was a son of the late Rev. F. W. P.
    Greenwood, D. D., of Boston.

  HALLOCK, MRS., Steubenville, O., March 9, wife of Hon. Jeremiah H.
    Hallock and only daughter of the late Rev. Dr. Bassett of Hebron,
    Ct.

  HASSARD, REV. SAMUEL, Great Barrington, Jan. 13, Y. C. 1826, Rector
    of the Episcopal Chh. in that town.

  HILL, MRS. HANNAH, Ashburnham, March 1, a. 75, mother of Ex-Gov. Hill
    of New Hampshire.

  HOLLAND, DR. ABRAHAM, Walpole, N. H., ab. March 1, a. 96, D. C. 1779.
    It is believed that no other graduate of the college ever lived to
    so great an age.

  HUNTER, GEN. SIR MARTIN, Anton's Hill, Canada, a. 89. He was the last
    of the British officers that survived the battle of Bunker Hill.

  JOHONNET, MAJ. OLIVER, Boston, Jan. 25, a. 87.

  KIMBALL, HON. JESSE, Bradford, Ms., Dec. 19, a. 54. He had been a
    Senator in Gen. Court, and a Dea. of the Cong. Chh. for more than
    twenty years.

  MILLER, COL. JONATHAN P., Montpelier, Vt., Feb. 17, a. 50. He was
    well known for his services in the Greek Revolution.

  NEWTON, HUBBARD, ESQ., Newport, N. H., Feb. 15, a. 67, D. C. 1804.
    Attorney.

  ODIORNE, HON. GEORGE, Boston, Dec. 1, 1846, a. 82, a merchant. While
    engaged in business at Malden he fell and instantly expired. He
    had been a Senator in General Court, an Alderman of the city, four
    years Cashier of one Bank and ten years President of another.

  OFFLEY, DAVID W., ESQ., Smyrna, Asia Minor, Nov., 1846, U. S. Consul
    at that place.

  OLCOTT, MRS. CHARLOTTE A., Meriden, La., Nov. 28, 1846, a. 39, wife
    of Hon. Edward R. Olcott, and daughter of the late Thomas Burns,
    Esq., of Gilmanton, N. H.

  PAGE, MRS. HARRIETTE E., of Houlton, Me., Jan. 24, a. 24. She was
    the wife of George P. Page, daughter of the late Judge Thacher of
    Thomaston, Me., and granddaughter of the late Maj. Gen. Henry Knox.

  PARK, REV. CALVIN, D. D., Stoughton, Jan. 5, a. 72. Dr. Park filled
    the offices of Tutor and Professor, B. U. about 25 years, and in
    1827 he became pastor of the Cong. chh. in Stoughton.

  PEABODY, HON. STEPHEN, Amherst, N. H., Jan. 19, a. 64. Attorney.

  POND, REV. ENOCH, JR., Bucksport, Me., Dec. 17, 1846, a. 26, B. C.,
    1838. He was a son of Rev. Dr. Pond of Theo. Sem'y, Bangor, and
    Colleague Pastor with the Rev. Isaac Braman, Cong. chh. Georgetown.

  PORTER, MRS. FIDELIA DWIGHT, New York, Jan. 22, of apoplexy, a.
    76. She was the widow of the late Jonathan Edwards Porter, Esq.,
    of Hadley, the daughter of Timothy and Mary Dwight, a sister of
    President Dwight of Yale College, and a descendant in a direct line
    from Thomas Hooker, the first minister in Hartford, Rev. James
    Pierpont of New Haven, and the first President Edwards.

  REED, ELIZABETH I., at the Abbot Seminary in New York, Jan. 20, a.
    16, youngest daughter of Dr. Alexander Reed of New Bedford.

  ROBBINS, MRS. PRISCILLA A., Enfield, Ct., Dec. 24, 1846, a. 63, wife
    of Rev. F. L. Robbins.

  ROBERTSON, DR. ASHBEL, Wethersfield, Ct., Feb. 18, a. 60.

  ROCKWELL, DR. ALONZO, Wethersfield, Ct., Feb. 11, a. 46.

  ROGERS, REV. TIMOTHY F., Bernardston, Jan. 28, a. 66. H. C. 1802.

  ROOT, GEN. ERASTUS, Delhi, N. Y., a. 73, D. C. 1793, had been a Rep.
    to Congress and Lieut.-Gov. of New York. He died at the city of New
    York, on his way to Washington, D. C.

  SAFFORD, DEA. WILLIAM, Salem, Feb. 27, a. 91.

  SAWYER, AARON FLINT, ESQ., Nashua, N. H., Jan. 4, a. 67, D. C. 1804.

  SEWALL, MRS. ABIGAIL, Boston, a. 80, relict of the late Chief-Justice
    Sewall.

  SHERBURNE, JONATHAN, Portsmouth, N. H., Jan. 3, a. 89, D. C. 1776.

  SPARHAWK, DR. GEORGE, Walpole, N. H., a. 99, H. C. 1777. He was one
    of the original members of the New Hampshire Medical Society, and
    the last survivor, except Dr. Green of Dover, N. H., who is the
    oldest graduate of Harvard College still living.

  STEELE, GEORGE HENRY, Nov. 15, 1846. He was son of Jason Steele,
    Esq., of Chelsea, Vt., D. C. 1845, a member of the Dane Law School,
    H. U., and died at Cambridge.

  STEVENS, DR. MORRILL, St. Johnsbury, Vt., March 4, brother of Hon.
    Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania.

  VERMONT, MICHAEL, Shutesbury, Vt., March 5, a. ab. 100, a Canadian.

  WHITMAN, DEA. ELEAZER, East Bridgewater, Dec. 3, 1846, a. 91.

  WILLIS, REV. ZEPHANIAH, Kingston, March 6, a. 90. H. C. 1778. The
    last survivor of his Class.




NOTICES OF NEW PUBLICATIONS.


_The Massachusetts State Record and Year Book of General Information.
1847. "Human and mortal although we are, we are nevertheless not mere
insulated beings, without relation to the past or future."_--DANIEL
WEBSTER. Boston: Published by James French, 78 Washington Street. 1847.

    This is the first volume of a new work, and is intended to be an
    Annual. It will aim, "1. To give annually the names of the State,
    County and Town Officers, and, in connection therewith, to note
    the objects and results of our State Legislation. 2. To develop
    the principles of the Institutions of the Commonwealth by giving
    their objects and results. 3. To set forth the kind and extent
    of business pursued by the inhabitants, including the learned
    professions. 4. To represent the social, moral, and physical
    condition of the people, as connected with their pursuits and
    recreation. 5. To exhibit the mutual relations of society, and to
    embody the results of the combined action of all in relation to
    external objects, with a view to the high destiny of man."

    The plan of the work is copious and judicious, and the due
    execution of it will require study, labor, and exactness. The
    present volume, which embraces two hundred and eighty pages,
    is printed on good paper with fair type, and is well bound. It
    contains a great quantity of matter, interesting and useful, and
    its historical character will render it none the less so. The
    editor we doubt not will exert himself to make the work deserving
    of public patronage.


_Biographical Sketches of the Moody Family; embracing notices of ten
Ministers and several Laymen, from 1633 to 1842._

    "_Just men they were, and all their study bent
    To worship God aright, and know his works
    Not hid; nor those things last, which might preserve
    Freedom and peace to man._"

_By Charles C. P. Moody._ Boston: Published by Samuel G. Drake, No. 56
Cornhill. 1847.

    This 12mo volume of 168 pages, besides the introduction, contains
    a brief account of Rev. Joshua Moody, Portsmouth and Boston; Rev.
    Samuel Moody, Newcastle, N. H., and Falmouth, Me.; Rev. Samuel
    Moody, pastor of the First Church in York, Me.; Rev. Joshua Moody,
    Star Island, N. H.; Rev. Joseph Moody, pastor of the Second Church
    in York, Me.; Joshua Moody, Esq., Portland, Me.; Dr. Samuel
    Moody, Portland, Me.; Rev. John Moody, New Market, N. H.; Rev.
    Amos Moody, Pelham, N. H.; Mr. Enoch Moody, Portland, Me; Dea.
    Benjamin Moody, Newburyport; Rev. Samuel Moody, Principal of Dummer
    Academy; Rev. Silas Moody, Arundel, Me.; Mr. Paul Moody, Waltham
    and Lowell; Stephen Moody, Esq., Gilmanton, N. H.; Joseph Moody,
    Esq., Kennebunk, Me.; Rev. Eli Moody, Granby, Ms.; and a List of
    all the Graduates at the New England Colleges by the name of Moody,
    in number 39. The united ages of the seventeen persons noticed
    in these sketches amount to 1,142 years, averaging 67 years to
    each--the eldest being 82, and the youngest 50 years. Mr. William
    Moody the principal progenitor of the name in New England, came,
    according to the most authentic accounts, from Wales, England, to
    Ipswich in 1633, and removed to Newbury with the first settlers in
    1635. While this work is affectingly serious, some portions of it
    partake of the character of novelty. No one can read the notices of
    Rev. Joshua Moody of Portsmouth and Boston, and of "Father Moody,"
    "Handkerchief Moody," and "Master Moody," as they were called,
    without being deeply interested. We hope the volume will meet with
    a ready sale, and be perused with spiritual benefit.


_A Sermon[AB] delivered at Plymouth on the twenty-second of December,
1846. By Mark Hopkins, D. D., President of Williams College._ Boston:
Press of T. R. Marvin, 24 Congress Street. 1847.

    The text on which this discourse is based is contained in Matt.
    xxiii.: 8. "And all ye are brethren."

    After the exordium and stating what is indicated in that
    far-reaching annunciation of the text, _And all ye are brethren_,
    the President says, "Columbus sought a passage to the Indies,
    and God revealed to him the whole rounded inheritance which he
    created in the beginning, and intended for the use of civilized
    man. Our Fathers sought for religious freedom, and God led them
    on to the practical recognition of those principles laid down
    by Christ in accordance with which alone man can obtain that
    political and social and moral inheritance of which his nature is
    evidently capable, and which we believe God intended for him." The
    term brethren indicates equality and affection, and these must
    form the basis of a perfect society. This proposition Dr. Hopkins
    shows is sanctioned by the Scriptures, and is in accordance with
    the nature of man. Having proved and illustrated the proposition,
    he urges upon the descendants of the Puritans to adopt this and
    this alone as the basis of our institutions, and to carry out
    this great principle of brotherhood. We conclude the notice of
    this appropriate and excellent discourse, by quoting the closing
    address: "And now, my friends, is not the star of hope which we
    see in this direction, a beautiful star? It is no meteor of a
    fervid imagination, or of a false philosophy. It is that great
    idea of a universal Christian brotherhood, pointed out by Christ,
    not in the text only, but everywhere, as an inherent part of his
    system. This star our Fathers saw, and is it any wonder, that under
    its inspiration and guidance, they should come across the ocean?
    Literally they found a landing here, but figuratively, the vessel
    which they launched is yet upon the deep, the multitude of their
    descendants is on board, and we too catch glimpses of the same
    bright star above the troubled waters. It may be that this vessel
    is not destined to reach the port. We hear moanings of the tempest,
    and see aspects of the elements which lead us to tremble for her.
    But where the bright image of this star has once fallen, it can
    never be effaced. This is our star. To it let the prow of our
    vessel be turned. Let every man be at his post, never ashamed of
    the plain rigging of his good ship, but always hearing that voice
    of duty, and of the God of our Fathers, which will speak above the
    roar of every tempest; and then if our ship must go down, the will
    of God be done. But _then_ she will not go down. Then the hand
    which guided the Mayflower, will guide her. Then will there be One
    on board, as we believe there always has been, who, though he may
    seem for a time to be asleep in the hinder part of the ship, will
    yet come, when the winds are loudest, and the waves are highest,
    and say, 'Peace, be still.'"


_The Connecticut Register: Being an official State Calendar of public
officers and institutions in Connecticut, for 1847. By Charles
W. Bradley, Jr., clerk in the office of the Secretary of State._
"Vineam---- transtulisti, ejecisti gentes et plantasti eam. Dux
itineris fuisti in conspectu ejus; plantasti radices ejus, et implevit
terram. Operuit montes umbra ejus, et arbusta ejus cedros Dei.
Extendit, palmites suos usque ad mare, et usque ad flumen propagines
ejus."--Ps. LXXX. Hartford: Published by Brown & Parsons, Corner of
Main and Asylum Streets.

    This volume of 224 pages 16mo, well printed and bound, for a
    work of the kind, embraces much more Historical and Statistical
    matter than is usual in such publications; as the chapter which
    contains the Annals of Connecticut, the Patent and Charter of the
    Colony, Indian topographical names till now never extensively
    collected, list of Colonial officers, and dates of town and court
    incorporations. The difficulty which has heretofore existed in
    tracing out genealogies from the records of the Mortuary Courts,
    is in part obviated by the table of their territorial changes.
    The author, connected as he was, with the records of the State,
    possessed peculiar advantages in preparing the work. The Register
    contains all the above articles in addition to those which have
    generally been inserted in its predecessors. It is a valuable book,
    and should be in the hands of every family in the State.

       *       *       *       *       *

->We regret that we have not room to notice other interesting
publications which we have received. We shall give notices of them in
the next number of the Register.


EXTRACTS FROM NOTICES OF THE NEW ENGLAND HISTORICAL AND GENEALOGICAL
REGISTER.

The object of this work is to gather up the facts which relate to the
Fathers of New England, so that the present generation may distinctly
understand, that "God sifted a whole nation that he might send choice
grain over into this wilderness." It will also contain the genealogy
of families which early settled the country. It will not be sectarian
in its character, but will be a faithful record of the principles and
character of the founders of New England. Among the great number of new
publications that are striving to push themselves into the community,
this cannot fail to find its way into the study of the minister, the
office of the lawyer and physician, and the parlor of many thousands of
the descendants of the Pilgrims.--_Boston Recorder._

It is a unique magazine. The work will bring to light many amusing
personal incidents both of old times and new. It must be intensely
interesting to all New England men, especially those who have a taste
for such things and have descended in regular succession from the
Pilgrims.--_Journal of Commerce, New York._

The first Number of the work has just made its appearance, and we greet
it with a hearty welcome. We commend it to all interested in pursuing
inquiries of a historical or statistical nature relating to New
England.--_Boston Atlas._

It is the only work of the kind ever undertaken in this country. Both
the Editor and Publisher come to their task with a degree of experience
and tact on such matters which will commend their labors to the
confidence of all interested in this kind of investigation.--_Vermont
Chronicle._

If we rightly apprehend the design of this work it will be serviceable
to the community in gathering and presenting the elements of the
history of New England. Dr. Cogswell has for a long course of years
employed his mind much in labors of this sort, and his efforts have
been well appreciated. He seems now to be more exclusively devoted
to them, and with advantages of doing the work more effectually. We
confidently commend this work to those who have a taste for such
reading, and those who wish to encourage and patronize a work, which
must be of great value to the coming generation.--_New England Puritan._

The comprehensive design of this work appears to be well carried out
in the number before us, which contains a great amount of historical,
statistical, and genealogical information.--_Lowell Daily Courier._

It is pleasant to take a peep at the queer and musty antiquities of
the Western world through the clear glass of such clean and beautiful
pages of modern typography. To those, heirs apparent or expectant, of
English or French estates, the work has some charms of an interesting
character.--_Massachusetts Cataract._

Its contents give promise of a periodical of great interest, especially
to New England men and women, who would be better acquainted with their
fathers.--_Christian Observer, Philadelphia._

The Rev. Dr. Cogswell, its Editor, was for some time connected with the
American Quarterly Register, and more recently with the New Hampshire
Repository, both of which were more or less devoted to subjects kindred
to those of which this work proposes exclusively to treat, and his
name alone is a sufficient guaranty for the faithful management of
a historical and genealogical journal. The Publisher, Mr. Drake, a
thorough antiquary, and well known as the historian of the Indians, is
admirably qualified to discharge the duties he has just assumed.--_New
York Express._

We are glad to see the commencement of a Quarterly Periodical of this
character in New England. Under the care of Dr. Cogswell, well known
for his historical, antiquarian, and genealogical lore, it will become
a repository of rare and valuable facts, a record of events, the memory
of which should be dear to the descendants of the Pilgrims.--_Boston
Mercantile Journal._

This is an excellent work, just such an one as we have long
needed.--_Litchfield Inquirer, Ct._


NOTICES.

->We propose to publish in some future Nos. of the Register brief
Genealogical Memoirs of all the Signers of the Declaration of
Independence. We request, therefore, that, if any of the relatives or
friends of these individuals have in their possession any genealogical
or biographical accounts of them, or can furnish any, they will be
pleased to send them to the Editor of this work. It is especially
desired that the communications should be accurate in their facts--as
names, dates, places, &c., and the chirography be very legible. The
names and places of residence of the individuals who may be pleased to
transmit such papers should be given as vouchers for their correctness.

Any person who will copy and send to the Cor. Sec. of the N. E. H. and
G. Society, exact copies of the earliest births, deaths, and marriages
from town records, or any other source, will confer an obligation
on the community; as they will be deposited in the archives of the
Society, and be published from time to time in the Register. The
account should be written legibly, and the name of the copyist and his
place of residence should be given as authority for the same.

       *       *       *       *       *

->We would give notice that Horatio G. Somerby, Esq., of Boston, will
visit England this season for the purpose of investigating the early
genealogies of the emigrants to New England, if suitable pecuniary
encouragement should be given by those who may be interested in such
researches. A subscription has been opened for this purpose, and
gentlemen can obtain the requisite information on this subject by
calling on the Corresponding Secretary of the New England Historical
and Genealogical Society.

       *       *       *       *       *

->We regret that the first two Nos. of the Register have made their
appearance so late in the Quarter for which they were issued, and that
the principal likenesses accompanying them have been so ordinary.
Circumstances beyond our control have led to it. Arrangements were not
made for the publication of the work until after the year commenced,
when not a word was written, and not a likeness engraved. In future we
intend that the Nos. shall be issued punctually, and good likenesses
accompany them. For our next No. we have procured an excellent likeness
of Governor Endecott, engraved expressly for the work, which will
accompany a Memoir of the Governor.

       *       *       *       *       *

->The Register will be issued Quarterly, each No. containing at least
ninety-six pages, octavo, upon good paper, and with fair type; making
annually a volume of about four hundred pages; the Nos. to be issued in
January, April, July, and October.

The price to Subscribers will be TWO DOLLARS a-year, payable on
issuing the first No. Any person obtaining subscriptions and becoming
responsible, for six copies of the work, shall be entitled to the
seventh copy gratis.

Subscription Papers to be returned to the address of SAMUEL G. DRAKE,
Publisher, 56 Cornhill, Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *

->All communications, which are designed for insertion in the Register,
or which respect the editorial department, should be addressed to the
Editor, at Boston.

All orders for the Register, and all communications respecting the
pecuniary concerns of it, should be directed to Samuel G. Drake, 56
Cornhill, Boston.

FOOTNOTES:

[AB] This Discourse makes the _forty-ninth_ discourse or address
delivered on these Anniversary occasions.




    Transcriber's Notes:


    Simple spelling, grammar, and typographical errors
    were corrected.

    Italics markup is enclosed in _underscores_.

    White right pointing backhand index is denoted by ->.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The New England Historical &
Genealogical Register, Vol. I., No. 2, April 1847, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEW ENGLAND HISTORICAL REGISTER, VOL I ***

***** This file should be named 45763.txt or 45763.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/7/6/45763/

Produced by Richard Tonsing, Heather Clark and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
