The Project Gutenberg eBook, Jose: Our Little Portuguese Cousin, by Edith
A. (Edith Augusta) Sawyer, Illustrated by Diantha Horne Marlowe


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Jose: Our Little Portuguese Cousin


Author: Edith A. (Edith Augusta) Sawyer



Release Date: May 28, 2014  [eBook #45797]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOSE: OUR LITTLE PORTUGUESE
COUSIN***


E-text prepared by Emmy, Beth Baran, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 45797-h.htm or 45797-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/45797/45797-h/45797-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/45797/45797-h.zip)





JOSE: OUR LITTLE PORTUGUESE COUSIN


       *       *       *       *       *

THE

Little Cousin Series

(TRADE MARK)


    Each volume illustrated with six or more full-page plates in
    tint. Cloth, 12mo, with decorative cover,
    per volume, 60 cents


LIST OF TITLES

BY MARY HAZELTON WADE

(unless otherwise indicated)

    Our Little African Cousin

    Our Little Alaskan Cousin
        By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet

    Our Little Arabian Cousin
        By Blanche McManus

    Our Little Argentine Cousin
        By Eva Canon Brooks

    Our Little Armenian Cousin

    Our Little Australian Cousin
        By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet

    Our Little Belgian Cousin
        By Blanche McManus

    Our Little Bohemian Cousin
        By Clara V. Winlow

    Our Little Brazilian Cousin
        By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet

    Our Little Brown Cousin

    Our Little Canadian Cousin
        By Elizabeth R. MacDonald

    Our Little Chinese Cousin
        By Isaac Taylor Headland

    Our Little Cuban Cousin

    Our Little Dutch Cousin
        By Blanche McManus

    Our Little Egyptian Cousin
        By Blanche McManus

    Our Little English Cousin
        By Blanche McManus

    Our Little Eskimo Cousin

    Our Little French Cousin
        By Blanche McManus

    Our Little German Cousin

    Our Little Grecian Cousin
        By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet

    Our Little Hawaiian Cousin

    Our Little Hindu Cousin
        By Blanche McManus

    Our Little Hungarian Cousin
        By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet

    Our Little Indian Cousin

    Our Little Irish Cousin

    Our Little Italian Cousin

    Our Little Japanese Cousin

    Our Little Jewish Cousin

    Our Little Korean Cousin
        By H. Lee M. Pike

    Our Little Mexican Cousin
         By Edward C. Butler

    Our Little Norwegian Cousin

    Our Little Panama Cousin
        By H. Lee M. Pike

    Our Little Persian Cousin
        By E. C. Shedd

    Our Little Philippine Cousin

    Our Little Porto Rican Cousin

    Our Little Portuguese Cousin
        By Edith A. Sawyer

    Our Little Russian Cousin

    Our Little Scotch Cousin
        By Blanche McManus

    Our Little Siamese Cousin

    Our Little Spanish Cousin
        By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet

    Our Little Swedish Cousin
        By Claire M. Coburn

    Our Little Swiss Cousin

    Our Little Turkish Cousin


    L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
    53 Beacon Street,      Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: "A SLIM SLIP OF A BOY ... WALKED AT THE HEAD OF A PAIR
OF FAWN-COLORED OXEN." (_See page 1_)]

JOSE: OUR LITTLE PORTUGUESE COUSIN

by

EDITH A. SAWYER

Author of "The Christmas Makers' Club,"
"Elsa's Gift Home," etc.

Illustrated by Diantha Horne Marlowe

[Illustration]







Boston
L. C. Page & Company
MDCCCCXI

Copyright, 1911, by
L. C. Page & Company
(Incorporated)

All rights reserved

First Impression, May, 1911




Preface


ONE of the important historic events of the present century is the
revolution which took place in Portugal on the third day of October,
1910, when King Manuel II lost his throne. The king and his mother were
exiled and fled from Lisbon, the capital city, to England. A republic
was proclaimed throughout Portugal, and a new, progressive government
was adopted on December 1st, 1910.

Portugal is often described as "a garden by the side of the sea."
Its strength as a country lies in its agriculture, especially in its
vineyards, which are the chief source of wealth.

Education in Portugal has generally been at a low ebb. At the time of
the revolution less than one-fifth of the Portuguese people could read
and write. Plans for the new government include the opening of many
primary schools and the development of a system of higher education.

The Portuguese are an earnest people, enthusiastic yet serious-minded.
Even the children play soberly. Whether rich or poor, Portuguese
children are taught to respect age as well as to honor their parents.
Throughout the country even a small boy takes off his cap and makes
a bow when he meets an older person. Little girls also are taught
gentleness of manner. The home life is simple and happy.




Contents


  CHAPTER                                PAGE
  PREFACE                                   v
  I. JOSE'S SECRET                          1
  II. THE ELDER BROTHER                    11
  III. A PORTUGUESE HOME                   17
  IV. GARDEN AND VINEYARD                  28
  V. THE HUSKING OF THE MAIZE              38
  VI. AN AUTUMN RAMBLE                     45
  VII. WINTER WORK AND PLAY                56
  VIII. WHEN SPRING UNLOCKS THE FLOWERS    67
  IX. ON ST. ANTONIO'S DAY                 71
  X. BETTER TIMES                          85




List of Illustrations


                                                              PAGE
  "A SLIM SLIP OF A BOY ... WALKED AT THE HEAD OF A PAIR OF
      FAWN-COLORED OXEN" (_See page 1_)               _Frontispiece_
  "JOSE CALLED TO THE DOG TO LEAVE OFF BARKING"                 12
  "JOANNA, WITH A BOAT-SHAPED BASKET OF CLOTHES UPON HER HEAD"  34
  "SHE WAS A PICTURE OF YOUTH, BEAUTY AND GRACE"                43
  "FOR A LONG TIME THE BROTHERS WERE SILENT"                    50
  "HE AND JOSE LOOKED ACROSS THE CITY"                          82




Jose

Our Little Portuguese Cousin




CHAPTER I

JOSE'S SECRET

    "The childhood shows the man."--_John Milton._


A SLIM slip of a boy, with dark brown eyes and pale olive skin, walked
at the head of a pair of fawn-colored oxen as he turned homeward from
the market-place of a small village in the north of Portugal.

The village was just a humble collection of narrow streets paved with
round, worn cobble stones; a few shops and a long, one-storied inn; a
group of cottages and two or three larger houses, and a little white
granite church.

Along the street through which Jose Almaida passed with the oxen, the
market-day produce was spread out under the trees. There were great
piles of maize-cobs, potatoes, chestnuts and beans; baskets full of
grapes, figs and apples; strings of garlic and onions; heaps of giant
early yellow gourds, scarlet pimentos and deep red tomatoes; panniers
of fish, fresh and salted, and red earthenware household dishes, crocks
and water-jars.

Jose had exchanged the grapes, onions and tomatoes, which he had
brought from the home farm, for a small amount of tea and of hard,
brown salted codfish,--now the only luxuries of the Almaida family. In
the rough ox-cart, Carlos, his dog, a thick-nosed pointer, white with
brown spots, mounted guard over these provisions.

The market-place was no new sight to Jose. He did not stop in passing
along the street, except at the village fountain to fill a jar with
water for an old woman. Around the fountain good-natured looking
groups of women were talking over village affairs,--women in peasant
dress of dark, full short skirts, bright-colored waists, and gay red,
blue or orange kerchiefs over their shoulders and hanging from under
their round pork-pie black hats. Each woman carried a boat-shaped
basket or a water-jar upon her head.

Little Jose was a familiar figure on the market-day. For five months
past, he had done the family marketing, sometimes with his oldest
sister Joanna as companion, but often, as to-day, alone. At each
greeting, he bowed and pulled off his long black knitted stocking-cap.

To-day, early in October, the market-place had confused him. He had
heard groups of men saying that the king had gone away from the
country, never to return, and that there would be great changes in
Portugal.

Jose had three miles to travel before dark. There was no time to lose,
so he urged on the oxen. But every now and then, out on the main road,
he turned to look back toward the village, shading his eyes with his
hand. Not seeing what he sought, he urged on the oxen again with the
goad, which was twice as long as himself.

The road was steep. The oxen plodded on with low-bowed heads. They
were small and intelligent-looking oxen with strong shoulders and
wide-branched horns. Above their heavy yoke rose the _canga_, or
head-board, the pride of the Portuguese farmer. This was a piece
of hard wood, about eighteen inches high and five feet wide, and
handsomely carved in open work. It was the same kind of head-board
used by the Romans two thousand years ago, when they held control of
Portugal.

The up-hill road had many sharp stones. But the boy's hardened bare
feet heeded them not. Carlos jumped from the cart to run by his
master's side. Jose gave the dog a loving pat: "Ah, Carlos, brother
Antonio does not come yet."

The dog was the only one who knew Jose's secret. He looked up with eyes
which seemed full of sympathy, and put his nose into the boy's hand.

Along the wayside were rows and rows of oaks, chestnuts, planes,
and most of all, white poplars. The poplars were covered to the top
by trailing vines, loaded with purple grapes. On the hillsides were
scattered little cottages, whitewashed or painted pale blue, pink, or
buff, with red-tiled roofs. Every cottage which Jose passed had its
shady porch built with trellis covering, and heavy bunches of grapes
hung over the heads of women spinning at the open doorways, surrounded
by quiet, bare-foot children.

In the distance stood green pine-covered hills. Farther away rose vast
mountains, peak upon peak, purple now in the shadows of the October
afternoon.

It is a beautiful, mountainous country, this Minho region around
Guimaraes, the old capital city. Minho is Portugal's richest province.
And here, it is said, faces are brighter and manners gentler than
anywhere else in Portugal.

Up-hill the road wound always. Jose met many other boys, barefooted
like himself, but usually older, driving oxen or pannier-loaded
donkeys. The boys were dressed, as he was, in loose white linen shirt
and blue cotton trousers which came just to the knees, a scarlet sash
wound three times around the waist, a long, knitted black cap, and a
jacket of brown homespun slung upon one shoulder. Sometimes the cap was
red or green, but oftenest black; and it ended in a tassel which hung
down the back.

Many a bare-foot girl, too, trudged along the road, dressed in peasant
costume, and driving a donkey with a short stick.

With a last wistful look in the direction of the village, Jose turned
the oxen from the main road into the rough wooded lane which led to his
father's home. The ox-cart creaked and rumbled over the uneven ground.
Like all such carts in Portugal, it was made of four or five boards
laid flat and resting upon two supports. It had two wheels of solid
wood, without spokes, and with iron tires, fixed fast to an axle which
turned with the wheels. Long as the three mile journey was to Jose, it
was easier to walk than to ride in the jolting car.

Jose felt very tired. Although it was almost sunset time, he stopped
the oxen and threw himself down near a clump of fragrant shrubs to rest
before the last half mile of the hard journey. Carlos came and licked
his master's face, then darted off after a red-legged partridge.

Upon this young boy had fallen the man's duty in a family of six,
including himself,--a now helpless father, a hard-working mother, and
three sisters. Since May, when the Senhor Almaida had a stroke of
paralysis, Jose had done the heavy work--for a young boy--of caring for
the oxen, the cow, the chickens and pig. Besides, he had done what he
could, with the help of Joanna, the seventeen-year-old sister, to carry
on the farm garden and the vineyard.

There was an elder brother, Antonio, now twenty-one years old. He had
left home, four years ago, to seek his fortune in America. It was this
elder brother whom Jose had been eagerly looking for during the last
four months.

Joanna had at once written to Antonio of the father's illness, but had
not suggested Antonio's return. "We must not send for Antonio," she and
her mother decided. Three times each year they had received money from
this elder brother; and the money would be even a greater help now that
the father could not work.

Jose had been given the letter to post on a village market-day. It
was then that the plan for his secret came to him. At the _correio_,
post-office, he spent all the money he had ever owned for a post-card
and stamp,--twenty _reas_, two cents, for the card and twenty _reas_
more, for a two-cent stamp. On one side of the card he copied in
printed letters, Antonio's American address; on the other side he wrote
the words: "Please come home. We need you. Jose."

How glad the boy was then that in the evenings last winter his father
had taught him to write and to spell,--something which very few
Portuguese children know.

For a long time after mailing the post-card Jose felt very guilty with
the heavy burden of his secret. As days and weeks went by, the burden
grew lighter, but the desire for Antonio's return grew stronger.

No letter had come from Antonio since Joanna had written. No money had
come, either. This fact, which caused anxiety to the elders, gave Jose
strong hope. He felt that Antonio's not sending any money meant that
Antonio himself was coming.




CHAPTER II

THE ELDER BROTHER

    "His first, best country ever is at home."
                             --_Oliver Goldsmith._


THE few moments of rest in the sweet, cool air refreshed Jose. He
jumped up quickly. The farm-work must be done before nightfall.

Carlos was barking excitedly. Had he caught the red-legged partridge?
Jose turned to see. No, the dog was running toward a stranger, who was
walking rapidly in their direction.

Could it be Antonio? Jose's heart-beats almost choked him. But no; this
was a well-dressed stranger, with shoes on. He was evidently a man from
the city, and a traveller, too, because he carried a hand-bag. And he
had a black moustache. Of course it was not Antonio. Antonio would be
barefooted; Antonio had no moustache.

[Illustration: "JOSE CALLED TO THE DOG TO LEAVE OFF BARKING."]

Jose called to the dog to leave off barking. The stranger drew near.
Stopping, he stroked one of the fawn-brown oxen. He looked at Jose with
piercing dark eyes. His olive skin was clear and sunburned.

"Do you live near here, boy?"

Jose pulled off his cap as he answered:

"_Sim, Senhor_--Yes, sir--a half mile away."

"What is your name?"

"Jose Almaida, _Senhor_."

The stranger dropped his hand-bag. He waited a moment to control his
voice before he said: "Jose,--this is your brother Antonio."

The two brothers rushed into each other's arms and kissed each the
other on the cheek.

"_Accolade!_"--Welcome! Jose cried out at last. Antonio, thumping him
gently on the shoulders, had drawn back to look into his face.

"Is it truly you, Antonio? You are so changed--so old--so splendidly
dressed!"

"It is your brother Antonio. You, too, are so changed, Jose, that I did
not know you. Instead of a very small boy I find a tall, grown lad. How
are the father and mother, and the sisters? One little sister, Tareja,
I have never seen."

Eager talk followed, questions and answers coming close together. The
mild-eyed oxen looked around as if to ask the reason why the homeward
journey was so long delayed.

"You say the father can never walk again?" Antonio asked sadly.

"We have had the doctor once. He said father may perhaps have the use
of his right hand and foot sometime, if he has the best of care."

"Are there any crops on the farm this year? Who could do the work?"

"The apple and fig trees have borne well. We have good crops of maize
and melons and gourds, because father had done the early spring
planting before his illness came. Joanna and I did the hoeing and took
what care we could. The vines are full of grapes. Father had pruned
and trimmed them last winter. Joanna and I are gathering the grapes
nowadays and beginning to press them. And I sold some to-day."

"Is this your dog, Jose?" Antonio asked. Carlos had burst out again
into barking.

"Yes. Inez Castillo, the daughter of Senhor Castillo--you remember our
neighbor who lives on the big farm?--gave Carlos to me when he was a
puppy, a year ago. He stays with me always when I work and goes with me
wherever I go. He barks in such a friendly way at you that I think he
must know you belong to the family."

One of the oxen gave a low cry which the other echoed.

Jose picked up the ox-goad and started them forward. "It is time to go
on; the night work must be done."

Antonio lifted his hand-bag into the cart. "Who does that work?" he
asked.

"I do. Sometimes Joanna helps. You will help now? You have come to stay
at home?" Jose's voice was very wistful.

"I shall stay a while to help. We will not talk about this before the
others."

"A little while will help. I am growing bigger every day." Jose drew
his slight figure to its fullest height.

Antonio was silent.

"Did you get my post-card, Antonio?" Jose asked timidly, after a few
moments.

"Yes; that is why I came home, Jose." Antonio threw his arm lovingly
over the little brother's shoulder as they walked on, side by side.

"Please, oh please, do not speak about it before the others,--about my
writing to you," Jose begged in a half frightened voice.

"I will not speak about it, Jose, I promise you." Antonio looked down
at his brother, whom he remembered as little more than a baby. It was
hard to realize that this mere child had been the head of the family
for five months.




CHAPTER III

A PORTUGUESE HOME

    "He was a man of single countenance,
     Of frank address and simple faith."
             --_Francisco de Sa de Miranda._


IT was twilight when Antonio, Jose, the patient oxen and the frisky dog
reached home.

Great was the joy over that home-coming. The father, sitting propped
with pillows by the hearth, put his left hand in blessing upon the
head of his eldest son and exclaimed "_Gracas a Deus_," thanks be to
God. The mother, weeping tears of joy, held Antonio's strong body in
her arms for a long moment. Joanna, the tall bronzed sister, who had
just come in with the pails from milking, greeted him with a glad kiss
upon the forehead. Shy, thirteen-year-old Malfada, her jet black hair
floating over her shoulders, hugged the big brother, and then ran to
a shadowy corner to watch him. Two-year-old baby Tareja held out her
chubby hands: Antonio had her on his shoulder now. The green parrot in
its gilded cage cried "_Accolade, accolade_," in a shrill tone.

Joanna quickly began preparing for supper the _bolos de bacalhau_--the
Portuguese delicacy for feast days--made of minced salt fish, mixed
with garlic, shaped into cakes and fried in olive oil.

Jose ran out and put the oxen into their corner of the farm-yard near
the house, fed them and the cow, the chickens and the pig; brought in
firewood, and, last of all, filled the red earthenware jar with cool
water from the well on the terrace below the garden.

Soon the supper was ready. With thankful hearts and glad talk the
family gathered around the long, dark, polished chestnut-wood table.
The father's chair was drawn to the side nearest the hearth where a
bright fire blazed, lighting the room. The mother held little Tareja.
Joanna kept the plates filled with _bacalhau_, with _broa_--the maize
and rye bread of Portugal--with the vegetable stew of gourds, dried
beans and rice, flavored with bacon, which was the usual supper-dish;
then, with ripe olives, fresh figs and sweet seed cakes. Malfada helped
the father take his food. Jose ate hungrily, and once in a while
slipped a piece of _broa_, or bacon, into Carlos' mouth.

The front door stood open. Beyond the trees, the shadow of twilight
lingered in the valley. The hills were bathed in rosy mist.

The Almaida home was one of the better class of small farmhouses.
It stood in the centre of a hillside farm of about four acres. It
was a square, plastered stone house, whitewashed inside and out.
The overhanging eaves of the red-tiled roof were painted deep red
underneath. This was the house where Senhor Miguel Almaida's father,
his grandfather and great-grandfather had lived.

The central room, into which one entered from the vine-clad porch, was
uncarpeted. The furnishings showed that the Almaidas were a family of
more than peasant rank.

At one end of the room stood a large cupboard or cabinet of carved
chestnut-wood. Its shelves were full of odds and ends,--some old pieces
of English ware, souvenirs of long ago days when trade relations
existed with Great Britain, and there was a silver platter of the fine
old Portuguese handwork of two hundred years ago. There were also a few
books on the shelves, and a violin, a guitar and a flute.

Against the wall, opposite the cabinet, were the beds, separated from
one another by partitions which did not reach quite to the top of the
room.

On the walls hung framed colored pictures of the Portuguese hero king,
Affonso Henriquez, of Inez de Castro and Prince Pedro, her lover. A
large gilt-framed mirror hung near the door, and over the mantel was a
crucifix.

Never was there a cleaner or a prettier farmhouse in all Portugal.
Never were there better-trained, more obedient children than Miguel
Almaida's.

The father, in these many days when he had to sit helpless by the
fireside in his arm-chair, felt grateful for his tidy home, his
good wife, and his dutiful children. He was a man of middle height,
thick-set in figure. He was of grave character and of great common
sense. Even during this illness he kept himself cheerful and of good
hope.

While the mother strained and cared for the milk, the older sisters
washed and put away the dishes. Jose sat on a low stool by his father's
side, holding Tareja on his knee, and listening to Antonio's stories
about America, of his voyage home, and of the revolution in Portugal.
Indeed the events in Portugal were of more interest even than the
wonders of far-away America.

"Our country has changed very little in the past ten, twenty and
perhaps fifty years. Now we can hope for better times," said Miguel
Almaida.

News of the revolution had been slow in reaching the hillside farm.
What the father had heard before as rumors Antonio now told him as
facts.

The revolution had taken place while Antonio was on the voyage from New
York to Gibraltar. The news had greeted him when he landed. As he had
journeyed from Gibraltar to Lisbon, the capital city of Portugal, and
then, northward still, to Guimaraes, people everywhere were talking of
the great event. Since then, travelling by foot from Guimaraes out into
the hill country and past the little market-place, always the one topic
of interest had been King Manuel's banishment and the fact that the
Portuguese people were now to rule and govern themselves.

Jose could not understand all that the change meant. But to Antonio
and his father it meant better times,--not so much money to be paid
in taxes, better laws, and a chance for the children to go to school.
Almost all of the education which the Almaida children had received had
been at home. Senhor Almaida was a man better educated than many of his
neighbors.

When the evening work was done, the mother and the two older sisters
drew around the hearth. Tiny Tareja soon fell asleep in the mother's
arms. Joanna and Malfada began to embroider: Portuguese girls do
beautiful work with their needles. The hearth-fire of maple wood burned
brilliantly. Two candles on the mantel lighted up the crucifix.

Every few moments the parrot in its cage near the mantel, opened its
eyes, blinked, and called out "_Accolade! a deus!_"--Welcome! Good-by!
"I am sure the old parrot remembers you, Antonio," the mother said,
each time. "He has not talked so much as this for six months."

Now it was that Antonio opened his heavy travelling-bag. One by one he
took out the presents he had brought. Joanna and Malfada quickly put
aside their work.

First there was a silver watch for the father,--who had never before in
all his life owned a watch.

Next came three silver-link hand-bags, the largest for the mother, the
middle sized one for Joanna, the smallest for Malfada.

When Malfada hung the bag from her round wrist and held it forth to
look at it, Antonio burst into a hearty laugh and said: "That is just
the way I imagined that Malfada would dangle the little bag from her
wrist."

Antonio put the present for sleeping Tareja into his mother's hands.
It was a wonderful American doll with yellow hair and with eyes which
would shut and open, and it was dressed all in white, just as Joanna
had sometimes, on rare visits to Guimaraes, seen foreign children
dressed.

Then how gleefully they all laughed at the next present which Antonio
brought out! It was for the house,--a china salt-cellar, red and round
like a tomato.

"We must put it in the cabinet. It is too fine to use except on
holidays and feast-days," said the mother.

Jose's present was the last to appear. Now it was the little boy's turn
to receive a paper-covered package, tied with pink string.

Jose's short fingers trembled in impatience as he untied the
string,--careful, even in his haste, not to break it, for a piece of
string was very precious to the boy.

Off came the paper and out came a square white box. Off came the
box-cover and out came an engine and four gaily painted cars,--such a
wonderful toy as Jose had never seen before.

It was an evening always to be remembered in the Almaida family.
They looked at one another's presents. They listened to Antonio's
tales of great American cities and railroads and bridges, of active,
rapid-moving people, and of his own work as foreman on a section of
railroad diggers.

By and by the mother saw that the father, in his arm-chair, was growing
tired. So she told the children it was time to go to bed, because they
could hear more to-morrow about all these things.

Jose took the engine and cars, the box and the pink string to bed
with him, and held them clasped in both hands to make sure that the
treasures were real.

He was very wide-awake. He heard his mother and Antonio talking after
they had helped the father to his bed. And the little boy never forgot
Antonio's last words to his mother that night:

"Before I went away from home, mother, you said to me 'Each morning,
resolve not to do anything during all the day which will make you feel
sorry when night comes.' I remembered that each morning, mother, and it
kept me always from wrong ways and wrong places."




CHAPTER IV

GARDEN AND VINEYARD

    "Trees manifold here left their branches tall,
     Fruit laden, fragrant, exquisite and rare."
                                     --_Camoens._


WHEN, the next morning, Jose led Antonio through the garden and
vineyard, crimson vine leaves and purple grapes were the only signs of
autumn. The green of summer was fresh over everything else.

The granite gate-posts, which divided the front yard and flower garden
from the fields, were almost buried in ferns and covered with ivy.
In the garden blossomed roses, bright geraniums, asters, balsams,
verbenas, salvias and dahlias. The Portuguese are great lovers of
flowers. Their climate, where the temperature hardly ever goes below
forty degrees, is favorable to the growing of all the flowers, as well
as the trees and shrubs, of both temperate and tropical zones.

On the borders of the Almaidas' garden and fields, great palms and tall
cedars of Lebanon stood side by side with orange, lemon, citron and
fig-trees. Here and there was an olive-tree, with gray-green leaves.

"How beautiful the flowers are, Jose, and how the trees have grown!"
Antonio breathed a happy sigh as he spoke. Many times in his absence
these last four years his heart had cried out for the flowers and trees
and the quiet happiness of his childhood home.

Jose darted off to the house with the large bouquet of flowers he had
gathered for his father. As he ran back to Antonio, he called: "Come
to the farm-yard. I want you to see our pretty, gentle cow, and the
chickens and the pig."

At the right-hand side of the house was a good-sized farm-yard, kept
more than ankle-deep in gorse and bracken litter. This yard was formed
by one side of the house and by a small granite building which held
the grape-vats. High over the yard hung grave-vines on strong wooden
trellises. Here the cattle found shade and shelter in the heat of
mid-summer. In Portugal, cattle are kept in the yards instead of being
put out to pasture.

The dun-brown cow was indeed a gentle creature. She leaned her head
to one side while Jose stroked her neck, and she looked at Antonio
with friendly brown eyes. The chickens, in their corner coop, hurried
forward, as if expecting food, so Jose ran outside the yard and pulled
some handfuls of chickweed for them. The long, tall pig grunted a
welcome, standing still to have his back scratched. The oxen turned
restlessly, as if wondering why work was so late in beginning to-day.

Next the brothers visited the grape-vats. The wide, shallow tubs were
full of trodden grapes. For several days Jose with Joanna, and Malfada
to help sometimes, had carefully removed the green and decayed grapes
from the huge purple clusters they had gathered, and had thrown the
good grapes into the vats. Jose and the girls had trodden these grapes
with their bare feet. Now the juice was running from the vats through
the troughs and the strainers in rich crimson streams into caskets set
upon slabs of granite outside. This is the way that port, the wine for
which Portugal is famed, is made throughout the country.

Antonio stood looking out over the maize field and vineyard, of about
an acre, beyond the flower gardens. It was surrounded by poplar trees.
Upon the trees hung grape-vines, heavy with fruit.

"We must gather more grapes to-day, Jose. I will help, and together we
will tread the wine-press." Antonio's quick eyes saw that only a small
part of the grapes had been taken from the vines. They must make the
most of the vineyard crop.

Beyond the grape-vats was the _eira_, or threshing-floor, made of
granite slabs set close together, and beyond the _eira_, a small barn
and storehouse.

The _eira_ was well open to sun and wind. Piled high at one side were
stacks of maize-stalks, full of unhusked ears. The farm-work was
behindhand at this harvest time: it had been more than Jose and his two
sisters could do. Yet they had bravely tried.

The oxen's inquiring looks had reminded Jose that the day's watering of
the gardens and fields ought to begin.

"Let me take the oxen out to-day, Antonio, please," Jose said, when his
brother would have gone ahead with the work. Jose knew that his part as
leader would soon be ended. Hard as the care had been, he felt more
than half sorry to give it up to Antonio.

The obedient oxen came forth under the yoke and the high, carved
head-board. With the long ox-goad Jose guided them, Antonio following,
to the wide terrace at the left side of the house, where a well was
sunk into a deep spring, which had a supply of water that never failed.
Jose fastened the oxen to the _nora_, the old-time water-wheel.

Round and round the oxen went, in a wide circle, under trellises
covered with vines. Their moving carried power to an endless chain
which was set a few feet apart with buckets. These buckets, sent
dipping in turn down into the well, brought up water from its depths.
Half of it was spilled by the way. But enough was saved to make a
plentiful stream which flowed off to the thirsty gardens and fields
below.

In this Portuguese part of Europe there is scarcely any rain from
May to November. Therefore through the long dry season, watering is
necessary to the growth of the crops and the vines. Irrigation by the
water of springs brought down from the hill-tops to the farms on the
way, is increasing every year. But many farmers, in remote places,
like the Almaidas', still follow the two thousand year old custom of
watering from a well by means of the oxen's turning of the endless
chain.

[Illustration: "JOANNA, WITH A BOAT-SHAPED BASKET OF CLOTHES UPON HER
HEAD."]

"This is water enough for to-day," Jose said at last. "Will you drive
the oxen to the yard? I must help Joanna." And off the boy ran.

Joanna, with a boat-shaped basket of clothes upon her head, had just
gone to the stream beyond the barn, near the wood-lane entrance to the
farm. She waded out into the stream, above her ankles, and took the
clothes which Jose handed to her, washing out one piece after another
in the running water.

When this task was done, busy Jose hurried back to join Antonio, who
had begun to gather grapes. For an hour they worked, filling and
emptying other boat-shaped baskets, till the sun was high overhead.

"We will tread the grapes toward night, Jose," Antonio said, when
Joanna called them to dinner.

At the noon-day meal they ate _broa_--bread--dipped in olive oil, a
little dried fish, oranges and figs.

After dinner, in the heat of the day, Antonio went out to a rocky
corner of the farm and lay down in the cool shade. Jose brought along
his engine and cars. It was the first chance he had found to-day to
play with them. And until Antonio grew too sleepy, he told Jose about
real trains and railroads.

Oh, it was good to be free, good to be in the shade of the trees, to
look off over the hills and dream of the cities and the people beyond!

Antonio fell asleep, thinking these thoughts. When he awoke, Jose
was drawing the train of cars by the pink string, back and forth. A
far-away strain of music sounded upon the air.

"Have you learned yet to play the flute or violin, Jose?" Antonio asked.

"Yes, Antonio, I can play the violin a little."

"Run to the house, bring both violin and flute. You can play the one,
and I will see if I have forgotten what I knew about the other."

Away sped Jose. Returning, he gave Antonio the flute, keeping the
violin. Then for an hour the brothers played, not by note but by ear,
the simple, sweet melodies of the country-side. The Portuguese people
are lovers of music as of flowers. Each farmer, peasant, shepherd and
charcoal-burner has his guitar or violin, his pipe or flute.

Jose's violin notes were true and liquid. The old violin--it had been
his grandfather's--was rich-toned. Presently Antonio laid aside the
flute and listened to the little brother's playing.




CHAPTER V

THE HUSKING OF THE MAIZE

    "If all the year were playing holidays,
     To sport would be as tedious as to work."
                     --_William Shakespeare._


JOSE and Antonio, Malfada and Joanna worked side by side those busy
days of the next two weeks. They gathered and trod the grapes. They cut
and carried through the threshing-floor great sheaves of maize and of
bean-stalks, leaving them to dry there in readiness for the threshing.
The girls were active and willing, strong and cheerful. Both girls and
boys worked with the eager purpose of helping the invalid father and
the mother so wearied with constant care of the sick man and the young
child.

After the grapes were gathered, and the maize and beans harvested,
the hard work was over for a time. The gourds and watermelons, which
had been planted between the rows of maize and beans, now open to the
sunshine, were gaining in mellow color.

There was some free time for the Almaida family in the afternoons of
these October days. Jose drew his engine and cars back and forth on the
terrace, Carlos barking after him. Sometimes Jose played with Malfada
around the water-works, and swam oranges in the streams still running
from the endless chain of buckets. The mother and Joanna worked in the
flower garden. Antonio wandered off on the hillside with his flute.

At the maize-husking season in Portugal there is many a gay assembly.
The threshing-floor is the social gathering-place for old and young.
Antonio, Joanna, Malfada and even little Jose had already been to the
_Decamisadas_, or husking, on neighboring farms, when the work and the
dancing had lasted until late into the evening. Now Antonio had, in
turn, invited their neighbors to a maize-husking.

On the afternoon set, eager troops of men and boys, most of them
carrying some musical instrument, came in holiday costume of homespun
trousers, white linen shirt with a large gold or silver stud at the
neck, a red sash bound around the waist, broadcloth or homespun
cloak hung over one shoulder, and newest hat of black felt or cap of
knitted yarn. Eager troops of girls came also, in full short skirts,
in bodices of dark red or yellow worn over white waists, the large
sleeves newly starched and ironed. Each girl had a gay-colored cotton
or silk kerchief over her shoulders, and almost every one wore handsome
filigree gold earrings.

Jose's mother was dressed in the same kind of costume, except that her
kerchief was of soft dark red silk; and she wore her chief treasure, a
heavy gold chain and cross.

That afternoon, for the first time since his illness, Senhor Almaida
sat out on the porch in his arm-chair, his best broadcloth cloak
wrapped about him. In the excitement of the family preparation for the
_Decamisadas_, he had moved his right hand slightly. How the mother and
the children rejoiced in this sign of returning strength!

The husking went on merrily. Skilful fingers made quick work. Gossip
and song filled the air with busy hum. At times one or two of the
men left off work, upon Antonio's asking, and for a half hour played
familiar tunes on flute, guitar, violin or pipe.

Toward sunset, when the sky was all aglow with red light, the mother,
Joanna and Malfada brought out the supper of _broa_, dried fish and
preserved fruits. The large platters were piled high with the food, and
there was plenty more in the house. The workers had hearty appetites,
and each took a cupful of the fresh-pressed grape-juice which Antonio
passed around.

[Illustration: "SHE WAS A PICTURE OF YOUTH, BEAUTY AND GRACE."]

The round harvest moon rose just at sunset. In the red-silver glow of
twilight and moonlight, the cheerful workers began their tasks again.
After an hour more, the husking was finished. A huge heap of golden
ears gleamed in the centre of the threshing-floor. Willing hands
carried these off to the barn. The threshing-floor was cleared of
maize-stalks and chaff. All was ready for dancing.

First the young men and maidens formed a circle and went round and
round in a merry jig. Then they danced, in groups, the _bolero_, a
dance slow and firm in motion, with well-marked time. This was followed
by a lively reel.

As the music grew louder, little Jose dared to join in with his beloved
violin.

Then singing burst forth to the music, players and dancers taking part
in the simple country-side melodies, until, warm and breathless, the
dancers drew back to the edges of the threshing-floor. And now they
began eagerly calling upon Inez Castillo for the dance she did so well.

Eighteen-year-old Inez Castillo had stood aside while the others
danced. She did not like so much romping. But now she stepped forward
good-naturedly at their request. Her deep black eyes glowed with the
lustre of health. There was a ripe red flush upon her cheeks, an
expression of gentle modesty upon face and figure.

"You play for me, Jose, you alone, please," the girl asked. She knew
how perfectly in tune and in time Jose's music was.

Steadily, but rather low at first, the boy began to play. Steadily and
gracefully Inez danced forth, her silver bracelets tinkling upon her
wrists. Her arms and body moved in perfect time. She was a picture of
youth, beauty and grace.

Jose did not think about the people listening as he drew his bow back
and forth. He thought only of making his music as true as possible for
Inez,--Inez who had given him his dear dog-friend Carlos.

Antonio leaned against the stone wall of the barn, watching the face
of his music-loving little brother. "I must try to let the lad have
some music-training," he said to himself. He watched, too, the modest,
graceful dancing of Inez; and he decided that however interesting
far-away America had been, his own fatherland was a goodly country.




CHAPTER VI

AN AUTUMN RAMBLE

    "With dreamful eyes
      My spirit lies
     Under the walls of Paradise."
             --_Thomas Buchanan Read._


THE father was better. He could move the weak hand and foot, although
he was not yet able to use them. But he could sit all day in the
arm-chair on the porch. From there he was able to direct the late
autumn work. This was fortunate. Antonio had half forgotten what needed
to be done, and Jose did not yet know much about it.

The mother's face had brightened. She did the work of the household and
cared for Tareja with a thankful heart. Joanna and Malfada were again
busy all day out of doors in the field with their brothers.

Now the winter's supply of gourds, left among the stubble of
maize-stalks, had grown very large and yellow. There were two kinds
of gourds,--one, smooth and round, the other, long and striped. These
were gathered and lifted, some to the low roof of the barn, others to
the top of the rocky ledge, where they would not have to stand in the
wet after the autumn rains began. The melons, also, were gathered and
stored in the same way. Upon these places, gourds and melons would keep
sound until February. All through the winter the better ones would be
valuable food for the family, while the coarser ones would be used for
cattle and pig.

There was a good supply of cabbage in the garden for the winter's
house-use and for feeding the live stock. Sown late in the summer, the
cabbage had grown to four or five feet in height. Its lower leaves
would be picked off, week after week, then the stalks cut down in the
spring to make room for other crops.

Twice Jose went with Antonio to the wild lands of the remote hillside,
and loaded upon the ox-cart gorse, heather, bracken and wild grass as
winter stabling for the cattle. This they cut or scraped together with
broad-bladed hoes,--simple tools made of a flat piece of iron shaped
like a spade and fastened upon a handle. Jose's hoe-handle was so long
that he had very hard work to manage it. But he bravely kept on, no
matter how his arms and back ached during those early November days.

It would soon be time to plough the stubble and to sow the winter
barley, rye and wheat, the flax, and the maize for cattle feed.

"We will take a holiday, Jose, before we begin this new work. Where
would you like to go?" Antonio asked, as they walked homeward from the
wild-land by the side of the oxen. Carlos ran ahead on the wood-road,
sniffing the fresh air.

"I would like best to go up to the hill-top, where we can look off and
see Guimaraes and the old ruined Roman city, Citania."

"We will go to-morrow. You have earned a holiday, and the up-hill walk
will straighten your shoulders. The hoeing has made you bend over like
a little old man."

The next morning's work of caring for the live-stock was done early.
Each with a lunch-basket, and a cloak hung over one shoulder, the two
brothers set forth, followed by Carlos, and watched out of sight by the
family on the front porch.

They found the mossy old foot-path which led from the main road up the
hill. Pine needles made the rocks here and there as slippery as glass.
But tufts of tall, stout grass along the path served as a help in
climbing.

The sky overhead was deepest blue. Through the trunks of trees on
both sides of the path they could see many a maize-field yellow with
stubble, and many a vineyard with brilliant bronze leaves.

The trees were very beautiful. Here was the straight trunk of a
eucalyptus "tall as the mast of some great admiral;" here was a
cork-tree with a rich, brown velvet-like trunk, and here a gum-tree,
its long drooping leaves of russet, red and orange showing like jewels
against the slender, dark trunk.

There were seats for the weary built against the trees along the way.
Once in a while the brothers stopped to rest. And at the noon hour they
ate their luncheon, Jose sitting at Antonio's feet, and giving a large
part of his own share to the dog.

By early afternoon they came to the rocky crag of the hill. A humble
hermitage stood upon the outer edge of this great rock. Near the
hermitage a gilded cross was built upon a broad pillar of piled
stones,--the work of some long-ago, shoeless Carmelite or Trappist
monk. The hermitage was deserted now, but the palms and ferns around
it were rich in beauty. Antonio, who had read much about his country's
history, told Jose that all these green growing things had been planted
and tended with loving care by the devout monks who had taken on
themselves the vows of poverty and of silence.

[Illustration: "FOR A LONG TIME THE BROTHERS WERE SILENT."]

Antonio and Jose lay down upon the soft, fine grass, under a tall
palm-tree, and looked out over the wide view which the rocky crag
gave. The mole-crickets made a soft churr-churring sound around them.
Blackbirds in the tree-tops gave shrill, crowing calls. From hilly
pastures, shepherds among their sheep sang in rivalry with one another.

For a long time the brothers were silent. The beauty of the scene
almost took away speech. On all sides were purple hills and upon
every hill-top stood a hermitage or shrine with a shining cross
above it. Far away rose the giant peak of the Penha, a mountain covered
with green up the greater part of its height, then bare granite to its
top.

Antonio pointed to the southeast: "There on the plain, is Guimaraes,
with its many roofs and chimneys; and, look, there is the smoke of a
railroad train."

"Will you take me there some time, Antonio, so that I can see a real
train of cars?"

"Yes, Jose, we will go there on our next long holiday. Now look over
yonder. Half way up the hill do you see some rows of stone wall?"

"Yes, Antonio."

"There lies the old fortress city, built by the Romans more than a
hundred years before Christ was born. It is called Citania now, and it
is in ruins. Some day you will read about it in a book of history."

Jose sighed as he said: "I fear it will be a long, long time before I
can read a book. I can only spell out a few words now,--not much more
than I wrote on the post-card to you."

"Would you like to go to school this winter, Jose?"

"Oh, how I should like it,--more than anything else in all the world!
But there is no school, and if there was one, I could not leave the
farm-work to go to it."

"There is to be a free primary school opened this winter, with a good
teacher, in our village where we go on market-days. I want you to
attend the school, Jose."

"But who will do the work at home, Antonio? You will soon go back to
America, I think." Jose never forgot, even in the joy of having Antonio
at home, that this big brother might soon go away again.

Antonio was silent a long time. Then he said slowly, looking off to the
far Penha Mountain: "Jose, how would you feel if I told you I will
stay at home?"

"I should be very happy, oh, so happy, brother."

"Well, Jose, I have decided to stay."

Jose raised himself upon his elbow and looked eagerly into Antonio's
face: "Do you really mean it?" he asked.

"Yes, Jose."

"Then I _can_ go to school, and learn as much as you know?"

Antonio laughed a little sadly: "It is not very much that I know, from
books. Most of the small amount I know is what I have learned from men
and things in America, and from the newspapers. But I will study in
the evenings this winter. I would rather have an education than be a
millionaire. There was a school in the village when I was your age. The
new school will be better than that."

"Why will it be better, Antonio?" Jose asked. He knew nothing of
schools except that they were places where children could learn to read
from books.

"We had old, dull books to study, and we had to wait, all in one class,
until every boy and every girl had learned the lesson. But Senhor
Castillo has told me that in the new school there will be new books,
and there will be more than one class, so that the boys and girls who
are quickest to learn can go ahead of the others."

"I am afraid I shall not be quickest to learn, Antonio."

"Try as hard as you can, Jose. Then, in the future, perhaps you will be
one of the rulers of Portugal. The time is coming in this country when
education will mean power."

Jose listened with close attention. And although he could not
understand Antonio's words, he remembered them. A moment later he
asked: "May I be the one to tell the family that you will stay at home
with us, Antonio? I know the father and mother have felt very anxious
about this."

"Yes, Jose, you may tell them this evening. Now take a last look toward
Guimaraes. We must start for home. It is nearly the sunset hour, and
darkness will soon follow. The path is so steep that we need light to
tread it."




CHAPTER VII

WINTER WORK AND PLAY

    "See, winter comes to rule the varied year."
                             --_James Thomson._


WHAT joy in the home when Jose that evening, after the late supper,
told the good news! How they crowded around Antonio, clapping him on
the shoulders! With what glee did Joanna bring out preserved fruits and
sweet cakes for them to eat as they drew their chairs around the hearth!

"We will have many a happy winter evening together;" the father spoke
with a new courage shining in his eyes. "The doctor you sent for,
Antonio, came to-day while you and Jose were away. He told me that if
I rest this winter, free from care, I shall have full use of my right
hand and foot again. Your taking the care from me will be what saves
me, Antonio."

"I can do more than keep you from care, father. I saved money while I
was away, and have over two hundred dollars now, even after paying my
passage home. I will spend some of this money to make the farm better."

This was the first time Antonio had spoken of his savings. He had kept
silent until he could decide as to whether or not he would go back to
America.

"You are a rich man, my son." A look of pride shone in the father's
eyes as he spoke.

"You deserve it, Antonio. You are a good son," the mother said, as she
wiped happy tears from her eyes.

Indeed this seemed to the whole family a very great fortune. Even
Senhor Castillo was not worth more than five hundred dollars, and he
was the wealthiest man for miles around.

"I will buy a new plough and some new tools. We shall soon have enough
better crops to more than pay for this spending. When you are well
again, father, there will be two men of us to work instead of one."

"And what about Jose?" The father put his left hand upon the little
boy's shoulder. Jose was kneeling beside him, roasting chestnuts on the
hearth.

"I am going to school this winter, Antonio says." Jose looked up with a
happy face.

"A school term will begin early in January, at the village. Jose can go
for the sixteen weeks; he is strong enough to walk there and back, I
think," said Antonio.

"Sometimes can I go, too?" Malfada asked, tossing back her thick black
hair.

"Yes, little one, you can go with Jose, that is the best plan. Then you
can help each other with your lessons," the father said quickly.

Soon the winter began. The dull weather with heavy rains lasted two
or three weeks. In this Portuguese country, autumn meets winter with
pouring rain and with strong winds, which break down almost everything
in the gardens and which cover gardens and fields with wet leaves and
long sprays of vine.

During these days Antonio and Jose wore about the farm-work curious
coats made of several layers of dried grass. These were some protection
against rain and wind. But there was not much work to be done until the
heavy storms should cease.

In late November the sun came forth brightly. It was time to plough the
stubble fields.

The only plough Jose had ever seen until now, was one made of a crooked
branch of hardwood tree, shod with iron,--of the same pattern as the
plough used by the Romans two thousand years ago. It was a plough so
light in weight that after the day's work was done, the man lifted it
from the ground and hung it over the yoke of the ox.

This old kind of plough was drawn by one ox, and it stirred the soil
only six or seven inches deep. The new plough--which Antonio brought
home one day behind the oxen--turned a deep straight furrow in the
light crumbling soil.

The old harrow, to level the ground after the ploughing, was made of
fifteen or twenty teeth of iron set into a wooden framework. The new
harrow which Antonio bought had many strong, close-set teeth.

Jose had followed after the plough with great delight, to watch its
working. Now, when Antonio let him ride on the harrow-seat, the boy
kept his head turned back most of the way, in order that he might see
the ploughed land grow level under the harrow's teeth.

"Surely our crops will be doubled next season--twice as large as ever
before--because the ground is so well-prepared," the father said each
day as he watched the work from the doorway. He seemed to gain in
strength daily, even during this dullest season of the year. It was
hard, though, for him to be unable to help, for there was much work to
be done.

Jose was given the sowing of the winter wheat and rye, and of the maize
for the winter food of the cattle. Antonio pruned the grape-vines and
cut off the tops of the trees on which the vines hung. Soon the maize
shot up, and the young stalks had to be cut, morning and night.

Jose stayed around the house all one market-day afternoon, taking care
of little Tareja and being company for his father, while the mother,
Joanna and Malfada went to the village with Antonio. Malfada dangled
the silver-link bag from her wrist, just as Antonio knew she would; and
she brought back home in it a little boxful of candies for Jose. It was
a great day for them all.

There were long, pleasant evenings, for Portuguese families stay at
home together instead of going to their neighbors for amusement. Jose
played softly on his violin. The mother, Joanna and Malfada sewed or
embroidered. Antonio read aloud from some book, or oftener from a
newspaper he had bought on the weekly market-day and which gave news
of the nation's progress. Sometimes, but not often, he went out with
his flute; and then the family knew that he had gone to serenade Inez
Castillo.

Swiftly the days passed. Soon came _Natal_--Christmas--the great
holiday of the year. On this day and on New Year's, there were
fireworks and decorations at each farmhouse, singing, and visits back
and forth.

Daily between Christmas and New Year's the Almaida family ate _bolos de
bacalhau_, and _rebanadas_,--thick slices of _broa_ soaked in new milk,
fried in olive oil and spread with honey. _Rebanadas_ is the special
holiday food for Christmas and New Year's. The red tomato salt-cellar
was used at table on each of these days.

The holidays from farm-work lasted up to the Feast of the Epiphany,
January 6th. On the day after, the school in the village opened.

Five days each week Jose and Malfada walked barefoot the three miles in
the early morning, returning in the dusk of the mild winter day. The
walk was very tiring sometimes. It was fortunate that both children
were strong, and used to being much on their feet.

At first Carlos wanted to go with them. But soon he seemed to
understand that he was not to be allowed to take these morning walks.
On each school-day, however, at four o'clock, he would begin watching
for the children, and the moment he caught sight of them coming along
the wood-lane, he dashed off at top speed to meet them.

The old parrot was very funny these days. So much going and coming
confused him. In the mornings when Jose and Malfada went away he
called out _Accolade_--welcome, and in the afternoons, when they
returned, _a deus_--good-by. These were the only words he knew; Jose
had tried in vain to teach him other words, just as Antonio had tried
when a little boy.

"The parrot is growing very old; he is losing his sense," the mother
said one day when the bird greeted the children on their return from
school with _a deus! a deus! a deus!_

"Oh no, mother; I am sure he thinks it is a joke, just as we do," Jose
said, very earnestly.

On the Saturday holiday Jose worked from dawn till dark, helping
Antonio. The vine-pruning and tying did not end until February. Jose
learned to tie the vine branches skilfully to the trees, leaving room
for the vines to grow and not be hurt by the cord. In February, March
and April came the sowing for the crops of the summer and autumn.

The sixteen weeks' term of school ended in April. Jose had been put
into the class of the quickest learners. He had gone rapidly ahead of
Malfada, who, although three years older, stayed in the lower class.

Jose had been eager over his books,--far more eager than Malfada. But
he ran almost all the way home, and reaching there long before she did,
put away his books gladly. The school-room, with its crowd of boys and
girls, had seemed hot and dusty those days when the outside world was
growing so beautiful.

Antonio was out in the field, planting cabbages, when Jose hurried
toward him calling: "No more school, Antonio, no more school now."

Antonio straightened back his shoulders and asked: "Is this the boy who
wanted so much to go to school?"

Jose's face turned very red under its tan. But when he saw the teasing
look in Antonio's eyes, he laughed and said: "It is good to have
spring come after winter, so I think it is good to change from going
to school to not going. Besides, the teacher says there will be a ten
weeks' term next autumn."

"Spring unlocks the flowers, so the spring should let children come out
of doors," said Antonio. "There will be some hard work for you, Jose,
but never mind!"

"Never mind," repeated Jose, racing back to the house with Carlos at
his heels.




CHAPTER VIII

WHEN SPRING UNLOCKS THE FLOWERS

    "In the merry month of May."
                --_William Shakespeare._


THE hills were sweet with the air of spring. Down their sides ran rills
of water, foaming with golden light. The fresh grass of the fields was
carpeted with flowers. The young vine-shoots were full of tender, pale
green leaves.

Lemon and orange trees shone with white blossoms. The elder, lotus,
and shining-leaved magnolia showed almost more white than green. The
pomegranate held forth fiery red blossoms. The olive-tree, with its
stunted growth and its gray-green leaves, glowed all day long with a
beautiful silver color under the bright sunshine. In the flower-garden,
roses, geraniums and heliotrope were a-bloom.

Crops were growing wonderfully. The effects of the deep ploughing
already showed in the stronger maize-stalks, the more abundant bean
pods and the well-started vegetables.

"The fourth leaf-spike has appeared on the maize: it is time for the
hoeing," said the father. He could walk now, slowly, with the aid of a
stout cane, as far as the field.

It was easy for Jose to work with the new short-handled hoe Antonio
had bought for him. Yet at the end of the day his arms and wrists were
so tired that he could scarcely draw the bow across the violin. Many
an evening the bow dropped from his hand as he fell asleep, heavy-eyed
after being all day in the open air.

As soon as the young maize-stalks were strong enough to stand the flow
of water, the oxen were set to work at the _nora_ and streams of water
began running down through the fields. The dry season had commenced.
There was day after day of bright, unclouded sunshine.

Then came the thinning of the crops, to make the strong stalks grow
stronger, and to give food for the cattle.

Working with his bare feet two or three inches deep in the warm, moist
soil, Jose felt as if he were a part of this great, growing, beautiful
world. The strength of the earth seemed to come into him with the air
he breathed. He was taller and more sturdy: he no longer looked like
the slim slip of a boy of six or seven months ago.

Early in June the crops had grown to their limit. Their turning to a
yellow color showed the ripening. It would soon be time for cutting
down the first crop of barley, oats, rye and wheat, and to make ready
for a second sowing. The flax had already been taken up, and had been
steeped or soaked in water for more than a week. Now, well-dried in the
sun, it must be broken and scutched by hand, or taken to some mill to
be finally made ready for spinning.

Antonio decided that he would carry the flax to Guimaraes, where there
were good mills, instead of having his mother and sisters do the work
at home. Besides, he wanted to buy some new seeds for the second sowing.

"Would you like to take a holiday with me to-morrow?" he asked Jose on
the evening before St. Antonio's day.

"Yes. Where? To Guimaraes?" Jose replied quickly.

"How did you guess, little brother?"

"Because last autumn, when we went on a holiday, you said you would
take me to Guimaraes when we went away again."

"We will start early to-morrow. We will take the oxen, because I am
going to carry the flax to the mill."

"It is good to have the holiday on St. Antonio's day. Because you have
that name, the day should be your holiday, Antonio."




CHAPTER IX

ON ST. ANTONIO'S DAY

    "--in my soul is naught but gayety."
                        --_Antonio Ferreira._


FOR the first time in all his life, Jose was to see Guimaraes, the old
city where Portugal's hero king, Affonso Henriquez, was born in 1109,
the great warrior who made of Portugal a united country.

On the morning of St. Antonio's day, the thirteenth of June, the family
was up early to eat with Antonio and Jose the holiday breakfast of
_estofado_--stewed meat and vegetables. At six o'clock they gathered on
the wide stone doorstep to see the brothers start. Carlos lay at the
edge of the step, his nose upon his paws, waiting, both eyes fixed upon
Jose. The dog knew that some unusual journey was planned; he was all
ready to go, too.

But Carlos could not go. This was Jose's only regret at starting. "He
would be frightened and perhaps lost in the city," Antonio said. So the
dog was held back by Joanna, and he decided, in his dog way, that Jose
must be going off to school again. The parrot's cries of _Accolade!
Accolade!_ followed the brothers until they were beyond reach of the
sound.

It was a glorious June morning. Although so early, the sun was even
now high in the blue heavens. The air was fragrant with sweet flower
perfumes. Many small brown and yellow butterflies fluttered along
the roadside. Large gray sand-lizards ran out from the underbrush.
Meadow-larks and blackbirds sang in every tree-top.

All beyond the village market-place was new to Jose. The road grew
constantly better. Soon above the pine forests appeared the granite
peak of Penha. On the approach to Guimaraes, the ground rises and pine
forests spread around the city for miles. In that wild country, Affonso
Henriquez first learned the art of war, and in his very boyhood became
the trusted leader of his troops.

As the brothers drew nearer, they saw the gentle hill on which stand
the walls of the old castle, still keeping watch over the city which
lies beneath. It is impossible to imagine a ruin more stately than
that of this grand old castle of the Middle Ages, the first Christian
fortress in Portugal,--a castle-fortress which tells the story of the
strong spirit of the race of men who built it. The huge granite blocks,
each taller than a man, which form the battlements, still stand erect
and immovable.

On the road, as the brothers drew yet nearer, were many other
travellers, like themselves bound for the city. It was market-day as
well as the holiday of St. Antonio. There were men and women, boys and
girls, in gala-day costume. Sometimes the women and girls were driving
donkeys, pannier-laden. But oftenest, these women-folk had baskets,
heavily filled, upon their heads; in Portugal women carry everything in
baskets, from babies to bales of goods. There were herdsmen on the way,
driving flocks of goats. Groups of children walked soberly along with
their parents. Now and then a beggar asked Antonio for a bit of money;
but Portugal has few beggars compared with its neighboring country,
Spain.

The crowd of holiday-makers grew. Jose climbed into the ox-cart,
because he could see more and because the long walk and the unusual
excitement were making him feel rather tired. Most of the travellers
passed on ahead, for the oxen, pulling their load up-hill, made slow
progress. But Jose did not mind this. The music of a brass band was
coming to his ears. He had to ask Antonio what it was; he had never
before heard a band.

Guimaraes is a delightful old city. Even people who have travelled much
more than Jose think so. It is full of picturesque buildings. There are
many houses with balconies and windows of fine wood-carving. Several
of the streets are hardly more than narrow alleys, and the eaves of
the houses all but meet overhead. Some of the wider streets end in
wonderful views of the hills, seen across fields brilliant green with
rye and clover. And there is a beautiful old granite cathedral church.

Jose had never seen anything so marvellous as this building. In its
graceful granite belfry tower the peal of eight bells was ringing
out the hour of ten as the oxen moved slowly past, along the crowded
street. But Jose hardly noticed the people: he was looking up, full of
eager curiosity, at the strange heads and faces, half like men, half
like animals,--the gargoyles carved on church and tower.

"Take me to see the cars and the railroad first of all, please,
Antonio," had been Jose's request, made over and over again that
morning on the way.

So, to please the little brother, Antonio drove the oxen directly to
the railway station. By good fortune they were just in time to see the
arrival of a long passenger train. Jose was almost terrified by the
rushing in of the tall black engine with its smoke and noise. The cars,
with their seats and windows and curtains, seemed to him like strange
little homes.

Many a traveller turned to gaze with interest at the earnest-faced,
black-eyed boy and the handsome, strong-looking brother, with the fresh
color of the country upon their faces.

A little girl dressed in white stepped from the cars, holding fast to
her mother's hand. "See, Antonio," Jose cried out in a voice so loud
that everyone around heard: "See, she looks just like Tareja's doll!"
As the mother and little girl passed, they smiled with friendly blue
eyes at the brothers.

After the passenger train moved out of the station, a puffing freight
engine went back and forth, shifting and changing about many long,
box-like looking freight cars. Presently the cars were all in place,
and the puffy engine pulled them slowly away.

Jose would have stayed all day at the station, waiting for other trains
to come and go. His eyes were not yet satisfied. But Antonio had many
other things to do. When they finally turned away, Jose looked back
as long as the station remained in sight. He soon, however, grew
interested in seeing other sights.

To Antonio, Guimaraes seemed very old-fashioned and slow, compared
with the busy American cities of the same size which he had seen. But
to Jose everything was new and wonderful,--so many people, such tall
buildings, such beautiful things in the shop windows, so much noise.

Everywhere on the corners of the quaint, crowded streets groups of men
were talking about the new government, and curious small boys were
listening at the edges of the crowds. Jose wanted to stop long enough
to hear what was being said; but Antonio urged the oxen on toward the
mill. Processions of young men marched through the streets to the music
of flutes, pipes, and drums. On many a street the statue figure of
St. Antonio, in a shrine, was decorated with flowers and garlands of
leaves. Around bonfires in the city square young people were dancing.

When they reached the mill, Antonio fastened the oxen at the corner of
a near-by side street. Jose helped carry the flax into the mill, but
he hurried back to take his seat in the ox-cart: he liked this better
even than staying in the mill.

A red, whizzing machine which Jose knew at once, from descriptions
Antonio had given him, was an automobile--came rushing through the
narrow street. The frightened oxen pulled so hard at the chain that
Jose thought they would break it and run away. He jumped down, and, in
his effort to quiet the oxen, lost the chance really to see the darting
red machine. But he saw other automobiles, by and by.

From the mill Antonio went to a neighboring shop to buy the seeds he
wanted for the second crop planting. This took a long time. Just as he
came back, the sweet-toned bells of the cathedral tower were chiming
out one o'clock. He guided the oxen to the end of a short side street,
where he let them graze upon the rich grass by the road while he and
Jose ate their luncheon. Streams of water ran along in stone channels
by the roadside. The murmur of running water was heard everywhere and
always, for this was an especially dry season, and the gardens and
fields of Guimaraes needed much moisture.

Back the brothers went with the oxen into the city crowds. Antonio
wanted to get some presents to take home. Jose helped him choose these.
They bought a bright-colored little basket for the mother, new silk
kerchiefs for the sisters, a gay little scarlet kerchief for Tareja,
and a book, about modern ways of farming, for the father.

After this was done, Antonio was ready to go home.

But Jose begged: "Please, oh please, Antonio, let us stay till dark.
The band keeps on playing; I never should tire of hearing that. And
some boys were saying on the street as we passed that there are going
to be fireworks at dusk."

Antonio hesitated. They were a long way from home, and it had been a
long day.

"Joanna will milk the cow, and feed the chickens and pig. Mother will
know we are safe together. Do stay, Antonio."

So, because the little brother did not often have a holiday, Antonio
delayed starting for home. The sky was very clear. A bright moon would
give them light on the way after the late twilight ended.

There were many more people now in the city square. The crowds were
cheerful, rather quiet, and very orderly; the Portuguese people are
sober-minded, even on their holidays.

Toward nightfall the scene grew gayer. More bonfires were lighted.
A second, third, and fourth brass band marched through the streets
to their own lively strains of music. Jose's quick ear caught many a
tune which he afterward played upon his violin. Candles were lighted
now on the shrines of the holiday saint. The cathedral bells rang
forth a beautiful vesper hymn. And almost before the sun had set, the
fireworks began.

[Illustration: "HE AND JOSE LOOKED ACROSS THE CITY."]

Antonio bought a bagful of buns and seed-cakes, which they ate as they
sat in the ox-cart on the edge of the crowd. It was not long before he
saw that Jose was growing very tired.

Antonio stepped down from the cart. "We will start now, Jose. We can
watch the fireworks as we move away from the city. Then we can stop
outside and let the oxen feed a while. They must be very hungry."

And because the big brother had been so kind, Jose did not object now
to the homeward start.

A half mile out in the country, just before they reached the borders of
the pine forest, Antonio turned the willing oxen aside to let them crop
the thick grass. Seated on a high rock, he and Jose looked across at
the city.

Wonderful gleams of colored light--red, blue, green and orange--shot
out over the surrounding valleys. Showers of bright stars fell, it
seemed, as if at their very feet. The tall granite castle ruin was
lighted up with a red glow. The city itself, with its many towers and
tops showing in the blaze of color, with its bursts of music which
floated across on the soft night air, was like a story or a dream.

At last Antonio turned the oxen to the road again. "Truly we have had a
wonderful end to our holiday, Jose," he said.

"Truly we have," Jose replied drowsily. The rest by the roadside had
made him very sleepy, and the glare of light had almost blinded his
eyes.

"Climb into the cart, Jose. There is no need for two of us to walk.
The road is growing rougher now, and the cart jolts badly, but that is
easier to bear than going afoot."

Jose crept into the cart, and put his folded jacket under his head
for a pillow. He had tight in his hand the paper bag with the three
seed-cakes he had saved for his sisters. A few moments later he was
fast asleep.

Antonio, without stopping the oxen who were now going at top speed
toward home, gently put his cloak over the sleeping little man-brother.




CHAPTER X

BETTER TIMES

    "In measureless content."
               --_William Shakespeare._


BETTER times had surely come to the Almaida family. By July, the father
was able to walk about without a cane; and the doctor, whom Antonio
asked to come again, said that Senhor Almaida might begin work in
September.

The first crops of the year were the largest that the farm had ever
raised. The early harvest of oats, rye, and wheat was piled high in the
barn by the last of July, and the new crops were growing abundantly.

"Another year we shall have twice as much of everything," Jose said,
as he sat with his father and Antonio at the barn door in the summer
twilight.

The father looked smilingly into the little boy's eager face as he
answered: "Yes, and we can keep two cows instead of one cow, and more
chickens, perhaps another pig. We shall have more feed for them, and
with our larger crops to sell, we can soon pay back to Antonio the
money which he has spent for new farm implements and tools. It was good
for us all that you went away, Antonio, and came back with the new
ideas."

There were other plans for the farm forming in Antonio's mind, but he
was not yet quite ready to talk them over with his father.

A few days later, as Antonio and Jose finished the work of watering
the maize-fields for the second time that day, by means of the oxen's
turning of the _nora_, Antonio said to Jose: "You know there is
the good full stream which flows beyond the barn and along by the
wood-lane? This autumn, when the farm-work grows lighter, we will put
in pipes from that stream to the vineyard and garden, so that the crops
can be watered by what is called irrigation, and without using the
_nora_, which takes the oxen away from the other work. We will not tell
this to the father until the time comes. He may think it too large a
thing for us to do."

In mid-August a party of students from Coimbra University came
strolling through the village and up the hillside to the Almaidas' and
other farms. They were on a vacation pilgrimage to Braga, one of the
oldest cities in Portugal, known in Roman times as _Baraca Augusta_,
and in more modern times as the home of the royal Braganza family, to
which King Manuel II belonged.

While these students, in long black coats buttoned close to the chin,
ate the _broa_ and the fresh fruits which the good mother set before
them, Jose asked them many questions about the place from which they
came. And they told the little boy about Coimbra University, famous for
many centuries as the seat of learning for all Portugal, and about the
great buildings of the University on the hill overlooking the town.

"Like the old castle of Guimaraes?" Jose asked.

"Yes, have you ever seen that?" the leader of the students asked.

Then Jose shyly described to them his holiday with Antonio at
Guimaraes. "There is Antonio off in the field now, and father is
sitting with him, in the shade."

The five students were very comfortable on the vine-covered porch
this warm August afternoon, so they stayed a little longer, and told
Jose more about Coimbra,--how the city was, after Guimaraes, made the
capital of Portugal, and how, as the Christian kings, beginning with
Affonso Henriquez, drove the Moors farther and farther south, until,
after Coimbra, the more southern city of Lisbon was made the capital.

The students shook Jose's hand and clapped him on the back as they
started to go on with their journey. "Some day I hope you will visit
Coimbra," one of them said.

"_Gracias, senhor_," Jose answered very politely. "Some day I will go
there, but not yet, for I am only a little boy."

"You have seen and learned more than most boys of your age in Portugal.
I believe you will some day come to study at Coimbra," the leader of
the students said.

"_A deus, a deus_, boy; come to Coimbra some day," the students cried
as they went off; a jolly, laughing group in their black coats.

Through the summer, talk of public reforms, of railroad strikes, of
riots and unrest, reached the Almaida farm. It made the father think
with a half regret of the old days of quiet. It made Antonio long for
the time when the young republic of Portugal would have passed through
these first months of change and become settled.

But none of this talk disturbed Jose. He was the happiest boy in all
Portugal. His father was nearly well. His big brother was going to stay
in Portugal. His mother grew brighter of face every day. Joanna was
soon to marry a young village carpenter. Malfada and Jose himself could
go to school again in the autumn. Little Tareja in a few years would
also be able to go. And every day Antonio told Jose stories about the
great world outside of Portugal.

Antonio valued education more than ever, since his four years of life
in America. He knew that it was too late for him to go to school again,
because of his age and because of the need for him to work on the farm.
But he talked with Jose of the future when, if the boy turned out to
be good at studies, he might go to the University at Coimbra. And it
happened in the years afterward, that Jose did go to Coimbra, and that
the leader of the students who had stopped at the Almaida farm for broa
and fruits on the August afternoon, was then a teacher at Coimbra.

Of the money brought from America Antonio had spent hardly any except
that for farm tools and implements. The rest of the money, a good round
sum for a young Portuguese farmer, was in the bank at Guimaraes. Once a
month, now, Antonio added a few dollars to this--not half nor quarter
as much as he might have had in America, but although a man earns less
in Portugal, living costs less there.

With this money, and with what he would add to it in the future,
Antonio planned to pay for Jose's education, and some time soon it
would make him able to build near his father's, a new home where he
could bring Inez Castillo as his bride.

If Antonio and Jose have hot summers of sixteen hours' work daily to
toil through, they have no great severity of winter weather to bear.
If their summer days bring more than common heat and weariness, they
find rest during the cool, pleasant nights. In the summer and winter
evenings alike, father, mother and children find quiet enjoyment
together, and always, best of all, they have the power to enjoy simple
things "in measureless content."

Meanwhile Jose and Malfada, with many other Portuguese children, are
eagerly gaining education in the bettered schools which are a part of
Portugal's new government.

    THE END.




BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE




THE LITTLE COLONEL BOOKS

(Trade Mark)

_By ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON_


    _Each 1 vol., large 12mo, cloth, illustrated, per vol._    $1.50


    THE LITTLE COLONEL STORIES
          (Trade Mark)

Being three "Little Colonel" stories in the Cosy Corner Series, "The
Little Colonel," "Two Little Knights of Kentucky," and "The Great
Scissors," put into a single volume.

    THE LITTLE COLONEL'S HOUSE PARTY
          (Trade Mark)

    THE LITTLE COLONEL'S HOLIDAYS
          (Trade Mark)

    THE LITTLE COLONEL'S HERO
          (Trade Mark)

    THE LITTLE COLONEL AT BOARDING-SCHOOL
          (Trade Mark)

    THE LITTLE COLONEL IN ARIZONA
          (Trade Mark)

    THE LITTLE COLONEL'S CHRISTMAS VACATION
          (Trade Mark)

    THE LITTLE COLONEL, MAID OF HONOR
          (Trade Mark)

    THE LITTLE COLONEL'S KNIGHT COMES RIDING
          (Trade Mark)

    MARY WARE: THE LITTLE COLONEL'S CHUM
          (Trade Mark)

    MARY WARE IN TEXAS

    _These eleven volumes, with The Little Colonel's Good
         Times Book, boxed as a twelve-volume set_,      $18.00.


    THE LITTLE COLONEL
          (Trade Mark)

    TWO LITTLE KNIGHTS OF KENTUCKY

    THE GIANT SCISSORS

    BIG BROTHER


Special Holiday Editions

    Each one volume, cloth decorative, small quarto,      $1.25

New plates, handsomely illustrated with eight full-page drawings in
color, and many marginal sketches.


IN THE DESERT OF WAITING: THE LEGEND OF CAMELBACK MOUNTAIN.


THE THREE WEAVERS: A FAIRY TALE FOR FATHERS AND MOTHERS AS WELL AS
FOR THEIR DAUGHTERS.


KEEPING TRYST


THE LEGEND OF THE BLEEDING HEART


THE RESCUE OF PRINCESS WINSOME: A FAIRY PLAY FOR OLD AND YOUNG.


THE JESTER'S SWORD

    Each one volume, tall 16mo, cloth decorative      $0.50
    Paper boards                                        .35

There has been a constant demand for publication in separate form of
these six stories, which were originally included in six of the "Little
Colonel" books.


JOEL: A BOY OF GALILEE: By ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON. Illustrated by L.
J. Bridgman.

    New illustrated edition, uniform with the Little Colonel Books,
    1 vol., large 12mo, cloth decorative                          $1.50

A story of the time of Christ, which is one of the author's best-known
books.


THE LITTLE COLONEL GOOD TIMES BOOK

    Uniform in size with the Little Colonel Series      $1.50
    Bound in white kid (morocco) and gold                3.00

Cover design and decorations by Peter Verberg.

Published in response to many inquiries from readers of the Little
Colonel books as to where they could obtain a "Good Times Book" such as
Betty kept.


THE LITTLE COLONEL DOLL BOOK

    Large quarto, boards      $1.50

A series of "Little Colonel" dolls,--not only the Little Colonel
herself, but Betty and Kitty and Mary Ware, yes, and Rob, Phil, and
many another of the well-loved characters,--even Mom' Beck herself.
There are many of them and each has several changes of costume, so that
the happy group can be appropriately clad for the rehearsal of any
scene or incident in the series.

The large, cumbersome sheets of most of the so-called doll "books" have
been discarded, and instead each character, each costume, occupies a
sheet by itself, the dolls and costumes being cut out only as they are
wanted.


ASA HOLMES: OR, AT THE CROSS-ROADS. A sketch of Country Life and
Country Humor. By ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON.

With a frontispiece by Ernest Fosbery.

    Large 16mo, cloth, gilt top      $1.00

"'Asa Holmes; or, At the Cross-Roads' is the most delightful, most
sympathetic and wholesome book that has been published in a long
while."--_Boston Times._


THE RIVAL CAMPERS; OR, THE ADVENTURES OF HENRY BURNS. By RUEL PERLEY
SMITH.

    Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.50

A story of a party of typical American lads, courageous, alert, and
athletic, who spend a summer camping on an island off the Maine coast.


THE RIVAL CAMPERS AFLOAT; OR, THE PRIZE YACHT VIKING. By RUEL PERLEY
SMITH.

    Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.50

This book is a continuation of the adventures of "The Rival Campers" on
their prize yacht _Viking_.


THE RIVAL CAMPERS ASHORE

By RUEL PERLEY SMITH.

    Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.50

"As interesting ashore as when afloat."--_The Interior._


THE RIVAL CAMPERS AMONG THE OYSTER PIRATES; OR, JACK HARVEY'S
ADVENTURES. By RUEL PERLEY SMITH.

    Illustrated      $1.50

"Just the type of book which is most popular with lads who are in their
early teens."--_The Philadelphia Item._


PRISONERS OF FORTUNE: A TALE OF THE MASSACHUSETTS BAY COLONY. By RUEL
PERLEY SMITH.

    Cloth decorative, with a colored frontispiece      $1.50

"There is an atmosphere of old New England in the book, the
humor of the born raconteur about the hero, who tells his story
with the gravity of a preacher, but with a solemn humor that is
irresistible."--_Courier-Journal._


FAMOUS CAVALRY LEADERS. By CHARLES H. L. JOHNSTON.

    Large 12mo, With 24 illustrations      $1.50

Biographical sketches, with interesting anecdotes and reminiscences of
the heroes of history who were leaders of cavalry.

"More of such books should be written, books that acquaint young
readers with historical personages in a pleasant informal way."--_N. Y.
Sun._


FAMOUS INDIAN CHIEFS. By CHARLES H. L. JOHNSTON.

    Large 12mo, illustrated      $1.50

In this book Mr. Johnston gives interesting sketches of the Indian
braves who have figured with prominence in the history of our own land,
including Powhatan, the Indian Caesar; Massasoit, the friend of the
Puritans; Pontiac, the red Napoleon; Tecumseh, the famous war chief
of the Shawnees; Sitting Bull, the famous war chief of the Sioux;
Geronimo, the renowned Apache Chief, etc., etc.


FAMOUS SCOUTS. By CHARLES H. L. JOHNSTON.

    Large 12mo, illustrated      $1.50

Mr. Johnston gives us historical facts and biographical sketches and
interesting anecdotes of those heroes of early pioneer days who made
names for themselves among the hardy adventurers who thronged the
border. There are tales of Gen. Israel Putnam; the celebrated Daniel
Boone; Kit Carson, the noted scout; Lewis and Clarke, the hardy
explorers; the world-renowned Buffalo Bill, and of many other famous
scouts, trappers and pioneers.


BEAUTIFUL JOE'S PARADISE: OR, THE ISLAND OF BROTHERLY LOVE. A sequel
to "Beautiful Joe." By MARSHALL SAUNDERS, author of "Beautiful Joe."

    One vol., library 12mo, cloth, illustrated      $1.50

"This book revives the spirit of 'Beautiful Joe' capitally. It is
fairly riotous with fun, and is about as unusual as anything in the
animal book line that has seen the light."--_Philadelphia Item._


'TILDA JANE. By MARSHALL SAUNDERS.

    One vol., 12mo, fully illustrated, cloth decorative,      $1.50

"I cannot think of any better book for children than this. I commend it
unreservedly."--_Cyrus Townsend Brady._


'TILDA JANE'S ORPHANS. A sequel to "'Tilda Jane." By MARSHALL
SAUNDERS.

    One vol., 12mo, fully illustrated, cloth decorative,      $1.50

'Tilda Jane is the same original, delightful girl, and as fond of her
animal pets as ever.


THE STORY OF THE GRAVELEYS. By MARSHALL SAUNDERS, author of
"Beautiful Joe's Paradise," "'Tilda Jane," etc.

    Library 12mo, cloth decorative. Illustrated by E. B. Barry    $1.50

Here we have the haps and mishaps, the trials and triumphs, of a
delightful New England family, of whose devotion and sturdiness it will
do the reader good to hear.


BORN TO THE BLUE. By FLORENCE KIMBALL RUSSEL.

    12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.25

The atmosphere of army life on the plains breathes on every page of
this delightful tale. The boy is the son of a captain of U. S. cavalry
stationed at a frontier post in the days when our regulars earned the
gratitude of a nation.


IN WEST POINT GRAY

By FLORENCE KIMBALL RUSSEL.

    12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.50

"Singularly enough one of the best books of the year for boys is
written by a woman and deals with life at West Point. The presentment
of life in the famous military academy whence so many heroes have
graduated is realistic and enjoyable."--_New York Sun._


THE SANDMAN: HIS FARM STORIES

By WILLIAM J. HOPKINS. With fifty illustrations by Ada Clendenin
Williamson.

    Large 12mo, decorative cover      $1.50

"An amusing, original book, written for the benefit of very small
children. It should be one of the most popular of the year's books for
reading to small children."--_Buffalo Express._


THE SANDMAN: MORE FARM STORIES

By WILLIAM J. HOPKINS.

    Large 12mo, decorative cover, fully illustrated      $1.50

Mr. Hopkins's first essay at bedtime stories met with such approval
that this second book of "Sandman" tales was issued for scores of eager
children. Life on the farm, and out-of-doors, is portrayed in his
inimitable manner.


THE SANDMAN: HIS SHIP STORIES

By WILLIAM J. HOPKINS, author of "The Sandman: His Farm Stories," etc.

    Large 12mo, decorative cover, fully illustrated      $1.50

"Children call for these stories over and over again."--_Chicago
Evening Post._


THE SANDMAN: HIS SEA STORIES

By WILLIAM J. HOPKINS.

    Large 12mo, decorative cover, fully illustrated      $1.50

Each year adds to the popularity of this unique series of stories to be
read to the little ones at bed time and at other times.


A TEXAS BLUE BONNET

By EMILIA ELLIOTT.

    12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.50

This is the story of a warm-hearted, impulsive and breezy girl of the
Southwest, who has lived all her life on a big ranch. She comes to the
far East for a long visit, and her experiences "up North" are indeed
delightful reading. Blue Bonnet is sure to win the hearts of all girl
readers.


THE DOCTOR'S LITTLE GIRL

By MARION AMES TAGGART, author of "Pussy-Cat Town," etc.

    One vol., library 12mo, illustrated      $1.50

A thoroughly enjoyable tale of a little girl and her comrade father,
written in a delightful vein of sympathetic comprehension of the
child's point of view.


SWEET NANCY

THE FURTHER ADVENTURES OF THE DOCTOR'S LITTLE GIRL. By MARION AMES
TAGGART.

    One vol., library, 12mo, illustrated      $1.50

In the new book, the author tells how Nancy becomes in fact "the
doctor's assistant," and continues to shed happiness around her.


CARLOTA

A STORY OF THE SAN GABRIEL MISSION. By FRANCES MARGARET FOX.

    Small quarto, cloth decorative, illustrated and decorated
        in colors by Ethelind Ridgway                         $1.00

"It is a pleasure to recommend this little story as an entertaining
contribution to juvenile literature."--_The New York Sun._


THE SEVEN CHRISTMAS CANDLES

By FRANCES MARGARET FOX.

    Small quarto, cloth decorative, illustrated and decorated
        in colors by E. B. Barry                             $1.00

Miss Fox's new book deals with the fortunes of the delightful Mulvaney
children.


SEVEN LITTLE WISE MEN

By FRANCES MARGARET FOX.

    Small quarto, cloth decorative, illustrated in colors by
        E. B. Barry                                          $1.00

In this new story Miss Fox relates how seven little children, who lived
in Sunny California, prepared for the great Christmas Festival.


PUSSY-CAT TOWN

By MARION AMES TAGGART.

Small quarto, cloth decorative, illustrated and decorated in colors
$1.00

"Anything more interesting than the doings of the cats in this
story, their humor, their wisdom, their patriotism, would be hard to
imagine."--_Chicago Post._


THE ROSES OF SAINT ELIZABETH

By JANE SCOTT WOODRUFF.

    Small quarto, cloth decorative, illustrated and decorated
        in colors by Adelaide Everhart                         $1.00

This is a charming little story of a child whose father was caretaker
of the great castle of the Wartburg.


GABRIEL AND THE HOUR BOOK

By EVALEEN STEIN.

    Small quarto, cloth decorative, illustrated and decorated
        in colors by Adelaide Everhart                        $1.00

Gabriel was a loving, patient, little French lad, who assisted the
monks in the long ago days, when all the books were written and
illuminated by hand, in the monasteries.


A LITTLE SHEPHERD OF PROVENCE

By EVALEEN STEIN.

    Small quarto, cloth decorative, illustrated in colors by
        Diantha Horne Marlowe                               $1.00

This is the story of Little lame Jean, a goatherd of Provence, and of
the "golden goat" who is supposed to guard a hidden treasure.


THE ENCHANTED AUTOMOBILE

Translated from the French by MARY J. SAFFORD.

    Small quarto, cloth decorative, illustrated and decorated
        in colors by Edna M. Sawyer                          $1.00

"An up-to-date French fairy-tale which fairly radiates the spirit of
the hour,--unceasing diligence."--_Chicago Record-Herald._


O-HEART-SAN

THE STORY OF A JAPANESE GIRL. By HELEN EGGLESTON HASKELL.

    Small quarto, cloth decorative, illustrated and decorated
        in colors by Frank P. Fairbanks                      $1.00

"The story comes straight from the heart of Japan. From every
page breathes the fragrance of tea leaves, cherry blossoms and
chrysanthemums."--_The Chicago Inter-Ocean._


THE YOUNG SECTION-HAND; OR, THE ADVENTURES OF ALLAN WEST. By BURTON
E. STEVENSON.

    Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.50

Mr. Stevenson's hero is a manly lad of sixteen, who is given a chance
as a section-hand on a big Western railroad, and whose experiences are
as real as they are thrilling.


THE YOUNG TRAIN DISPATCHER. By BURTON E. STEVENSON.

    Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.50

"A better book for boys has never left an American
press."--_Springfield Union._


THE YOUNG TRAIN MASTER. By BURTON E. STEVENSON.

    Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.50

"Nothing better in the way of a book of adventure for boys in which the
actualities of life are set forth in a practical way could be devised
or written."--_Boston Herald._


CAPTAIN JACK LORIMER. By WINN STANDISH.

    Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.50

Jack is a fine example of the all-around American high-school boy.


JACK LORIMER'S CHAMPIONS; OR, SPORTS ON LAND AND LAKE. By WINN
STANDISH.

    Square 12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.50

"It is exactly the sort of book to give a boy interested in athletics,
for it shows him what it means to always 'play fair.'"--_Chicago
Tribune._


JACK LORIMER'S HOLIDAYS; OR, MILLVALE HIGH IN CAMP. By WINN STANDISH.

    Illustrated      $1.50

Full of just the kind of fun, sports and adventure to excite the
healthy minded youngster to emulation.


JACK LORIMER'S SUBSTITUTE; OR, THE ACTING CAPTAIN OF THE TEAM. By
WINN STANDISH.

    Illustrated      $1.50

On the sporting side, this book takes up football, wrestling,
tobogganing, but it is more of a _school_ story perhaps than any of its
predecessors.


THE RED FEATHERS. By THEODORE ROBERTS.

    Cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.50

"The Red Feathers" tells of the remarkable adventures of an Indian boy
who lived in the Stone Age, many years ago, when the world was young.


FLYING PLOVER. By THEODORE ROBERTS.

    Cloth decorative. Illustrated by Charles Livingston Bull  $1.00

Squat-By-The-Fire is a very old and wise Indian who lives alone with
her grandson, "Flying Plover," to whom she tells the stories each
evening.


COMRADES OF THE TRAILS. By G. E. THEODORE ROBERTS.

    Cloth decorative. Illustrated by Charles Livingston Bull   $1.50

The story of a fearless young English lad, Dick Ramsey, who, after the
death of his father, crosses the seas and takes up the life of a hunter
and trapper in the Canadian forests.


LITTLE WHITE INDIANS. By FANNIE E. OSTRANDER.

    Cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.25

"A bright, interesting story which will appeal strongly to the
'make-believe' instinct in children, and will give them a healthy,
active interest in 'the simple life.'"


THE BOY WHO WON By FANNIE E. OSTRANDER, author of "Little White
Indians."

    12mo, cloth decorative, illustrated by R. Farrington Elwell  $1.25

A companion volume to "Little White Indians" continuing the adventures
of the different "tribes," whose "doings" were so interestingly told in
the earlier volume.


MARCHING WITH MORGAN. HOW DONALD LOVELL BECAME A SOLDIER OF THE
REVOLUTION. By JOHN V. LANE.

    Cloth decorative, illustrated      $1.50

This is a splendid boy's story of the expedition of Montgomery and
Arnold against Quebec.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

Punctuation errors were corrected without note.

Page 70, "Guimaraes" changed to "Guimaraes" (to Guimaraes, where there)

Page 89, "A" changed to "A" changed to (A deus!)

Page A-4, subtitle of "Prisoners of Fortune" small-capped to match rest
of usage in text.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOSE: OUR LITTLE PORTUGUESE COUSIN***


******* This file should be named 45797.txt or 45797.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/5/7/9/45797



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
