The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Golden Book of the Dutch Navigators, by
Hendrik Willem van Loon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Golden Book of the Dutch Navigators

Author: Hendrik Willem van Loon

Release Date: May 28, 2014 [EBook #45799]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLDEN BOOK OF THE DUTCH NAVIGATORS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)






 [Illustration: The Cocos Islands]

 THE GOLDEN BOOK
     OF THE
 DUTCH NAVIGATORS

 BY

 HENDRIK WILLEM van LOON

 ILLUSTRATED WITH SEVENTY
 REPRODUCTIONS OF OLD PRINTS

 [Illustration]

 NEW YORK
 THE CENTURY CO.
 1916

 Copyright, 1916, by
 THE CENTURY CO.

       *       *       *       *       *

 _Published, October, 1916_




FOR HANSJE AND WILLEM

This is a story of magnificent failures. The men who equipped the
expeditions of which I shall tell you the story died in the poorhouse.
The men who took part in these voyages sacrificed their lives as
cheerfully as they lighted a new pipe or opened a fresh bottle. Some
of them were drowned, and some of them died of thirst. A few were
frozen to death, and many were killed by the heat of the scorching sun.
The bad supplies furnished by lying contractors buried many of them
beneath the green cocoanut-trees of distant lands. Others were speared
by cannibals and provided a feast for the hungry tribes of the Pacific
Islands.

But what of it? It was all in the day's work. These excellent fellows
took whatever came, be it good or bad, or indifferent, with perfect
grace, and kept on smiling. They kept their powder dry, did whatever
their hands found to do, and left the rest to the care of that
mysterious Providence who probably knew more about the ultimate good of
things than they did.

I want you to know about these men because they were your ancestors.
If you have inherited any of their good qualities, make the best of
them; they will prove to be worth while. If you have got your share of
their bad ones, fight these as hard as you can; for they will lead you
a merry chase before you get through.

Whatever you do, remember one lesson: "Keep on smiling."

                   HENDRIK WILLEM van LOON.

  Cornell University, Ithaca, New York.
  February 29, 1916.




HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION

The history of America is the story of the conquest of the West. The
history of Holland is the story of the conquest of the sea. The western
frontier influenced American life, shaped American thought, and gave
America the habits of self-reliance and independence of action which
differentiate the people of the great republic from those of other
countries.

The wide ocean, the wind-swept highroad of commerce, turned a small
mud-bank along the North Sea into a mighty commonwealth and created
a civilization of such individual character that it has managed to
maintain its personal traits against the aggressions of both time and
man.

When we discuss the events of American history we place our scene
upon a stage which has an immense background of wide prairie and high
mountain. In this vast and dim territory there is always room for
another man of force and energy, and society is a rudimentary bond
between free and sovereign human beings, unrestricted by any previous
tradition or ordinance. Hence we study the accounts of a peculiar race
which has grown up under conditions of complete independence and which
relies upon its own endeavors to accomplish those things which it has
set out to do.

The virtues of the system are as evident as its faults. We know that
this development is almost unique in the annals of the human race.
We know that it will disappear as soon as the West shall have been
entirely conquered. We also know that the habits of mind which have
been created during the age of the pioneer will survive the rapidly
changing physical conditions by many centuries. For this reason those
of us who write American history long after the disappearance of the
typical West must still pay due reverence to the influence of the old
primitive days when man was his own master and trusted no one but God
and his own strong arm.

The history of the Dutch people during the last five centuries shows
a very close analogy. The American who did not like his fate at home
went "west." The Hollander who decided that he would be happier
outside of the town limits of his native city went "to sea," as the
expression was. He always had a chance to ship as a cabin-boy, just as
his American successor could pull up stakes at a moment's notice to
try his luck in the next county. Neither of the two knew exactly what
they might find at the end of their voyage of adventure. Good luck, bad
luck, middling luck, it made no difference. It meant a change, and most
frequently it meant a change for the better. Best of all, even if one
had no desire to migrate, but, on the other hand, was quite contented
to stay at home and be buried in the family vault of his ancestral
estate, he knew at all times _that he was free to leave just as soon as
the spirit moved him_.

Remember this when you read Dutch history. It is an item of grave
importance. It was always in the mind of the mighty potentate who
happened to be the ruler and tax-gatherer of the country. He might
not be willing to acknowledge it, he might even deny it in vehement
documents of state, but in the end he was obliged to regulate his
conduct toward his subjects with due respect for and reference to their
wonderful chance of escape. The Middle Ages had a saying that "city
air makes free." In the Low Countries we find a wonderful combination
of city air and the salt breezes of the ocean. It created a veritable
atmosphere of liberty, and not only the liberty of political activity,
but freedom of thought and independence in all the thousand and one
different little things which go to make up the complicated machinery
of human civilization. Wherever a man went in the country there was
the high sky of the coastal region, and there were the canals which
would carry his small vessel to the main roads of trade and ultimate
prosperity. The sea reached up to his very front door. It supported him
in his struggle for a living, and it was his best ally in his fight for
independence. Half of his family and friends lived on and by and of
the sea. The nautical terms of the forecastle became the language of
his land. His house reminded the foreign visitor of a ship's cabin.

And finally his state became a large naval commonwealth, with a number
of ship-owners as a board of directors and a foreign policy dictated by
the need of the oversea commerce. We do not care to go into the details
of this interesting question. It is our purpose to draw attention to
this one great and important fact upon which the entire economic,
social, intellectual, and artistic structure of Dutch society was
based. For this purpose we have reprinted in a short and concise form
the work of our earliest pioneers of the ocean. They broke through the
narrow bonds of their restricted medieval world. In plain American
terms, "They were the first to cross the Alleghanies."

They ushered in the great period of conquest of West and East and South
and North. They built their empire wherever the water of the ocean
would carry them. They laid the foundations for a greatness which
centuries of subsequent neglect have not been able to destroy, and
which the present generation may triumphantly win back if it is worthy
to continue its existence as an independent nation.




 CONTENTS


 CHAPTER                                          PAGE

    I JAN HUYGEN VAN LINSCHOTEN                      3

   II THE NORTHEAST PASSAGE                         43

  III THE TRAGEDY OF SPITZBERGEN                    87

   IV THE FIRST VOYAGE TO INDIA--FAILURE            97

    V THE SECOND VOYAGE TO INDIA--SUCCESS          135

   VI VAN NOORT CIRCUMNAVIGATES THE WORLD          159

  VII THE ATTACK UPON THE WEST COAST OF AMERICA    207

 VIII THE BAD LUCK OF CAPTAIN BONTEKOE             249

   IX SCHOUTEN AND LE MAIRE DISCOVER A NEW STRAIT  279

    X TASMAN EXPLORES AUSTRALIA                    303

   XI ROGGEVEEN, THE LAST OF THE GREAT VOYAGERS    325




THE GOLDEN BOOK OF THE DUTCH NAVIGATORS




CHAPTER I

JAN HUYGEN VAN LINSCHOTEN


It was the year of our Lord 1579, and the eleventh of the glorious
revolution of Holland against Spain. Brielle had been taken by a
handful of hungry sea-beggars. Haarlem and Naarden had been murdered
out by a horde of infuriated Spanish regulars. Alkmaar--little
Alkmaar, hidden behind lakes, canals, open fields with low willows and
marshes--had been besieged, had turned the welcome waters of the Zuyder
Zee upon the enemy, and had driven the enemy away. Alva, the man of
iron who was to destroy this people of butter between his steel gloves,
had left the stage of his unsavory operations in disgrace. The butter
had dribbled away between his fingers. Another Spanish governor had
appeared. Another failure. Then a third one. Him the climate and the
brilliant days of his youth had killed.

But in the heart of Holland, William, of the House of Nassau, heir to
the rich princes of Orange, destined to be known as the Silent, the
Cunning One--this same William, broken in health, broken in money, but
high of courage, marshaled his forces and, with the despair of a last
chance, made ready to clear his adopted country of the hated foreign
domination.

Everywhere in the little terrestrial triangle of this newest of
republics there was the activity of men who had just escaped
destruction by the narrowest of margins. They had faith in their
own destiny. Any one who can go through an open rebellion against
the mightiest of monarchs and come out successfully deserves the
commendation of the Almighty. The Hollanders had succeeded. Their
harbors, the lungs of the country, were free once more, and could
breathe the fresh air of the open sea and of commercial prosperity.

On the land the Spaniard still held his own, but on the water the
Hollander was master of the situation. The ocean, which had made his
country what it was, which had built the marshes upon which he lived,
which provided the highway across which he brought home his riches, was
open to his enterprise.

He must go out in search of further adventure. Thus far he had been
the common carrier of Europe. His ships had brought the grain from the
rich Baltic provinces to the hungry waste of Spain. His fishermen had
supplied the fasting table of Catholic humanity with the delicacy of
pickled herring. From Venice and later on from Lisbon he had carried
the products of the Orient to the farthest corners of the Scandinavian
peninsula. It was time for him to expand.

The role of middleman is a good role for modest and humble folk who
make a decent living by taking a few pennies here and collecting a few
pennies there, but the chosen people of God must follow their destiny
upon the broad highway of international commerce wherever they can.
Therefore the Hollander must go to India.

It was easily said. But how was one to get there?

       *       *       *       *       *

Jan Huygen van Linschoten was born in the year 1563 in the town of
Haarlem. As a small boy he was taken to Enkhuizen. At the present time
Enkhuizen is hardly more than a country village. Three hundred years
ago it was a big town with high walls, deep moats, strong towers, and
a local board of aldermen who knew how to make the people keep the
laws and fear God. It had several churches where the doctrines of the
great master Johannes Calvinus were taught with precision and without
omitting a single piece of brimstone or extinguishing a single flame of
an ever-gaping hell. It had orphan asylums and hospitals. It had a fine
jail, and a school with a horny-handed tyrant who taught the A B C's
and the principles of immediate obedience with due reference to that
delightful text about the spoiled child and the twigs of a birch-tree.

[Illustration]

Outside of the city, when once you had passed the gallows with its
rattling chains and aggressive ravens, there were miles and miles
of green pasture. But upon one side there was the blue water of the
quiet Zuyder Zee. Here small vessels could approach the welcome
harbor, lined on both sides with gabled storehouses. It is true that
when the tide was very low the harbor looked like a big muddy trough.
But these flat-bottomed contraptions rested upon the mud with ease
and comfort, and the next tide would again lift them up, ready for
farther peregrinations. Over the entire scene there hung the air of
prosperity. A restless energy was in the air. On all sides there
was evidence of the gospel of enterprise. It was this enterprise
that collected the money to build the ships. It was this enterprise,
combined with nautical cunning, that pushed these vessels to the ends
of the European continent in quest of freight and trade. It was this
enterprise that turned the accumulating riches into fine mansions and
good pictures, and gave a first-class education to all boys and girls.
It walked proudly along the broad streets where the best families
lived. It stalked cheerfully through the narrow alleys when the sailor
came back to his wife and children. It followed the merchant into his
counting-room, and it played with the little boys who frequented the
quays and grew up in a blissful atmosphere of tallow, tar, gin, spices,
dried fish, and fantastic tales of foreign adventure.

And it played the very mischief with our young hero. For when Jan
Huygen was sixteen years old, and had learned his three R's--reading,
'riting, and 'rithmetic--he shipped as a cabin-boy to Spain, and said
farewell to his native country, to return after many years as the
missing link in the chain of commercial explorations--the one and only
man who knew the road to India.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here the industrious reader interrupts me. How could this boy go to
Spain when his country was at war with its master, King Philip? Indeed,
this statement needs an explanation.

Spain in the sixteenth century was a magnificent example of the failure
of imperial expansion minus a knowledge of elementary economics. Here
we had a country which owned the better part of the world. It was rich
beyond words and it derived its opulence from every quarter of the
globe. For centuries a steady stream of bullion flowed into Spanish
coffers. Alas! it flowed out of them just as rapidly; for Spain, with
all its foreign glory, was miserably poor at home. Her people had never
been taught to work. The soil did not provide food enough for the
population of the large peninsula. Every biscuit, so to speak, every
loaf of bread, had to be imported from abroad. Unfortunately, the grain
business was in the hands of these same Dutch Calvinists whose nasal
theology greatly offended his Majesty King Philip. Therefore during the
first years of the rebellion the harbors of the Spanish kingdom had
been closed against these unregenerate singers of Psalms. Whereupon
Spain went hungry, and was threatened with starvation.

Economic necessity conquered religious prejudice. The ports of King
Philip's domain once more were opened to the grain-ships of the
Hollanders and remained open until the end of the war. The Dutch trader
never bothered about the outward form of things provided he got his
profits. He knew how to take a hint. Therefore, when he came to a
Spanish port, he hoisted the Danish flag or sailed under the colors of
Hamburg and Bremen. There still was the difficulty of the language,
but the Spaniard was made to understand that this guttural combination
of sounds represented diverse Scandinavian tongues. The tactful
custom-officers of his Most Catholic Majesty let it go at that, and
cheerfully welcomed these heretics without whom they could not have fed
their own people.

When Jan Huygen left his own country he had no definite plans beyond
a career of adventure; for then, as he wrote many years later, "When
you come home, you have something to tell your children when you get
old." In 1579 he left Enkhuizen, and in the winter of the next year he
arrived in Spain. First of all he did some clerical work in the town
of Seville, where he learned the Spanish language. Next he went to
Lisbon, where he became familiar with Portuguese. He seems to have been
a likable boy who did cheerfully whatever he found to do, but watched
with a careful eye the chance to meet with his next adventure. After
three years of a roving existence, with rare good luck, he met Vincente
da Fonseca, a Dominican who had just been appointed Archbishop of Goa
in the Indies. Jan Huygen obtained a position as general literary
factotum to the new dignitary and also acted as purser for the captain
of the ship.

At the age of twenty he was an integral member of a bona-fide
expedition to the mysterious Indies. Through his account of this trip,
printed in 1595, the Dutch traders at last learned to know the route to
the Indies. The expedition left Lisbon on Good Friday of the year 1583
with forty ships. During the first few weeks nothing happened. Nothing
ever happened during the first weeks on any of those expeditions.
The trouble invariably began after the first rough weather. In this
instance everything went well until the end of April, when the coast
of Guinea had been reached. Then the fleet entered a region of squalls
and severe rainstorms. The rain collected on the decks and ran down the
hatchways. A dozen times or so a day the fleet had to come to a stop
while all hands bailed out the water which filled the holds. When it
did not rain the sun beat down mercilessly, and soon the atmosphere of
the soaked wood became unpleasant. To make things worse the drinking
water was no longer fresh, and smelled so badly that one could not
drink it without closing the unfortunate nose that came near the cup.

On the whole the printed work of Jan Huygen does not show him as
an admirer of the Portuguese or their system of navigation. In all
his writing he gives us the impression of a very sober-minded young
Hollander with a lot of common sense. Portugal had then been a colonial
power for many years and showed unmistakable signs of deterioration.
The people had been too prosperous. They were no longer willing to
defend their own interests against other and younger nations. They
still exercised their Indian monopoly because it had been theirs for
so long a time that no one remembered anything to the contrary. But
the end of things had come. Upon every page of Jan Huygen's book we
find the same evidence of bad organization, little jealousies, spite,
disobedience, cowardice, and lack of concerted action.

When only a few weeks from home this fleet of forty ships encountered
a single small French vessel. Part of the Portuguese crew of the fleet
was sick. The others made ready to flee at once. After a few hours it
was seen that the Frenchman had no evil intentions, and continued his
way without a closer inspection of his enemies. Then peace returned to
the fleet of Fonseca.

A few days later the ship reached the equator. The customary initiation
of the new sailors, followed by the usual festivities and a first-class
drunken row, took place. The captain was run down and trampled upon by
his men, tables and chairs were upset, and the crew fought one another
with knives. This quarrel might have ended in a general murder but
for the interference of the archbishop, who threw himself among the
crazy sailors, and with a threat of excommunication drove them back to
work. Half a dozen were locked up, others were whipped, and the ships
continued their voyage in this happy-go-lucky fashion. Then it appeared
that nobody knew exactly where they were. Observations finally showed
that the fleet was still fifty miles west of the Cape of Good Hope. As
a matter of fact, they had passed the cape several days before, but did
not discover their error until a week later. Then they sailed northward
until they reached Mozambique, where they spent two weeks in order
to give the crew a rest and to repair the damages of the equatorial
fight. On the twentieth of August they continued their voyage until
the serpents which they saw in the water showed them that they were
approaching the coast of India. From that time on luck was with the
expedition. The ships reached the coast near the town of destination.
After a remarkably short passage of only five months and thirteen days
the fleet landed safely in Goa.

Jan Huygen was very proud of the record of his ship. Only thirty people
had died on the voyage. It is true that all the people on board had
been under a doctor's care, and every one of the sailors and passengers
had been bled a few times; but thirty men buried during so long a
voyage was a mere trifle. In the sixteenth century, if fifty per cent.
of the men returned from an Indian voyage, the trip was considered
successful.

The next five years Jan Huygen spent in Goa with his ecclesiastical
master. He was intrusted with a great deal of confidential work, and
became thoroughly familiar with all the affairs of the colony. In Goa
he heard wonderful tales about the great Chinese Empire, many weeks to
the north. He began to collect maps for an expedition to that distant
land, but lack of funds made him put it off, and he never went far
beyond the confines of the small Portuguese settlement.

Unfortunately, at the end of five years the archbishop died, and Jan
Huygen was without a job. As he had had news that his father had died,
he now decided to go back to Enkhuizen to see what he could do for his
mother. Accordingly, in January of the year 1589, he sailed for home
on board the good ship _Santa Maria_. It was the same old story of bad
management: The ships of the return fleet were all loaded too heavily.
The handling of the cargo was left entirely to ship-brokers, and these
worthies had developed a noble system of graft. Merchandise was loaded
according to a regular tariff of bribes. If you were willing to pay
enough, your goods went neatly into the hold. If you did not give a
certain percentage to the brokers, your bags and bales were stowed
away somewhere on a corner of a wharf exposed to the rain and the sea.
Very likely, too, the first storm would wash your valuable possessions
overboard.

When the _Santa Maria_ left, her decks were stacked high with
disorderly masses of colonial products. The sailors on duty had to make
a path through this accumulated stuff, and the captain lacked the
authority to put his own ship in order. A few days out a cabin-boy fell
overboard. The sea was quiet, and it would have been possible to save
the child, but when the crew ran for a boat, it was found to be filled
with heavy boxes. By the time the boat was at last lowered the boy had
drowned.

The _Santa Maria_ sailed direct for the Cape. There it fell in with
another vessel called the _San Thome_, and it now became a matter of
pride which ship could round the cape first. Severe western winds made
the _Santa Maria_ wait several days. The _San Thome_, however, ventured
forth to brave the gale. When finally the storm had abated and the
_Santa Maria_ had reached the Atlantic Ocean, the bodies and pieces of
wreckage which floated upon the water told what had happened to the
other vessel. This, however, was only the beginning of trouble. On the
fifth of March the _Santa Maria_ was almost lost. Her rudder broke, and
it could not be repaired. A storm, accompanied by a tropical display of
thunder and lightning, broke loose. For more than forty-eight hours
the ship was at the mercy of the waves. The crew spent the time on deck
absorbed in prayer. When little electric flames began to appear upon
the masts and yards (the so-called St. Elmo's fire, a spooky phenomenon
to all sailors of all times), they felt sure that the end of the world
had come. The captain commanded all his men to pray the "Salvo corpo
Sancto," and this was done with great demonstrations of fervor. The
celestial fireworks, however, did not abate. On the contrary the crew
witnessed the appearance of a five-pointed crown, which showed itself
upon the mainmast, and was hailed with cries of the "crown of the Holy
Virgin." After this final electric display the storm went on its way.

In his sober fashion Jan Huygen had looked on. He did not take much
stock in this sudden piety, and called it "a lot of useless noise."
Then he watched the men repairing the rudder. It was discovered that
there was no anvil on board the ship, and a gun was used as an anvil.
A pair of bellows was improvised out of some old skins. With this
contrivance some sort of steering-gear was finally rigged up, and
the voyage was continued. After that, except for occasional and very
sudden squalls, when all the sails had to be lowered to save them
from being blown to pieces, the _Santa Maria_ was past her greatest
danger, though the heavy seas caused by a prolonged storm proved to be
another obstacle. No further progress was possible until the ship had
been lightened. For this purpose the large boat and all its valuable
contents were simply thrown overboard.

[Illustration]

The recital of Jan Huygen's trip is a long epic of bungling. The
captain did not know his job; the officers were incompetent; the men
were unruly and ready to mutiny at the slightest provocation; and
everybody blamed everybody else for everything that went wrong. The
captain, in the last instance, accused the good Lord, Who "would not
allow His own faithful people to pass the Cape of Good Hope with
their strong and mighty ships," while making the voyage an easy one
for "the blasphemous English heretics with their little insignificant
schooners." In this statement there was more wisdom than the captain
suspected. The English sailors knew their business and could afford
to take risks. The Portuguese sailors of that day hastened from one
coastline and from one island to the next, as they had done a century
before. As long as they were on the high seas they were unhappy.
They returned to life when they were in port. Every time the _Santa
Maria_ passed a few days in some harbor we get a recital of the joys
of that particular bit of paradise. If we are to believe Portuguese
tradition, St. Helena, where the ship passed a week of the month of May
of the year 1589, was placed in its exact geographical position by the
Almighty to serve His faithful children as a welcome resting-point upon
their perilous voyage to the far Indies. The island was full of goats,
wild pigs, chickens, partridges, and thousands of pigeons, all of which
creatures allowed themselves to be killed with the utmost ease, and
furnished food for generations of sailors who visited those shores.

Indeed, this island was so healthy a spot that it was used as a general
infirmary. After a few days on shore even the weakest of sufferers was
sufficiently strong to catch specimens of the wild fauna of the island.
Often, therefore, the sick sailors were left behind. With a little salt
and some oil and a few spices they could support themselves easily
until the next ship came along and picked them up. We know what ailed
most of these stricken sailors. They suffered from scurvy, due to a
bad diet; but it took several centuries before the cause of scurvy was
discovered. When Jan Huygen went to the Indies the crew of every ship
was invariably attacked by this most painful disease. Therefore the
islands were of great importance.

Nowadays St. Helena is no longer a paradise. Three centuries ago it
was the one blessed point of relief for the Indian traders. The diary
of Jan Huygen tells of attempts made to colonize the island. The King
of Portugal, however, had forbidden any settlement upon this solitary
rock. For a while it had harbored a number of runaway slaves. Whenever
a ship came near they had fled to the mountains. Finally, however, they
had been caught and taken back to Portugal and sold. For a long time
the island had been inhabited by a pious hermit. He had built a small
chapel, and there the visiting sailors were allowed to worship. In his
spare time, however, the holy man had hunted goats, and he had entered
into an export business of goat-skins. Every year between five and six
hundred skins were sold. Then this ingenious scheme was discovered, and
the saintly hunter was sent home.

On the twenty-first of May the _Santa Maria_ continued her northward
course. Again bad food and bad water caused illness among the men. A
score of them died. Often they hid themselves somewhere in the hold,
and had been dead for several days before they made their presence
noticeable. It was miserable business; and now, with a ship of sick
and disabled men, the _Santa Maria_ was doomed to fall in with three
small British vessels. At once there was a panic among the Portuguese
sailors. The British hoisted their pennant, and opened with a salvo
of guns. The Portuguese fled below decks, and the English, in sport,
shot the sails to pieces. The crew of the _Santa Maria_ tried to load
their heavy cannon, but there was such a mass of howling and swearing
humanity around the guns that it took hours before anything could
be done. The ships were then very near one another, and the British
sailors could be heard jeering at the cowardice of their prey. But just
when Jan Huygen thought the end had come the British squadron veered
around and disappeared. The _Santa Maria_ then reached Terceira in the
Azores without further molestation.

Like all other truthful chroniclers of his day, Jan Huygen speculates
about the mysterious island of St. Brandon. This blessed isle was
supposed to be situated somewhere between the Azores and the Canary
Islands, but nearer to the Canaries. As late as 1721 expeditions were
fitted out to search for the famous spot upon which the Irish abbot of
the sixth century had located the promised land of the saints. Together
with the recital of another mysterious bit of land consisting of the
back of a gigantic fish, this story had been duly chronicled by a
succession of Irish monks, and when Jan Huygen visited these regions he
was told of these strange islands far out in the ocean where the first
travelers had discovered a large and prosperous colony of Christians
who spoke an unknown language and whose city could disappear beneath
the surface of the ocean if an enemy approached.

Once in the roads of Terceira, however, there was little time for
theological investigations. Rumor had it that a large number of British
ships were in the immediate neighborhood. Strict orders had come from
Lisbon that all Portuguese and Spanish ships must stay in port under
protection of the guns of the fortifications. Just a year before that
the Armada had started out for the conquest of England and the Low
Countries. The Invincible Armada had been destroyed by the Lord, the
British, and the Dutch. Now the tables had been turned, and the Dutch
and British vessels were attacking the Spanish and Portuguese colonies.
The story of inefficient navigation is here supplemented by a recital
of bad military management. The roads of Terceira were very dangerous.
In ordinary times no ships were allowed to anchor there. A very large
number of vessels were now huddled together in too small a space.
These vessels were poorly manned, for the Portuguese sailors, whenever
they arrived in port, went ashore and left the care of their ship to a
few cabin-boys and black slaves. The unexpected happened; during the
night of the fourth of August a violent storm swept over the roads.
The ships were thrown together with such violence that a large number
were sunk. In the town the bells were rung, and the sailors ran to the
shore. They could do nothing but look on and see how their valuable
ships were driven together and broken to splinters, while pieces of the
cargo were washed all over the shore, to be stolen by the inhabitants
of the greedy little town. When morning came, the shore was littered
with silk, golden coin, china, and bales of spices. Fortunately the
wind changed later in the morning, and a good deal of the cargo was
salved. But once on shore it was immediately confiscated by officials
from the custom-house, who claimed it for the benefit of the royal
treasury. Then there followed a first-class row between the officials
and the owners of the goods, who cursed their own Government quite as
cheerfully as they had done their enemies a few days before.

To make a long story short, after a lawsuit of two years and a half the
crown at last returned fifty per cent. of the goods to the merchants.
The other half was retained for customs duty. Jan Huygen, who was
an honest man, was asked to remain on the island and look after the
interests of the owners while they themselves went to Lisbon to plead
their cause before the courts. He now had occasion to study Portuguese
management in one of the oldest of their colonies. The principles
of hard common sense which were to distinguish Dutch and British
methods of colonizing were entirely absent. Their place was taken by
a complicated system of theological explanations. The disaster that
befell these islands was invariably due to divine Providence. The
local authorities were always up against an "act of God." While Jan
Huygen was in Terceira the colony was at the mercy of the British. The
privateers waited for all the ships that returned from South America
and the Indies, and intercepted these rich cargoes in sight of the
Portuguese fortifications. When the Englishmen needed fresh meat they
stole goats from the little islands situated in the roads. Finally,
after almost an entire year, a Spanish-Portuguese fleet of more than
thirty large ships was sent out to protect the traders. In a fight with
the squadron of Admiral Howard the ship of his vice-admiral, Grenville,
was sunk. The vice-admiral himself, mortally wounded, was made a
prisoner and brought on board a Spanish man-of-war. There he died. His
body was thrown overboard without further ceremonies.

At once, so the story ran, a violent storm had broken loose. This storm
lasted a week. It came suddenly, and when the wind fell only thirty
ships were left out of a total of one hundred and forty that had been
in the harbors of the islands. The damage was so great that the loss
of the Armada itself seemed insignificant. Of course it was all the
fault of the good Lord. He had deserted His own people and had gone
over to the side of the heretics. He had sent this hurricane to punish
the unceremonious way in which dead Grenville had been thrown into the
ocean. And of course this unbelieving Britisher himself had at once
descended into Hades, had called upon all the servants of the black
demon to help him, and had urged this revenge. Evidently the thing
worked both ways.

This clever argument did not in the least help the unfortunate owners
of the shipwrecked merchandise. One fine day they were informed that
they could no longer expect royal protection for the future. Jan Huygen
was told to come to Lisbon as best he could. He finally found a ship,
and after an absence of nine years returned to Lisbon. On his trip to
Holland he was almost killed in a collision. Finally, within sight of
his native land, he was nearly wrecked on the banks of one of the North
Sea islands. On the third of September of the year 1592, however,
after an absence of thirteen years, he returned safely to Enkhuizen.
His mother, brother, and sisters were there to welcome him.

He did not at once rush into print. It was not necessary. The news of
his return spread quickly to the offices of the Amsterdam merchants.
They had been very active during the last dozen years and they had
conducted an efficient secret organization in Portugal, trying to buy
up maps and books of navigation and, perhaps, even a pilot or two. They
knew a few things, and guessed at many others. A man who had actually
been there, who knew concrete facts where other people suspected, such
a man was worth while. Jan Huygen became consulting pilot to Dutch
capital.

The Dutch merchants still found themselves in a very difficult
position. They had to enter this field of activity when their
predecessors had been at work for almost two centuries. These
predecessors, judging by outward evidences, were fast losing both
ability and energy. But prestige before an old and well-established
name is a strong influence in the calculations of men. Those who
directed the new Dutch Republic did not lack courage. All the same,
they shrank from open and direct competition with the mighty Spanish
Empire. Besides, there were other considerations of a more practical
nature.

The Middle Ages, both late and early, dearly loved monopoly. Indeed,
the entire period between the days of the old Roman Empire and the
latter part of the eighteenth century, when the French Revolution
destroyed the old system, was a time of monopolies or of quarrels
about, and for, monopolies. The Dutch traders wondered whether they
could not obtain a little private route to India, something that
should be Dutch all along the line, and could be closed at will to all
outsiders. What about the Northeastern Passage? There seem to have been
vague rumors about a water route along the north of Siberia. That part
of the map was but little known. The knowledge of Russia had improved
since the days when Moscow was situated upon the exact spot where the
ocean between Iceland and Norway is deepest. The White Sea was fairly
well known, and Dutch traders had found their way to the Russian port
of Archangel. What lay beyond the White Sea was a matter of conjecture.
Whether the Caspian Sea, like the White Sea, was part of the Arctic Sea
or part of the Indian Ocean no one knew. But it appeared that farther
to the north, several days beyond the North Cape, there was a narrow
strait between an island which the Russians called the New Island (Nova
Zembla) and the continent of Asia. This might prove to be a shorter and
less dangerous route to China and the Indies. Furthermore, by building
fortifications on both sides of the narrows between the island and the
Siberian coast, the Hollanders would be the sole owners of the most
exclusive route to India. They could then leave the long and tedious
trip around the Cape of Good Hope, with its perils of storms, scurvy,
royal and inquisitorial dungeons, savage negroes, and several other
unpleasant incidents, to their esteemed enemies.

[Illustration: VOYAGES OF LINSCHOTEN]

The men who were most interested in this northern enterprise were
two merchants who lived in Middleburg, the capital of the province of
Zeeland. The better known of the two was Balthasar de Moucheron, an
exile from Antwerp. When the Spanish Government reconquered this rich
town it had banished all those merchants who refused to give up their
Lutheran or Calvinistic convictions. Their wealth was confiscated by
the state. They themselves were forced to make a new start in foreign
lands. The foolishness of this decree never seems to have dawned upon
the Spanish authorities. They felt happy that they had ruined and
exiled a number of heretics. What they did not understand was that
these heretics did not owe their success to their wealth, but to the
sheer ability of their minds, and before long these penniless pilgrims
had laid the foundations for new fortunes. Then they strove with all
their might to be revenged upon the Government which had ruined them.

De Moucheron, one of this large group which had been expelled, had
begun life anew in the free Republic and was soon among the greatest
promoters of his day. Of tireless energy and of a very bitter ambition,
none too kindly to the leading business men of his adopted country, he
got hold of Jan Huygen and decided to try his luck in a great gamble.
He interested several of the minor capitalists of Enkhuizen, and on the
fifth of June of the year 1594 Jan Huygen went upon his first polar
exploration with two ships, the _Mercurius_ and the _Lwaan_. Without
adventure the ships passed the North Cape, sailed along the coast of
the Kola peninsula, where Willoughby had wintered just forty years
before, and reached the Straits of Waigat, the prospective Gibraltar of
Dutch aspirations. The conditions of the ice were favorable.

On the first of August of the year 1594 the two ships entered the Kara
Sea, which they called the New North Sea. Then following the coast,
they entered Kara Bay. After a few days Jan Huygen discovered the
small Kara River, the present frontier between Russia and Siberia. He
mistook it for the Obi River, and thought that he had gone sufficiently
eastward to be certain of the practicability of the new route which
he had set out to discover. The ice had all melted. As far as he
could see there was open water. He cruised about in this region for
several weeks, discovered a number of little islands, and sprinkled
the names of all his friends and his employers upon capes and rivers
and mountains. Finally, contented with what had been accomplished, he
returned home. On the sixteenth of September of the same year he came
back to the roads of Texel.

After that he was regarded as the leader in all matters of navigation.
The stadholder, Prince Maurice, who had succeeded his father William
after the latter had been murdered by one of King Philip's gunmen,
sent for Jan Huygen to come to The Hague and report in person upon
his discoveries. John of Barneveldt, the clever manager of all the
financial and political interests of the republic, discussed with him
the possibility of a successful northeastern trading company. Before
another year was over Jan Huygen, this time at the head of a fleet
of seven ships, was sent northward for a second voyage. Everybody,
from his Highness the stadholder down to the speculator who had risked
his last pennies, had the greatest expectations. Nothing came of this
expedition. As a matter of fact, Jan Huygen had met with exceptionally
favorable weather conditions upon his first voyage; on the second he
came in for the customary storms and blizzards. His ships were frozen
in the ice, and for weeks they could not move. Scurvy attacked the crew
and many men died.

In October of the same year he was back in Holland. The only result
of the costly expedition was a dead whale that the captain had towed
home as an exhibit of his good intentions. He was still a young man,
not more than forty-five, but he had had his share of adventures. He
did not join the third trip to the North in the next year, about which
we shall give a detailed account in our next chapter. He was appointed
treasurer of his native city. There he lived as its most respected
citizen until the year 1611, when he died and was buried with great
solemnity. His work had been done.

In the year 1595 the "Itinerary of His Voyage to the East Indies"
had been published. By this book he will always be remembered. For a
century it provided a practical handbook of navigation which guided the
Dutch traders to the Indies, allowed them to attack the Spaniards and
Portuguese in their most vulnerable spot, and gave them the opportunity
to found a colonial empire which has lasted to this very day.




CHAPTER II

THE NORTHEAST PASSAGE


Amsterdam, the capital of the new Dutch commonwealth, the rich city
which alone counted more people within her wide walls than all of the
country provinces put together, had ever been the leader in all matters
which offered the chance of an honest penny. Her intellectual glory was
a reflected one, her artistic fame was imported from elsewhere; but her
exchange dictated its own terms to the rest of the country and to the
rest of the world. When the Estates of the Republic gave up the hope of
finding the route to India through the frozen Arctic Ocean, Amsterdam
had the courage of her nautical convictions, and at her own expense
she equipped a last expedition to proceed northward and discover this
famous route, which had the advantage of being short and safe.

Out of this expedition grew the famous voyage of Barendsz and Heemskerk
to Nova Zembla, the first polar expedition of which we possess a
precise account. There were two ships. They were small vessels, for no
one wished to risk a large investment on an expedition to the dangerous
region of ice and snow. Fewer than fifty men took part, and all had
been selected with great care. Married men were not taken; for this
expedition might last many years, and it must not be spoiled by the
homesick discontent of fathers of families.

Jan Corneliszoon de Ryp was captain of the smaller vessel. The other
one was commanded by Jacob van Heemskerk, a remarkable man, an able
sailor who belonged to an excellent family and entered the merchant
marine at a time when the sea was reserved for those who left shore
for the benefit of civic peace and sobriety. He had enjoyed a good
education, knew something about scientific matters, and had been in
the Arctic a year before with the last and unfortunate expedition of
Linschoten. The real leader of this expedition, however, was a very
simple fellow, a pilot by the name of Willem, the son of Barend
(Barendsz, as it is written in Dutch). He was born on the island of
Terschelling and had been familiar with winds and tides since early
childhood. Barendsz had two Northern expeditions to his credit, and had
seen as much of the coast of Siberia as anybody in the country. A man
of great resource and personal courage, combined with a weird ability
to guess his approximate whereabouts, he guided the expedition safely
through its worst perils. He died in a small open boat in the Arctic
Sea. Without his devoted services none of the men who were with him
would ever have seen his country again.

There was one other member of the ship's staff who must be mentioned
before the story of the trip itself is told. That was the ship's
doctor. Officially he was known as the ship's barber, for the
professions of cutting whiskers and bleeding people were combined in
those happy days. De Veer was a versatile character. He played the
flute, organized amateur theatrical performances, kept everybody happy,
and finally he wrote the itinerary of the trip, of which we shall
translate the most important part.

From former expeditions the sailors had learned what to take with
them and what to leave at home. Unfortunately, contractors, then as
now, were apt to be scoundrels, and the provisions were not up to the
specifications. During the long night of the Arctic winter men's lives
depended upon the biscuits that had been ordered in Amsterdam, and
these were found to be lacking in both quality and quantity. There were
more complaints of the same nature. As the leaders of the expedition
fully expected to reach China, they took a fair-sized cargo of trading
material, so that the Hollanders might have something to offer the
heathen Chinee in exchange for the riches of paradise which this
distant and mysterious land was said to possess. On the eighteenth of
May everything was ready. Without any difficulty the Arctic Circle was
soon reached and passed. Then the trouble began. When two Dutch sailors
of great ability and equal stubbornness disagree about points of the
compass there is little chance for an agreement. The astronomical
instruments of that day allowed certain calculations, but in a rather
restricted field. As long as land was near it was possible to sail with
a certain degree of precision, but when they were far away from any
solid indications of charted islands and continent the captains of that
day were often completely at a loss as to their exact whereabouts.

[Illustration]

The reason why two of the previous expeditions had failed was known:
the ships had been driven into a blind alley called the Kara Sea. In
order to avoid a repetition of that occurrence it was deemed necessary
to try a more northern course. Barendsz, however, wanted to go due
northeast, while De Ryp favored a course more to the west. For the
moment the two captains compromised and stayed together. On the fifth
of June the sailor on watch in the crow's-nest called out that he saw a
lot of swans. The swans were soon found to be ice, the first that was
seen that year.

Four days later a new island was discovered. Barendsz thought it must
be part of Greenland. After all, he argued, he had been right; the
ships had been driven too far westward. De Ryp denied this, and his
calculation proved to be true. The ships were still far away from
Greenland. The islands belonged to the Spitzbergen Archipelago. On
the nineteenth of June they discovered Spitzbergen. The name (steep
mountains) describes the island. An expedition was sent ashore, after
which we get the first recital of one of the endless fights with bears
that greatly frightened the good people in those days of blunderbusses.
Nowadays polar bears, while still far removed from harmless kittens,
offer no grave danger to modern guns. But the bullets of the small
cannon which four centuries ago did service as a rifle refused to
penetrate the thick hide of a polar bear. The pictures of De Veer's
book indicate that these hungry mammals were not destroyed until they
had been attacked by half a dozen men with gunpowder, axes, spears, and
meat-choppers.

A very interesting discovery was made on this new island. Every winter
wild geese came to the Dutch island of the North Sea. Four centuries
ago they were the subject of vague ornithological speculations, for,
according to the best authorities of the day, these geese did not
behave like chickens and other fowl, which brought up their families
out of a corresponding number of eggs. No, their chicks grew upon
regular trees in the form of wild nuts. After a while these nuts
tumbled into the sea and then became geese. Barendsz killed some of the
birds and he also opened their eggs. There were the young chicks! The
old myth was destroyed. "But," as he pleasantly remarked, "it is not
our fault that we have not known this before, when these birds insist
upon breeding so far northward."

[Illustration]

On the twenty-fifth of June, Spitzbergen was left behind, and once more
a dispute broke out between the two skippers over the old question of
the course which was to be taken. Like good Dutchmen, they decided that
each should go his own way. De Ryp preferred to try his luck farther to
the north. Barendsz and Heemskerk decided to go southward. They said
farewell to their comrades, and on the seventeenth of July reached
the coast of Nova Zembla. The coast of the island was still little
known; therefore the usual expediency of that day was followed. They
kept close to the land and sailed until at last they should find some
channel that would allow them to pass through into the next sea. They
discovered no channel, but on the sixth of August the northern point of
Nova Zembla, Cape Nassau, was reached. There was a great deal of ice,
but after a few days open water appeared.

The voyage was then continued. Their course then seemed easy. Following
the eastern coast downward they were bound to reach the Strait of
Kara. Avoiding the Kara Sea, they made for the river Obi and hoped
that all would be well. But before the ship had gone many days the
cold weather of winter set in, and before the end of August the ship
was solidly frozen into the ice. Many attempts were made to dig it out
and push it into the open water. The men worked desperately; but the
moment they had sawed a channel through the heavy ice to the open sea
more ice-fields appeared, and they had to begin all over again. On
the thirtieth of August a particularly heavy frost finally lifted the
little wooden ship clear out of the ice. Then came a few days of thaw,
during which they hoped to get the vessel back into shape and into
the water. But the next night there was a repetition of the terrible
creakings. The ship groaned as if it were in great agony, and all the
men rushed on shore.

The prospect of spending the winter in this desolate spot began to be
more than an unspoken fear. Any night the vessel might be destroyed by
the violent pressure of the ice. An experienced captain knew what to
do in such circumstances. All provisions were taken on shore, and the
lifeboats were safely placed on the dry land. They would be necessary
the next summer to reach the continent. Another week passed, and the
situation was as uncertain as before. By the middle of September,
however, all hope had to be given up. The expedition was condemned to
spend the winter in the Arctic. The ship's carpenter became a man of
importance. Near the small bay into which the vessel had been driven
he found a favorable spot for a house. A little river near by provided
fresh water. On the whole it was an advantageous spot for shipwrecked
sailors, for a short distance towards the north there was a low
promontory. The western winds had carried heavy trees and pieces of
wood from the Siberian coast, and this promontory had caught them.
They were neatly frozen in the ice. All the men needed to do was to
take these trees out of their cold storage and drag them ashore which,
however, did not prove to be so easy a task as it sounds. There were
only seventeen men on the ship, and two of them were too ill to do any
work. The others were not familiar with the problem of how to saw and
plane water-soaked and frozen logs into planks. Even when this had
been done the wood must be hauled a considerable distance on home-made
sleighs, clumsy affairs, and very heavy on the soft snow of the early
winter.

[Illustration]

Unfortunately, after two weeks the carpenter of the expedition suddenly
died. It was not easy to give him decent Christian burial. The ground
was frozen so hard that spades and axes could not dig a grave; so the
carpenter was reverently laid away in a small hollow cut in the solid
ice and covered with snow.

When their house was finished it did not offer many of the comforts
of home, but it was a shelter against the ever-increasing cold. The
roof offered the greatest difficulty to the inexperienced builders. At
last they hit upon a scheme that proved successful: they made a wooden
framework across which they stretched one of the ship's sails. This
they covered with a layer of sand. Then the good Lord deposited a thick
coat of snow, which gradually froze and finally made an excellent cover
for the small wooden cabin which was solemnly baptized "Safe Haven."
There were no windows--fresh air had not yet been invented--and what
was the use of windows after the sun had once disappeared? There was
one door, and a hole in the roof served as a chimney. To make a better
draft for the fire of driftwood which was kept burning day and night
in the middle of the cabin floor, a large empty barrel was used for a
smoke-stack. Even then the room was full of smoke during all the many
months of involuntary imprisonment, and upon one occasion the lack of
ventilation almost killed the entire expedition.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

While they were at work upon the house the men still spent the night
on board their ship. When morning came, with their axes and saws and
planes they walked over to the house. But hardly a day went by without
a disturbing visit from the much-dreaded polar bears. After some of
the provisions had been removed from the ship to the house the bears
became more insistent than ever. Upon one occasion when the bears had
gone after a barrel of pickled meat, as shown with touching accuracy
in the picture, the concerted action of three sailors was necessary to
save the food from the savage beasts. Another time, when Heemskerk, De
Veer, and one of the sailors were loading provisions upon a sleigh they
were suddenly attacked by three huge bears. They had not brought their
guns, but they had two halberds, with which they hit the foremost bear
upon the snout; and then they fled to the ship and climbed on board.
The bears followed, sat down patiently, and laid siege to the ship.
The three men on board were helpless. Finally one of them hit upon
the idea of throwing a stick of kindling-wood at the bears. Like a
well-trained dog, the animal that was struck chased the stick, played
with it, and then came back to ask for further entertainment. At last
all the kindling-wood laid strewn across the ice, and the bears had had
enough of this sport. They made ready to storm the ship, but a lucky
stroke with a halberd hit one of them so severely upon the sensitive
tip of his nose that he turned around and fled. The others followed,
and Heemskerk and his companions were saved.

When the month of November came and the sun had disappeared, the bears
also took their departure, rolled themselves up under some comfortable
shelter, and went to sleep for the rest of the winter. Now the sailors
could wander about in peace, for the only other animal that kept awake
all through the year was the polar fox. He was a shy beastie and never
came near a human being. The sailors, however, hunted him as best they
could. Not only did they need the skins for their winter garments,
but stewed fox tasted remarkably like the domestic rabbit and was an
agreeable change from the dreary diet of salt-flesh. In Holland before
the introduction of firearms rabbits were caught with a net. The same
method was tried on Nova Zembla with the more subtle fox. Unfamiliar
with the wiles of man, he actually allowed himself to be caught quite
easily. Later on traps were also built. But the method with the net was
more popular, for the men had the greatest aversion to the fresh air
of the freezing polar night and never left the house unless they were
ordered to do some work. When they went hunting with the net they could
pass the string that dropped the mechanism right under the door and
stay inside, where it was warm and cheerful, and yet catch their fox.

On the sixth of November the sun was seen for the last time. On the
seventh, when it was quite dark, the clock stopped suddenly in the
middle of the night, and when the men got up in the morning they had
lost the exact time. For the rest of the winter they were obliged to
guess at the approximate hour; not that it mattered so very much, for
life had become an endless night: one went to bed and got up through
the force of habit acquired by thousands of previous generations. If
the men had not been obliged to, they never would have left their
comfortable beds. They had but one idea, to keep warm. The complaint
about the insufferable cold is the main motive in this Arctic symphony.
Lack of regular exercise was chiefly to blame for this "freezing
feeling"--lack of exercise and the proper underwear. It is true
that the men dressed in many layers of heavy skins, but their lower
garments, which nowadays play a great part in the life of modern
explorers, were sadly neglected. In the beginning they washed their
shirts regularly, but they found it impossible to dry them; for just
as soon as the shirt was taken out of the hot water it froze stiff.
When they carried the frozen garment into the house to thaw it out
before the fire it was either singed and burned in spots or it refused
absolutely to melt back into the shape and aspect of a proper shirt.
Finally the washing was given up, as it has been on many an expedition,
for cleanliness is a costly and complicated luxury when one is away
from the beaten track of civilization.

[Illustration]

The walls of the house had been tarred and calked like a ship. All the
same, when the first blizzards occurred, the snow blew through many
cracks, and every morning the men were covered with a coat of snow
and ice. Hot-water bottles had not yet been invented, but at night
large stones were roasted in the fire until they were hot, and then
were placed in the bunks between the fur covers. They helped to keep
the men warm, and incidentally they burned their toes before they knew
it. Not only did the men suffer in this way. That same clock which I
have already mentioned at last succumbed to the strain of alternating
spells of heat and cold. It began to go slower and slower. To keep
it going at all, the weight was increased every few days. At last,
however, a millstone could not have coaxed another second out of the
poor mechanism. From that moment on an hour-glass was used. One of the
men had to watch it, and turn it over every sixty minutes.

All this time, while the men never ceased their complaint about
feeling cold, the heating problem had been solved by fires made of
such kindling-wood as the thoughtful ocean had carried across from
the Siberian coast and deposited upon the shore. Finally, however, in
despair at ever feeling really warm again, if only for a short while,
it was decided, as an extra treat, to have a coal fire. There was some
coal on board the ship, but it had been saved for use upon the homeward
trip in the spring, when the men would be obliged to travel in open
boats. The coal was brought to the house. The worst cracks in the walls
were carefully filled with tar and rope, and somebody climbed to the
roof and closed the chimney; not an ounce of the valuable heat must be
lost. As a result the men felt comfortable for the first time in many
months; they also came very near losing their lives. Having dozed off
in the pleasant heat they had not noticed that their cabin was filling
with coal-gas until finally some of them, feeling uncomfortable, tried
to get up, grew dizzy, and fainted. Our friend the barber, possessed of
more strength than any of the others, managed to creep to the door. He
kicked it open and let in the fresh air. The men were soon revived, and
the captain treated them all to a glass of wine to celebrate the happy
escape. No further experiments with coal were made during that year.

December was a month of steady blizzards. The snow outside piled up in
huge drifts which soon reached to the roof. The hungry foxes, attracted
by the smell of cookery wafted abroad through the barrel-chimney, used
to gallop across the roof, and at night their dismal and mean little
bark kept the men in their bunks awake. At the same time their close
proximity made trapping easier, and the skins were now doubly welcome;
for the shoes, bought in Holland, had been frozen so often and had been
thawed out too near the fire so frequently that they were leaking like
sieves and could no longer be worn. New shoes were cut out of wood
and covered with fox-fur. They provided comfortable, though far from
elegant, footwear.

New Year's day was a dreary feast, for all the men thought of home
and were melancholy and sad. Outside a terrible snow-storm raged. It
continued for an entire week. No one dared to go outside to gather
wood, fearing the wind and cold would kill them. In this extremity they
were obliged to burn some of their home-made furniture. On the fifth
of January the blizzard stopped. The door was opened, the cabin was
put in order, wood was brought from the woodpile, and then one of the
men suddenly remembered the date and how at home the feast of the Magi
was being celebrated with many happy and innocent pastimes. The barber
decided to organize a little feast. The first officer was elected to
be "King of Nova Zembla." He was crowned with due solemnity. A special
dinner of hot pancakes and rusks soaked in wine was served, and the
evening was such a success that many imagined themselves safely home in
their beloved fatherland. A new blizzard reminded them that they were
still citizens of an Arctic island.

[Illustration]

On the sixteenth of January, however, the men who had been sent out
to look after the traps and bring in wood suddenly noticed a glimmer
of red on the horizon. It was a sign of the returning sun. The dreary
months of imprisonment were almost over. From that moment the heating
problem became less difficult. On the contrary, the roof and the walls
now began to leak, and the expedition had its first taste of the thaw
which would be even more fatal than the cold weather had proved to be.
As has been remarked, these men had been leading a very unhealthy life.
While it was still light outside they had sometimes played ball with
the wooden knob of the flagpole of the ship, but since early November
they had taken no exercise of any sort. A few minutes spent out of
doors just long enough to kill the foxes in the traps was all the fresh
air they ever got. Out of a barrel they had made themselves a bath-tub,
and once a week every man in turn had climbed through the little
square opening into that barrel (see the picture) to get steamed out.
But this mode of living, combined with bad food, brought half a year
before from Holland, together with the large quantity of fox-meat, now
caused a great deal of scurvy, and the scurvy caused more dangerous
illness. Barendsz, the man upon whom they depended to find the way
home, was already so weak that he could not move. He was kept near the
fire on a pile of bearskins. On the twenty-sixth of January another man
who had been ill for some time suddenly died. His comrades had done all
they could to save him. They had cheered him with stories of home, but
shortly after midnight of that day he gave up the ghost. Early the next
morning he was buried near the carpenter. A chapter of the Bible was
read, a psalm was sung, and his sorrowful companions went home to eat
breakfast.

None of the men were quite as strong as they had been. Among other
things, they hated the eternal bother of keeping the entrance to the
door clear of snow. Why should they not abolish the door, and like good
Eskimos enter and leave their dwelling-place through the chimney?
Heemskerk wanted to try this new scheme and he got ready to push
himself through the narrow barrel. At the same time one of the men
rushed to the door to go out into the open and welcome the skipper when
he should stick his head through the barrel; but before he espied the
eminent leader of the expedition he was struck by another sight: the
sun had appeared above the horizon. Apparently Barendsz, who had tried
to figure out the day and week of the year after they had lost count
of the calendar, had been wrong in his calculation. According to him,
there were to be two weeks more of darkness. And now, behold! there was
the shining orb, speedily followed by a matutinal bear. The lean animal
was at once killed and used to replenish the oil of the odorous little
lamp which for more than three months had provided the only light
inside the cabin.

February came and went, but as yet there were no signs of the breaking
up of the ice. During the first day of March a little open water was
seen in the distance, but it was too far away to be of any value to
the ship. An attempt was made to push the ship out of its heavy coat of
ice, but the men at once complained that they were too weak to do much
work. Some of them had had their toes frozen and could not walk. Others
suffered from frost-bite on their hands and fingers and were unable
to hold an ax. When they went outside only incessant vigilance saved
them from the claws of the skinny bears that were ready to make up for
the long winter's fast. Once a bear almost ate the commander, who was
just able to jump inside the house and slam the door on bruin's nose.
Another time a bear climbed on the roof, and when he could not get into
the chimney, he got hold of the barrel and rocked that architectural
contrivance until he almost ruined the entire house. It was very
spooky, for the attack took place in the middle of the night, and it
was impossible to go out and shoot the monster.

March passed, and the ship, which had been seventy yards away from the
water when it was deserted in the autumn of 1595, was now more than
five hundred yards away from the open sea. The intervening distance
was a huge mass of broken ice and snow-drifts. It seemed impossible to
drag the boats quite so far. When on the first of May the last morsel
of salt meat had been eaten, the men appeared to be as far away from
salvation as ever. There was a general demand that something be done.
They had had enough of one winter in the Arctic, and would rather
risk a voyage in an open boat than another six months of cold bunks
and tough fox-stew, and reading their Bible by the light of a single
oil-lamp.

[Illustration]

Fortunately--and this is a great compliment to a dozen men who have
been cooped up in a small cabin for six months of dark and cold--the
spirit of the sailors had been excellent, and discipline had been well
maintained. They did not make any direct demands upon the captain.
The question of going or staying they discussed first of all with the
sick Barendsz, and he in turn mentioned it to Heemskerk. Heemskerk
himself was in favor of waiting a short while. He reasoned that the
ice might melt soon, and then the ship could be saved. He, as captain,
was responsible for his craft. He asked that they wait two weeks more.
If the condition of the ice was still unsatisfactory at the end of
that time, they would give up the ship and try to reach home in the
boats. Meanwhile the men could get ready for the trip. They set to
work at once cleaning and repairing their fur coats, sharpening their
tools, and covering their shoes with new skins to keep their feet from
freezing during the long weeks in the open boats.

An eastern storm on the last day of May filled their little harbor with
more ice, and all hope of saving the ship was given up. The return
trip must be made in the open boats. There were two, a large and a
small one. They had been left on land in the autumn, and were now
covered with many feet of frozen snow. A first attempt to dig them out
failed. The men were so weak that they could not handle their axes and
spades. The inevitable bear attacked them, drove them post-haste back
to the safe shelter of the house, and so put an end to the first day's
work.

The next morning the men went back to their work. Regular exercise and
fresh air soon gave them greater strength, while the dire warning of
Heemskerk that, unless they succeeded, they would be obliged to end
their days as citizens of Nova Zembla provided an excellent spur to
their digging enthusiasm. The two boats were at last dragged to the
house to be repaired. They were in very bad condition, but since there
was no further reason for saving the ship there was sufficient wood
with which to make good the damage. From early to late the men worked,
the only interruptions being the dinner-hour and the visits of the
bears. "But," as De Veer remarked in his pleasant way, "these animals
probably knew that we were to leave very soon, and they wanted to have
a taste of us before we should have gone for good." Before that happy
hour arrived the expedition was threatened with a novel, but painful,
visitation. To vary the monotonous diet of bearsteak, the men had fried
the liver. Three of them had eaten of this dish and fell so ill that
all hope was given up of saving their lives. The others, who knew that
they could not handle the boats if three more sailors were to die,
waited in great anxiety. Fortunately on the fourth day the patients
showed signs of improvement and finally recovered. There were no
further experiments with scrambled bear's liver.

After that the work on the two boats proceeded with speed, and by
the twelfth of June everything was ready. The boats, now reinforced
for the long trip across the open water of the Arctic Ocean, had to
be hauled to the sea, and the ever-shifting wind had once more put a
high ice-bank between the open water and the shore. A channel was cut
through the ice with great difficulty, for there were no tools for this
work. After two days more the survivors of this memorable shipwreck
were ready for the last part of their voyage. Before they left the
house Barendsz wrote three letters in which he recounted the adventures
of the expedition. One of these letters was placed in a powder-horn
which was left hanging in the chimney, where it was found two hundred
and fifty years later.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

On the morning of the fourteenth, Barendsz and another sick sailor who
could no longer walk were carried to the boats. With a favorable wind
from the south they set sail for the northern cape of Nova Zembla,
which was soon reached. Then they turned westward, and followed the
coast until they should reach the Siberian continent. The voyage along
the coast was both difficult and dangerous. The two boats were not
quite as large as the life-boats of a modern liner. Being still too
weak to row, the men were obliged to sail between huge icebergs, often
being caught for hours in the midst of large ice-fields. Sometimes
they had to drag the boats upon the ice while they hacked a channel
to open water. After a week the condition of the ice forced them to
pull the boats on shore and wait for several days before they could
go any farther. Great and tender care was taken of the sick pilot and
the dying sailor, but those nights spent in the open were hard on the
sufferers. On the morning of the twentieth of June the sailor, whose
name was Claes Andriesz, felt that his end was near. Barendsz, too,
said he feared that he would not last much longer. His active mind kept
at work until the last. De Veer, the barber, had drawn a map of the
coast, and Barendsz offered suggestions. Capes and small islands off
the coast were definitely located, placed in their correct geographical
positions, and baptized with sound Dutch names.

The end of Barendsz came very suddenly. Without a word of warning he
turned his eyes toward heaven, sighed, and fell back dead. A few hours
later he was followed by the faithful Claes. They were buried together.
Sad at heart, the survivors now risked their lives upon the open sea.
They had all the adventures not uncommon to such an expedition. The
boats were in a rotten condition; several times the masts broke, and
most of the time the smaller boat was half full of water. The moment
they reached land and tried to get some rest, there was a general
attack by wild bears. And once a sudden break in a field of ice
separated the boats from the provisions, which had just been unloaded.
In their attempt to get these back several men broke through the ice.
They caught cold, and on the fifth of July another sailor, a relative
of Claes, who had died with Barendsz, had to be buried on shore.

During all this misery we read of a fine example of faithful
performance of duty and of devotion to the interest of one's employers.
You will remember that this expedition had been sent out to reach China
by the Northeast Passage and to establish commercial relations with the
merchants of the great heathen kingdom. For this purpose rich velvets
and other materials agreeable to the eyes of Chinamen had been loaded
onto the ship when they left Amsterdam. Heemskerk felt it his duty to
save these goods, and he had managed to keep them in safety. Now that
the sun shone with some warmth, the packages were opened and their
contents dried. When Heemskerk came back to Amsterdam the materials
were returned to their owners in good condition.

On the eleventh of June of the year 1597 the boats were approaching
the spot where upon previous voyages large colonies of geese had been
found. They went ashore and found so many eggs that they did not know
how to take them all back to the boats. So two men took down their
breeches, tied the lower part together with a piece of string, filled
them with eggs, and carried their loot in triumph back to the others on
board.

That was almost their last adventure with polar fauna, except for an
attack by infuriated seals whose quiet they had disturbed. The seals
almost upset one of the boats. The men had no further difficulties,
however. On the contrary, from now on everything was plain sailing; and
it actually seemed to them that the good Lord himself had taken pity
upon them after their long and patient suffering, for whenever they
came to a large ice-field it would suddenly separate and make a clear
channel for their boats; and when they were hungry they found that
the small islands were covered with birds that were so tame that they
waited to be caught and killed.

[Illustration]

At last, on the twenty-seventh of July, they arrived in open water
where they discovered a strong eastern current. They decided that they
must be near Kara Strait. The next morning they hoped to find out for
certain. When the next morning came they suddenly beheld two strange
vessels near their own boats. They were fishing-smacks, to judge by
their shape and size, but nothing was known about their nationality,
for they flew no flags, and it was well to be careful in the year of
grace 1597. Therefore a careful approach was made. To Heemskerk's
great joy, the ships were manned by Russians who had seen the fleet of
Linschoten several years before and remembered some of the Hollanders.
There were familiar faces on both sides, and this first glimpse of
human beings did more to revive the courage of the men than the
doubtful food which the Russians forced with great hospitality upon
their unexpected guests. The following day the two fishing-boats set
sail for the west, and Heemskerk followed in their wake. But in the
afternoon they sailed into a heavy fog and when it lifted no further
trace of the Russians could be found. Once more the two small boats
were alone, with lots of water around them and little hope before them.

By this time all of the men had been attacked by scurvy and they could
no longer eat hard-tack, which was the only food left on board. Divine
interference again saved them. They found a small island covered with
scurvy-grass (_Cochlearia officinalis_) the traditional remedy for this
painful affliction. Within a few days they all recovered, and could
row across the current of the straits which separated them from the
continent. Here they found another Russian ship. Then they discovered
that their compass, on account of the proximity of heavy chests and
boxes covered with iron rings, had lost all track of the magnetic pole
and that they were much farther toward the east than they had supposed.
They deliberated whether they should continue their voyage on land or
on sea. Finally they decided to stick to their boats and their cargo.
Once more they closely followed the coast until they came to the mouth
of the White Sea. That meant a vast stretch of dangerous open water,
which must be crossed at great risk. The first attempt to reach the
other shore failed. The two boats lost sight of each other, and they
all worried about the fate of their comrades. On the eighteenth of
August the second boat managed to reach the Kola peninsula after rowing
for more than thirty hours.

That virtually ends the adventures of the men who had gone out with
Barendsz and Heemskerk to discover the Northeast Passage, and who quite
involuntarily acted as the first polar explorers. After a few days the
boats found each other, and together they reached the first Russian
settlement, where they found houses and warm rooms and a chance to get
a decent bath and eat from a table. Their misery was at once forgotten.
At heart they were healthy-minded, simple fellows, and when for the
first time after many months they saw some women they were quite happy,
although these women were Laplanders and proverbially lacking in those
attributes which we usually connect with the idea of lovely womanhood.

[Illustration]

News traveled fast even in the dominion of the Lapp. In less than
eighty hours a Laplander came running to the Russian settlement with
a letter which had been written by De Ryp, who, half a year before,
had been blown into the White Sea and was now waiting for a favorable
wind to sail home. He was still in Kola, and was delighted at the
safe return of his colleague from whom he had separated over a point
of nautical difference. He invited the men to go home with him. The
two small boats of Heemskerk's ship were left in the town of Kola as
a small souvenir for the kind-hearted Russians, the Arctic costumes
were carefully packed away, to be shown to the family at home, and
on the sixth of October they all said farewell to the Russian coast.
Twenty-three days later they entered the Maas. By way of Maassluis,
Delft, The Hague, and Haarlem they made their triumphant entry into
Amsterdam. Dressed in their fox-skins and their home-made wooden
shoes, they paraded through the streets of the city. Their High and
Mightinesses the mayors received them at the town hall, and the world
was full of the fame of this first Arctic expedition. As for the
practical results, there were none, unless we except the negative
information about the impossibility of the Northeastern Passage. But
nobody cared any longer about this route, for just two months before
the first Dutch fleet which had tried to reach the Indies by way of
the Cape had safely returned to the roads of Texel. The Portuguese,
after all, had proved to be not so dangerous as had been expected.
The Indian native was quite willing to welcome the Dutch trader.
And the Northeastern route, after the wonderful failures of a number
of conscientious expeditions, was given up for the well-worn and
well-known route along the African coast. The Arctic was all right for
the purpose of hunting of the profitable whale, but as a short cut to
the Indies it had proved an absolute disappointment.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER III

THE TRAGEDY OF SPITZBERGEN


Before I tell you the story of the first voyage to India I want to give
a short account of another Dutch expedition in the Arctic Sea which
ended even more sadly than that of Heemskerk and Barendsz.

On their voyage to Nova Zembla the two mariners had discovered a group
of islands which on account of their high mountains they had called the
"Islands of the Steep Peaks," or Spitzbergen in the Dutch language.
These islands provided an excellent center for the whaling fisheries.
During the first half of the seventeenth century a large Dutch fleet
went northward every spring to catch whales. The dead animals were
brought to Spitzbergen, where the blubber was turned into whale-oil,
and the rest of the huge animal was got ready for a market that was
not as finicky in its taste as in our own time.

Soon a small city was built around the large furnaces and the
rooming-houses for the workmen. This town was appropriately called
"Greaseville" (in Dutch, Smeerenburg). It consisted of the usual
gathering of saloons, eating-places, and small stores, that you might
find in a Western American town during a mining boom. When the autumn
came, the inhabitants moved back to Holland and left the city to the
tender mercies of the bears and foxes. Unfortunately, the owners of
this curious and somewhat motley settlement were not always the first
to arrive upon the scene in the summer. Other sailors, Scotch or
Norwegian, had often visited Greaseville before they arrived and either
appropriated what they wanted or destroyed what they could not carry
away. As early as 1626 a plan was discussed of leaving a guard on the
island during the winter. The men could live comfortably in one of the
houses and they could support themselves by hunting and fishing. It was
not a bad idea, but Nova Zembla still spooked in people's heads, and
nobody wanted to try a winter of darkness and cold such as had been
just described by De Veer. But in the year 1630 eight English sailors
were accidentally left behind from a ship, and next spring they were
found little the worse for wear. As a result the experiment was at last
made in the winter of the year 1633. Seven men were left on Spitzbergen
and seven others on the Jan Mayen, an island somewhat to the west and
farther away from the pole. The seven on Jan Mayen all died of scurvy.
When next spring a fleet came to relieve them they were found frozen
dead in their bunks. On Spitzbergen, however, all the men had passed a
comfortable winter. They had suffered a good deal from the cold, but
they had managed to keep out in the open, take a lot of exercise, and
pass the long winter as cheerfully as the heavy blizzards and storms
allowed. It was decided to leave a small guard upon the island every
year. When in September of 1634 the fleet of whalers sailed back for
Holland, seven new men, under the leadership of Adriaen Janzzoon, who
came from Delft, had agreed to remain behind and keep watch over
the little settlement of Smeerenburg. They were well provided with
supplies, but all perished before the spring of the next year. They
left a diary, and from this we copy a few items to show the quiet and
resigned courage with which they went to their death.

"On the eleventh of September of the year of our Lord 1634 the whaling
ships sailed for home. We wished them a happy voyage. We saw several
whales and often tried to get one, but we did not succeed. We looked
for fresh vegetables, foxes, and bears with great industry, but we did
not find any.

"Between the twentieth and the twenty-first of October the sun left
us. On the twenty-fourth of November we began to suffer from scurvy.
Therefore we looked for fresh vegetables, foxes, and bears with great
industry, but we did not succeed, to our great grief. Therefore we
consoled each other that the good Lord would provide. On the second of
December Klaes Florisz took a remedy against scurvy, and we set traps
to catch foxes.

"On the eleventh of December Jeroen Caroen also took a remedy against
scurvy, and we all began to eat separately from each other because some
suffered more from scurvy and others less. We looked every day, trying
to find fresh vegetables, but we found nothing. So we recommended our
souls into the hands of God.

"On the twelfth of December Cornelis Thysz took a remedy for scurvy. On
the twenty-third of December we saw our first bear. Just as the cook
was pouring out hot water from his kitchen the bear stood outside the
window, but when he heard a noise he hastily fled. On the twenty-fourth
we again heard a bear, and we at once ran for him with three men,
whereupon he stood upright on his hind legs and looked quite horrible;
but we shot a musket-ball through his belly, and he began to groan and
bleed quite badly, and with his teeth he bit one of our halberds to
pieces and then fled. We followed him with two lanterns, but we could
not get him, although we needed him sorely on account of the sick
people as well as of those who were still well, for nobody was quite
without pain. If things do not improve before long we shall all be
dead before the ships come back; but God knows what is best for us. On
the twenty-fifth of December Cornelis Thysz took a remedy for scurvy
for the second time, for things were going badly with him. On the
fourteenth of January Adriaen Janszoon died, being the first of the
seven of us to go; but we are now all very ill and have much pain.

"On the fifteenth Fetje Otjes died.

"On the seventeenth Cornelis Thysz died. Next to God we had put our
hope upon him. We who were still alive made coffins for the three dead
ones, and we laid them into their coffins, although we were hardly
strong enough to do this, and every day we are getting worse.

"On the twenty-eighth we saw the first fox, but we could not get him.
On the twenty-ninth we killed our red dog, and we ate him in the
evening. On the seventh of February we caught our first fox, and we
were all very happy; but it did not do us much good, for we are all too
far gone by now. We saw many bears, yes, sometimes we saw as many as
three, four, five, six, ten, twelve at the same time; but we did not
have strength enough to fire a gun, and even if we had hit a bear, we
could not have walked out to get him, for we are all so weak that we
can not put one foot before the other. We can not even eat our bread;
we have terrible pains all over our bodies; and the worse the weather
is the more pain we have. Many of us are losing blood. Jeroan Caroen is
the strongest, and he went out and got some coals to make a fire.

"On the twenty-third we laid flat on our backs almost all the time. The
end has come, and we commend our souls into the hands of God.

"On the twenty-fourth we saw the sun again, for which we praised God,
for we had not seen the sun since the twentieth or twenty-first of
October of last year.

"On the sixth of February the four of us who are still alive are lying
in our bunks. We would eat something if only one of us were strong
enough to get up and make a fire; we can not move from the pain we
suffer. With folded hands we pray to God to deliver us from this
sorrowful world. If it pleases Him we are ready; for we would prefer
not to stand this suffering much longer without food and without a
fire, and yet we cannot help each other, and each one must bear his own
fate as well as he can."

When the ships came to Spitzbergen in the spring of 1635 they found the
cabin locked. A sailor climbed into the house through the attic window.
The first things he found were pieces of the red dog hanging from the
rafters, where they had been put to dry. In front of the stairs he
stumbled over the frozen body of the other dog. Inside the cabin the
seven sailors rested together. Three were lying in open coffins, two
in one bunk, two others on a piece of sail on the floor, all of them
frozen, with their knees pulled up to their chins.

That was the last time an attempt was made to have anybody pass the
winter on the island.




CHAPTER IV

THE FIRST VOYAGE TO INDIA--FAILURE


It was no mean expedition which set sail for the Indies on the second
of April of the year 1595 with four ships, 284 men, and an investment
of more than three hundred thousand guilders. Amsterdam merchants had
provided the capital and the ships. The Estates of Holland and a number
of cities in the same province had sent cannon. With large cannon and
small harquebus, sixty-four in number, they were a fair match for any
Spaniard or Portuguese who might wish to defend his ancient rights upon
this royal Indian route, which ran down the Atlantic, doubled the Cape
of Good Hope, and then made a straight line from the southernmost tip
of Africa to Cape Comorin on the Indian peninsula in Asia.

A few words should be said about the ships, for each was to experience
adventures before reaching the safe harbor of home or disappearing
silently in a lonely sea. There were the _Hollandia_, proudly called
after the newly created sovereign republic of the seven united
Netherlands; the _Mauritius_, bearing the name of the eminent general
whose scientific strategy was forcing the Spanish intruder from one
province after the other; the _Amsterdam_, the representative of a city
which in herself was a mighty commonwealth; and lastly a small and fast
ship called the _Pigeon_.

Also, since there were four ships, there were four captains, and
thereby hangs a tale. This new Dutch Republic was a democracy of an
unusually jealous variety, which is saying a great deal. Its form of
government was organized disorder. The principle of divided power and
governmental wheels within wheels at home was maintained in a foreign
expedition where a single autocratic head was a most imperative
necessity. What happened during the voyage was this: the four
captains mutually distrustful, each followed his own obstinate will.
They quarreled among themselves, they quarreled with the four civil
directors who represented the owners and the capitalists in Holland,
and who together with the captains were supposed to form a legislative
and executive council for all the daily affairs of the long voyage.
Finally they quarreled with the chief representative of the commercial
interests, Cornelis de Houtman, a cunning trader and commercial
diplomatist who had spent four years in Lisbon trying to discover the
secrets of Indian navigation. Indeed, so great had been his zeal to
get hold of the information hidden in the heads of Portuguese pilots
and the cabalistic meaning of Portuguese charts, that the authorities,
distrustful of this too generous foreigner, with his ever-ready purse,
had at last clapped him into jail.

Then there had been a busy correspondence with the distant employers
of this distinguished foreign gentleman. Amsterdam needed Houtman
and his knowledge of the Indian route. The money which in the rotten
state of Portugal could open the doors of palaces as well as those of
prisons brought the indiscreet pioneer safely back to his fatherland.
Now, after another year, he was appointed to be the leading spirit of
a powerful small fleet and the honorable chairman of a complicated and
unruly council of captains and civilian directors. That is to say, he
might have been their real leader if he had possessed the necessary
ability; but the task was too much for him. For not only was he obliged
to keep the peace between his many subordinate commanders, but he was
also obliged to control the collection of most undesirable elements
who made up the crews of this memorable expedition. I am sorry that
I have to say this, but in the year 1595 people did not venture upon
a phantastical voyage to an unknown land along a highly perilous
route unless there was some good reason why they should leave their
comfortable native shores. The commanders of the ships and their chief
officers were first class sailors. The lower grades, too, were filled
with a fairly sober crowd of men, but the common sailor almost without
exception belonged to a class of worthless youngsters who left their
country for their country's good and for the lasting benefit of their
family's reputation. There was, however, a saving grace, and we must
give the devil his due. Many of these men were desperately brave. When
they were well commanded they made admirable sailors and excellent
soldiers, but the moment discipline was relaxed, they ran amuck, killed
their officers or left them behind on uninhabited islands and lived
upon the fat of the commissary department until the last bottle of gin
was emptied and the last ham was eaten. In most cases their ship then
ran on a hidden cliff, whereupon the democratic sea settled all further
troubles with the help of the ever-industrious shark.

When we realize that the Dutch colonial empire was conquered with and
by such men we gain a mighty respect for the leaders whose power of
will turned these wild bands of adventurers into valiant soldiers. And
when we study the history of our early colonial system we no longer
wonder that it was so bad. We are gratefully astonished that it was
not vastly worse.

On the tenth of March of the year 1595 the crews had been mustered,
the last provisions had been taken on board. Everything was ready for
the departure. The riot act was read to the men, for discipline was
maintained by means of the gallows and the flogging-pole, and after a
great deal of gunpowder had been wasted upon salutes the ships sailed
to the Texel. Here they waited in the roads for two weeks, and then
with a favorable wind from the north set sail for the English Channel.
All this and the rest of the story which is to follow we have copied
from the diary of Frank van der Does, who was on board the _Hollandia_
and who was one of the few officers who got safely home.

During the first three weeks it was plain sailing. On the twenty-sixth
of April the fleet reached one of the Cape Verde Islands. Some of the
wild goats of the islands that had so greatly impressed Linschoten
were caught and divided among the sailors, making a very welcome
change in their eternal diet of salted meat. Another week went by,
and two Portuguese freighters, loaded to the gunwales, appeared upon
the horizon. Kindly remember that this was only a few years after the
desperate struggle with Spain and while yet any ship that might be
considered popish was a welcome prize. Therefore the instinct of all
the Hollanders on board demanded that this easy booty be captured.
These ships, so the men reasoned, would provide more profit than an
endless, dreary trip to an unknown Indian sea; but for once discipline
prevailed. The commanders were under strict order not to do any
freebooting on their own account. On the contrary, they must make
friends wherever they could. Accordingly, the Dutch admiral gave the
Portuguese a couple of hams, and the Portuguese returned the favor with
a few jars of preserved fruit. Then the two squadrons separated, and
the Dutch fleet went southward.

In the end of June the ships passed the equator, and scurvy made its
customary appearance among the men. The suspicion that scurvy might
have something to do with the lack of certain elements in the daily
food had begun to dawn upon the sailors of that time. Of course it was
quite impossible for them to carry fresh solid food in their little
and ill-ventilated ships, but they could take fluids. Water was never
drunk by sailors of that day. It spoiled too easily in the primitive
tanks. Beer was the customary beverage. This time, however, a large
supply of wine had been taken along, and when they reached the tropics
each of the sailors got a pint of wine per day as a remedy or, rather,
a preventive of the dreaded disease. But it increased rapidly, and with
a feeling of deep relief the sailors welcomed the appearance of wild
birds, which indicated that the Cape of Good Hope must be near. Early
in August they sailed past the southern point of the African continent,
and dropped anchor in a small bay near the spot where now the town
of Port Elizabeth is situated. Here our friend Van der Does was sent
on shore with two boats to find fresh water. His first attempt at a
landing did not succeed. The boats got into a very heavy surf. They
were attacked by a couple of playful whales, and on the shore excited
natives, reputed to be cannibals, danced about in gleeful anticipation.
A storm broke loose, and for almost an entire day the men floated
helplessly on the angry waves. When at last they returned to the ship
the other sailors had already given them up as lost.

The next day the weather was more favorable, and they managed to reach
the shore, where they made friends with the natives. According to the
description, these must have been Hottentots. They made a very bad
impression. The Hottentot, then as now, was smallish and very ugly,
with a lot of black hair that looked as if it had been singed. In
short, in the language of the sixteenth century they looked like people
who had been hanging on the gallows for a long time and had shriveled
into the leathern caricature of a man. A dirty piece of skin served
them as clothing, and their language sounded to the Dutch sailors
like the cackling of a herd of angry turkeys. As for their manners,
they were beastly. When they killed an animal, they ate it raw, both
insides and outsides. Perhaps they stopped long enough to scrape some
of the dirt off with their fingers, but usually they did not take the
trouble to cook their food. Furthermore--this, however, so far was only
a suspicion--they were said to be cannibals and ate their own kind.

[Illustration]

The happy Hottentot still lived in the Stone Age, and these first
European traders were a veritable godsend to a people obliged to hunt
with stone arrows. The expedition did not fail to discover this, and
for a few knives and a few simple iron objects they received all the
cows and sheep they wanted. And, to our great joy, we get our first
glimpse of that most amusing and clownish of all living creatures, the
penguin. The penguin has risen in the social scale of wild birds since
he has become one of the chief attractions of the moving-pictures. In
the year 1595 he was every bit as silly and absurd an animal as he is
now, when he wanders forth to make friends with the sailors of our
South Polar expeditions. Van der Does hardly knew what to make of this
strange creature which has wings, yet cannot fly, and whose feathers
look like the smooth skin of a seal. Strangest of all, this wild animal
was found to be so tame that the sailors had to box their ears before
they could force a narrow path through the dense crowds of excited
birds.

On the eleventh of August the ships left the safe harbor. Their
original plan had been to cross the Indian Ocean from this point and
to make directly for the Indian islands, but there had been so much
illness among the crew that the plan had to be given up. They decided
to call at Madagascar first of all. There they hoped to find an
abundance of fresh fruit and to spend some weeks in which to allow the
sick people to recover completely before they ventured, into the actual
domains of the Portuguese.

Unfortunately, the navigating methods of that day were still very
primitive. A profound trust in the Lord made up for a lack of knowledge
of the compass. The good Lord in his infinite mercy usually guided
the ship until it reached some shore or other. Then the navigator set
to work and wormed his way either upward or downward until at last he
struck the spot which he had been trying to reach all the time and
thanked divine Providence for his luck. The particular bay renowned
for its fresh water and vegetables, that the expedition hoped to reach
was situated on the east coast of Madagascar, but a small gale blew
the ships to the westward. They could not reach the southern cape, and
they were forced to take whatever the western coast could provide.
That was little enough. There was an abundance of wild natives. Upon
one occasion the natives caught a landing party and stripped them of
all their arms and clothes before they allowed them to return to their
ships. But there were no wild fruit-trees, and upon these now depended
the lives of the members of the expedition.

[Illustration]

Seventy sailors were dead. Worst of all, the captain of the
_Hollandia_, Jan Dignumsz by name, the most energetic of the leaders
and famous for his discipline, had also died. A small island was
used as a cemetery, and was baptized Deadmen's Land, where rested
one-quarter of the men who had left Holland. The situation was far from
pleasant when the _Pigeon_, which had been sent out to reconnoiter,
came back with good tidings. A tribe of natives had been found that
was willing to enter into peaceful trade with the Hollanders and to
sell their cattle in exchange for knives and beads. It was almost too
good to be true. For a single tin spoon these simple people would give
an entire ox or four sheep. A steel knife induced them to offer one of
their daughters as a slave.

At this spot the sick people were landed, to be tended on shore. Soon
the misery was forgotten in the contemplation of an abundance of wild
monkeys, which competed with the natives in the execution of wild
and curious dances and which when roasted on hot coals made a fine
dish. This idyl, however, did not last long. The "pious life" of the
sailors and their attitude toward the natives soon caused considerable
friction. One night the natives attacked the camp where the sick men
slept. The Hollanders, from their side, took four young natives to
their ships and kept them there as prisoners. The four of course tried
to escape. One was drowned, pulled down by his heavy chains. Two others
hid themselves in a small boat and were recaptured the next day. A few
days after this event the mate of one of the ships and another sailor
went on shore and tried to buy a cow. They were attacked. The sailor
was mortally wounded, and the mate had his throat cut. In revenge the
Hollanders shot one of the natives and burned down a few villages. It
is a sad story, but we shall often have to tell of this sort of thing
when the white man made his first appearance among his fellow-creatures
of a different hue.

After this adventure the council of captains decided to proceed upon
the voyage without further delay. On the thirteenth of December the
fleet started upon the last stretch of water which separated it from
the island of Java. After two weeks, however, scurvy once more played
such havoc among the sailors that the ships were obliged to sail back
to Madagascar. They found the small island called Santa Maria on
the east coast. The natives here were more civilized, there was an
abundance of fresh food, and the sick people recovered in a short time.
Except for a sufficient supply of water, the expedition was ready for
the last thousand miles across the Indian Ocean. Santa Maria, however,
did not provide enough water.

Once more a sloop was sent out to reconnoiter. In the Bay of Saint
Antongil, on the main island, they discovered a small river, and on
the twenty-fifth of January the four ships reached this bay. They
started filling their water-kegs when on the third of February a
terrible storm drove the _Hollandia_ on a shoal and almost wrecked
the ship. During the attempts at getting her afloat two of her boats
were swept away and were washed on shore. The next morning a sloop was
sent after these boats, but during the night the natives, in their
desire for iron nails, had hacked the boats to pieces. When thereupon
the boat with sailors approached the village, the natives, expecting
a punitive expedition, attacked the men with stones. The Hollanders
fired their muskets, the power of which seemed unknown to these people,
for they gazed at the murderous arms with great curiosity until a
number of them had been killed, when they ran away and hid themselves.
After the fashion of that day the Dutch crew then burned down a few
hundred native huts. Such was the end of the first visit of Hollanders
to Madagascar. On the thirteenth of February the ships left for the
Indies, but before they got so far the long-expected internal disorder
had broken loose.

I have mentioned that the captain of the _Hollandia_ had died on the
west coast of Madagascar. The owners of the ships, not wishing to leave
anything to luck, had provided each ship with sealed instruction,
telling the officers who should succeed whom in case of just such
an accident. These letters were to be opened in the full council
of captains. Instead of doing this, the civil commissioner on the
_Hollandia_ had opened his letter at once and had read therein that the
office of captain should be bestowed upon the first mate, De Keyser by
name, and a personal friend of the commissioner. It is difficult at
this late date to discover what caused all the trouble which followed.
De Keyser was a good man, the most popular officer of the fleet, while
Houtman, the civilian commander of the expedition, was very much
disliked by the officers of all the ships. There is nothing very
peculiar in this. Civilians are never wanted on board a fleet, least of
all when they have been sent out to control the actions of the regular
seafaring people. It is not surprising, therefore, to find the officers
taking the side of De Keyser and turning against the civilians.
Houtman in his high official altitude and in a very tactless way,
declared that he would not recognize De Keyser. De Keyser, to avoid
friction, then declared that he would voluntarily resign, but the other
officers declared that they would not hear of such a thing. Thereupon
Houtman insisted that he, as civilian commander, had a right to demand
the strictest obedience to the orders of the owners. The officers
told Houtman what they would be before they obeyed a mere civilian.
Houtman stood his ground. The council of the captains broke up in a
free-for-all fight, and the most violent backers of De Keyser declared
that they would shoot Houtman rather than give in. Thus far the quarrel
had been about the theoretical principle whether the actual sailors or
the civilian commissioners should be the masters of the fleet. But
when the man who had started the whole trouble by opening the sealed
letter against orders proposed to desert the fleet with the _Hollandia_
he committed a breach of etiquette which at once made him lose the
support of the other regular officers. Discipline was discipline. The
mutineer was brought before a court-martial and was ordered to be put
in irons until the end of the voyage. He actually made the remainder
of the trip as a prisoner. The suit against him was not dropped until
after the return to Holland. It was a storm in a tea-kettle, or,
rather, it was a quarrel between a few dozen people, most of them ill,
who were cooped up in four small and ill-smelling vessels and who had
got terribly on one another's nerves. It is needless to say that these
official disagreements greatly entertained the rough elements in the
forecastle, who witnessed this commotion with hidden glee and decided
that they would have some similar fun of their own as soon as possible.

[Illustration]

Meanwhile the wind had been favorable, and on the fifth of June, after
a long, but uneventful voyage, an island was seen. It proved to be
a small island off the coast of Sumatra. Sumatra itself was reached
two days later, and on the eleventh of the same month the Sunda
Archipelago, between Sumatra and Java, was reached. In this part of
the Indies the white man had been before. The natives, therefore, knew
the power of firearms, and they were accordingly cautious. One of them
who was familiar with the straits between the islands offered to act
as pilot on their further trip to Bantam. For eight reals in gold he
promised to guide them safely to the north shore of Java. The amount
was small, but the distance was short. On the twenty-third of June of
the year 1596 four Dutch ships appeared for the first time in the roads
of Bantam, and were welcomed by the Portuguese with all the civility
which the sight of sixty-four cannon demanded. At that time Bantam was
an important city, the most important trading center of the western
part of the Indian islands. It was the capital of a Mohammedan sultan,
and for many years it had been the residence of a large Portuguese
colony. Besides Javanese natives and Portuguese settlers there were
many Arab traders and Chinese merchants. All of these hastened forth
to inspect the ships with the strange flag and have a look at this new
delegation of white men who were blond, not dark like the Portuguese,
and who spoke an unknown language.

The fleet had now reached its destination, and the actual work of
the commercial delegates began. It was their business to conclude
an official treaty with the native authorities and to try to obtain
equal trading rights with the Portuguese. Houtman was of great value
in this sort of negotiation. As representative of the mighty Prince
Maurice of Nassau, who for the benefit of the natives was described
as the most high potentate of the most powerful Dutch commonwealth,
he called upon the regent, who was governing the country during the
minority of the actual sultan. He made his visit in great state, and
through a number of presents he gained the favor of the regent. On the
first of July he obtained the desired commercial treaty. The Hollanders
were allowed to trade freely, and a house was put at their disposal to
serve as a general office and storeroom. Two of the civilian directors
were allowed to live on shore, and everything was ready for business.
Thus far things had gone so well that Houtman decided to perform his
task leisurely. The new pepper harvest was soon to be gathered, and he
thought it well to wait until he had a chance to get fresh spices. What
was left of last year's crop was offered for a very low price, but as
there was no hurry, no supply was bought.

[Illustration]

Unfortunately, this time of waiting was utilized by the Portuguese
for a campaign of underhand agitation against their unwelcome rivals.
They did not accuse the Hollanders directly of any evil intentions, but
did the regent know who those people were? It is true that they claimed
to be the representatives of a certain Prince of Nassau. Was there
such a Prince? They might just as well be common buccaneers. It would
be much safer if the regent would order his soldiers to take all the
Hollander people prisoner and to surrender them to the Portuguese, to
be dealt with according to their deserts.

The regent, who knew nothing about his new guests except that they were
white and had come to him in wooden ships, listened with an attentive
ear. At first he did not act, but the Hollanders soon noticed that
whereas they found it difficult to buy anything at all in Bantam,
Portuguese vessels left the harbor every week with heavy cargoes. At
last when the commissary department of the Dutch fleet sent on shore
for provisions they were refused all further supplies. Evidently
something was going to happen.

To be well prepared against all eventualities, the Dutch captains began
to chart the harbor. With the small guns of that age it was necessary
to know exactly how near shore one could get in order to bombard the
enemy. The natives saw the manoeuvering, and wondered what it was
all about. From that moment on there was suspicion on both sides, and
at last the tension between them grew so serious that the Hollanders
decided to remove their goods from their storehouse and bring them on
the ships. But while they were loading their possessions into the boats
Houtman and another civilian by the name of Willem Lodewycksz were
suddenly taken prisoner and brought to the castle of the regent. This
dignitary, afraid of the Portuguese, whose power he appreciated, and
yet unwilling to act openly against some newcomers who might be far
more dangerous, wanted to keep the leader of the Dutch expedition and
one of his officers as hostages until the Dutch ships should have left
the port without doing him or his people any harm.

[Illustration]

The Hollanders, however, who knew that the Portuguese were responsible
for this action, at once attacked the Portuguese ships. Both parties,
however, proved to be equally strong, and having fired several volleys
at one another, both sides gave up their quarrel and waited until they
should be reinforced. Houtman and his companion were set free after
the Hollanders had paid a heavy ransom. All this took place in the
month of October. Even then Houtman hoped that the interrupted trading
might be resumed. Meanwhile, however, the Portuguese had asked for
reinforcements to be sent from their colony in Malacca, and a high
Portuguese official was already on his way to Bantam to offer the
regent ten thousand reals for the surrender of the entire Dutch fleet.
Of these negotiations the Dutch commander obtained full details through
a friendly Portuguese merchant. Since everybody spied upon everybody
else, this merchant's secret correspondence was soon detected, and the
culprit was sent to Malacca. As there was now no longer any hope for
profitable business, the Dutch fleet made ready to depart. Just before
leaving, however, they managed to get some cargo. A Chinaman got on
board the admiral's ship, and made him the following offer. He would
load two vessels with spices and would leave the port. The Hollanders
would attack his vessels and would capture both ship and cargo. Of
course they must pay cash and must deposit the money beforehand.

This was done, and in this way Houtman got several thousand guilders'
worth of nutmeg and mace. Thereupon the Hollanders left Bantam and
tried their luck in several other cities on the Javanese coast; but
everywhere the people had been warned by the Portuguese against
ungodly pirates who were soon to come with four big ships, and
everywhere the ships were refused water and were threatened with open
hostilities if they should attempt to buy anything from the natives.

One little king, however, appeared to have more friendly feelings. That
was the King of Sidayu, on the strait of Surabaya. He was very obliging
indeed, and volunteered to pay the first call upon his distinguished
visitors. At the hour which had been officially announced his Majesty,
with a large number of well-armed canoes, paddled out to the Dutch
ships. The Hollanders, glad at last to find so cheerful a welcome,
had arranged everything for a festive occasion. The ships had hoisted
their best array of flags, and the trumpeters--it was a time when
signals on board were given with a trumpet--bellowed forth a welcome.
The _Amsterdam_ was the first ship to be reached. The captain stood
ready at the gangway to welcome the dusky sovereign, but suddenly his
ship was attacked from all sides by a horde of small brown men. They
swarmed over the bulwarks and hacked a dozen Hollanders to pieces
before the others could defend themselves. These in turn gave fight
as best they could with knives and wooden bars, but many more were
killed. At last, however, the other ships managed to come to the relief
of the _Amsterdam_, and they destroyed the fleet of war-canoes with a
few volleys from their cannon. It was a sad business. Several of the
officers had been killed. What with the illness of many of the men
there were hardly sailors enough to man the four ships. The _Amsterdam_
looked like a butcher shop. It was cleaned thoroughly, the dead
people were given Christian burial in the open sea, and the voyage was
continued to the island of Madura.

[Illustration]

Here they arrived on the eighth of December, and were once more met
by a large fleet of small craft. In one of these there was a native
who knew a little Portuguese. He asked to speak to the commander,
who at that moment was on the _Amsterdam_. Houtman told the native
interpreter to row to the _Mauritius_, where he would join him in a few
minutes. This was a good idea, for the people on the _Amsterdam_, who
had just seen the massacre of their comrades, were very nervous and
in no condition to receive another visit of natives, however friendly
they intended to be. But through a mistake the boat of the interpreter
did not turn toward the _Mauritius_, but returned once more to the
_Amsterdam_, apparently to ask for further instructions. Then one of
these horrible accidents due entirely to panic happened. The sailors of
the _Amsterdam_ opened fire upon the natives. The other ships thought
that this was the sign for a new general attack, and they got out
their cannon. In a moment a score of well-intentioned natives, and
among them their king, had been killed or were drowning.

After this it could not be expected that the island of Madura would
sell Houtman anything at all. There was only one chance left if the
expedition was to be a financial success. This was a trip to the
Molucca Islands. But for this voyage the ninety-four sailors who were
still alive--all the others who had left Holland the year before were
dead--hardly sufficed. Furthermore, the _Amsterdam_ was beginning to
show such severe leaks that the carpenters could not repair the damage.
The ship was therefore beached and burned. The crew was divided among
the three other ships and they set sail for the Moluccas.

Before they reached these islands a formal mutiny had broken out
on board the _Mauritius_. Suddenly, during the afternoon meal, the
captain of the ship had died. He had fainted, turned blue and black,
and in less than an hour he was dead after suffering dreadful pains.
Healthy people, so the sailors whispered, did not die that way, and
they accused Houtman, who did not like this particular captain, of
having put poison into his food. Houtman was attacked by his own men,
and he was put in irons. A formal tribunal then was called together.
It investigated the charges, but nothing was found against the accused
Commissioner. Therefore Houtman was released, and the topsyturvy
expedition once more continued its voyage.

[Illustration]

But it never reached the Molucca Islands, for before they got to
these they found the island of Bali. This proved to be governed by a
well-disposed monarch. The influence of the Portuguese was less strong
in this island than it had been on Java. The Hollanders, too, had
learned their lesson, and they refrained from the naval swashbuckling
that had often characterized their conduct on Java. On the contrary,
they gave themselves every possible trouble to be very pleasant to his
Majesty the Sultan. They made him fine presents, and they produced
their maps of the fatherland and made a great ado about their official
documents. The sultan wished to know who they were. They told him
that they came from a country which was situated in the northern part
of Europe, where the water turned into a solid mass across which you
could drive a horse every winter. This country, according to their
descriptions, covered a region occupied by Russia, France, and Germany.
There was but little truth in these grandiloquent stories, but they
were dealing with an innocent native who must be duly impressed by
the great power and the enormous riches of the home of ninety-odd,
bedraggled and much traveled Dutch sailors. The account which the
sailors gave of their country so deeply impressed the king that he
allowed them to buy all the spices they wanted and to collect the
necessary provisions for the long return voyage. On February 26, in
the second year of their voyage, the three ships got ready to sail
back to Holland. One of the civilian directors who with his masterful
fibbing had brought himself more particularly to the attention of his
Majesty was left behind, together with one sailor. They were to act as
counselors to the court, an office which they held for four years, when
they returned to Amsterdam. Of the two hundred and eighty-four men who
had left Holland in 1595, only eighty-nine returned after an absence of
two years and four months.

[Illustration]

That was the end of the first trip. It had not been profitable. The
sale of the pepper and nutmeg bought in Bali saved the expedition from
being a total loss to the investors, but there were not nearly such
large revenues as were to follow in the succeeding years. Furthermore,
Houtman had not been able to establish any lasting relations with any
of the native princes of India. Neither could he report that the first
Dutch expedition had been a shining example of tactful dealing with, or
kind treatment of the people of the Indies.

But this was really a detail. It was an unfortunate incident due
to their own lack of experience and to the intrigues of the rival
Portuguese merchants.

From a commercial point of view this expedition was a failure. Yet it
brought home a large volume of negative information which was of the
utmost importance. It showed that the direct road to India was not an
impossible achievement to anybody possessed of energy and courage. It
showed that the power of the Portuguese in India was not as strong as
had been expected. It showed that the dream of an independent colonial
empire for the new Dutch Republic in the Indian islands was not an
idle one. In short, it proved that all the fears and misgivings about
Holland's share in the development of the riches of Asia had been
unnecessary. The thing could be done.




CHAPTER V

THE SECOND VOYAGE TO INDIA--SUCCESS


There was now a great boom in the Indian trade. Whosoever could beg,
borrow, or steal a few thousand guilders; whoever possessed an old
scow which could perhaps be made to float, whoever was related to a
man who had a cousin who had some influence on the exchange, suddenly
became an Indian trader, equipped a ship, hired sailors, had mysterious
conferences with nautical gentlemen who talked about their great
experience in foreign waters, and then waited for the early days of
spring to bid God-speed to his little expedition. Every city must have
its own Indian fleet. Companies were formed, stockholders quarreled
about the apportionment of the necessary capital, and at once they
split up into other smaller companies. There was an "Old" Indian
Trading Company. The next day there was a rival called the "New"
Indian Trading Company. There was an Indian company which was backed by
the province of Zeeland. There was a private enterprise of the city of
Rotterdam. To be honest, there were too many companies for the small
size of the country. Before another dozen years had passed they were
all amalgamated into one strong commercial body, the great Dutch East
India Company, but during the first years hundreds of ships stampeded
to the promised land of Java and Bali and the Moluccas, and for one
fleet of small vessels which came home with a profit there were a dozen
which either were shipwrecked on the way or which had ruined their
shareholders before they had passed the equator.

Amsterdam, as always, was the leader in this activity. It was not
only a question of capital. There had to be men of vision, merchants
who were willing to do things on a large scale, before such a venture
could return any profit. And while the ships of the Zeeland Company
were hurried to sea, and left long before the others, and incidentally
came back a few years later, Amsterdam quietly collected eight hundred
thousand guilders and advertised for competent officers and willing
men for a large expedition. This time, it was decided, everything was
to be done with scientific precision, and nothing must be left to
chance. The commander in chief of the 560 men who were to take part
in the expedition was Jacob van Neck, a man of good birth, excellent
training, and well-known in the politics of his own city. His most
important adviser was Jacob van Heemskerk, fresh from his adventures in
the Arctic Sea and ready for new ones in the Indian Ocean. Several of
the officers who had been to Bantam with Houtman were engaged for this
second voyage. Among them our friend Van der Does, out of whose diary
we copied the adventures of the first voyage to the Indies. Even the
native element was not lacking. You will remember that the Hollanders
had taken several hostages in Madagascar when they visited the east
coast of that island in the year 1595. Two of these had been tamed and
had been taken to Holland. After a year in Amsterdam they were quite
willing to exchange the uncomfortable gloominess of the Dutch climate
for a return to their sunny native shores. Also there was a Mohammedan
boy by the name of Abdul, whom curiosity had driven from Bali to
Holland on board the ship of Houtman.

[Illustration]

The fleet of eight vessels left the roads of Texel on the first of May
of the year 1598, and with a favorable wind reached the Cape Verde
Islands three weeks later. There, a general council of the different
captains was asked to decide upon the further course. For with each
expedition the knowledge of what ought to be done and what ought to
be omitted increased, and the experiences of Houtman on the coast of
Africa where his entire crew had been disabled through scurvy, must
not be repeated. The fleet must either follow the coast of Africa to
get fresh food and water whenever necessary, or the ships must risk a
more western course, which would take them a far distance away from
land, but would bring them into currents which would carry them to the
Indies in a shorter while. They decided to take the western course. It
was a very tedious voyage except for the flying-fishes which sometimes
accompanied the ship. Luck was with the expedition, and on the ninth of
July the ships passed the equator. The little island of Trinidad, off
the coast of Brazil, was soon reached, and an inquisitive trip in an
open boat to explore this huge rock almost ended in disaster. But such
small affairs as a night spent in an open boat in a stormy ocean were
all in the day's work and gave the sailors something to talk about.

Within a remarkably short time the lonely island of Tristan d'Acunha
was passed, and from there the current and the western winds carried
the ships to the Cape of Good Hope. But near this stormy promontory a
small hurricane suddenly fell upon the fleet, and after a night of very
heavy squalls one of the eight ships had disappeared. It was never seen
again. A few days later, this time through carelessness in observing
signals, four other ships were separated from their admiral. Several
days were spent in coursing about in the attempt to find them. The sea,
however, is very wide, and ships very small, and Van Neck with two big
and one small vessel at last decided to continue the voyage alone.
He was in a hurry. There were many rivals to his great undertaking,
and when he actually met a Dutch ship sent out by the province of
Zeeland, he insisted that there must be no delay of any sort. The
Zeeland ship, however, was not a dangerous competitor. Nine members
of its crew of seventy-five had died. Among the others there was so
much scurvy that only seven men were able to handle the helm. Only
two could climb aloft. The Amsterdam ships ought to have helped their
fellow-countrymen, but in the Indian spice trade it was a question of
"first come, first served." Therefore they piously commended their
Zeeland brethren to the care of the Good Lord and hastened on.

[Illustration]

A short stay in Madagascar was necessary because the water in the
tanks was of such abominable taste and smelled so badly that it must
be replenished. The ships sailed to the east coast of the island,
stopped at Santa Maria, well known from the visit of Houtman's ships
three years before, and then made a short trip in search of fresh
fruit to the bay of Antongil. On the island of Santa Maria they had
found a happy population, well governed by an old king and spending
their days in hunting wild animals on land or catching whales at sea.
But in the Bay of Antongil things had greatly changed since Houtman
had left a year before. There had been a war with some of the tribes
from the interior of the island. The villages along the coast had been
burned, and all the cattle had been killed. Men and women were dying of
starvation. Right in the midst of the lovely tropical scenery there lay
the decaying corpses of the natives, a prey to vultures and jackals.
The expedition of Van Neck, however, had been sent out to buy spices in
India and not to reform the heathen inhabitants of African islands. The
water-tanks were hastily filled, and on the sixteenth of September the
island was left to its own fate.

[Illustration]

For two months the ships sailed eastward. There were a few sick men on
board, but nobody died, which was considered a magnificent record in
those days for so long a voyage. On November 19 the high mountains of
the coast of Sumatra appeared upon the horizon. From there Van Neck
steered southward, and near the Sunda Islands he at last reached the
dangerous domains of the Portuguese. The cannon were inspected, the
mechanism of the guns was well oiled, and everything was made ready
for a possible fight. Before the coast of Java was reached one of the
islands of the Sunda Archipelago was visited. Could the natives tell
them anything about the Portuguese and their intentions? The natives
could not do this, but in return asked the men whether they perhaps
knew anything about a foreign expedition which had been in those parts
a few years before? That expedition, it appeared, had left a very bad
reputation behind on account of its cruelty and insolence.

Van Neck decided not to remain in this region, where his predecessor
had made himself too thoroughly unpopular, and sailed direct for
Bantam. He would take his risks. On November 26, while the sun was
setting, the three ships dropped anchor in that harbor. They spent
an uncomfortable night, for nobody knew what sort of reception would
await them on the next day. Houtman had been in great difficulty with
both the sultan and the Portuguese. Very likely the ships, flying
the Dutch flag, would be attacked in the morning. But when morning
came, the ubiquitous Chinaman, who in the far Indies serves foreign
potentates as money-changer, merchant, diplomatic agent, and handy-man
in general, came rowing out to Van Neck's ship. He told the admiral
that the sultan sent the Hollanders his very kind regards and begged
them to accept a small gift of fresh fruit. The sultan was glad to
see the Hollanders. If they would only send a messenger on shore the
sultan would receive him at once. Meanwhile as a sign of good faith
the Chinese intermediary was willing to stay on board the ship of the
Hollanders. Nobody in the fleet, least of all the officers and sailors
who remembered what had happened two years before, had expected such a
reception. They were soon told the reason of this change in attitude.
After Houtman and his ships left in the summer of 1596 the Portuguese
Government had sent a strong fleet to punish the Sultan of Bantam for
having been too friendly to the Hollanders. This fleet had suffered a
defeat, but since that time the people in Bantam had feared the arrival
of another punitive expedition. The Hollanders, therefore, came as very
welcome defenders of the rights of the young sultan. It was decided
that their services should be used for the defense of the harbor if the
long-expected Portuguese fleet should make a new attack. It was in this
role of the lesser of two evils that the Hollanders finally were to
conquer their Indian empire from the Portuguese. Van Neck was the first
Dutch captain to use the local political situation for his own benefit.
He sent his representative on shore, who was received with great
ceremony. He explained how this fleet had been sent to the Indies by
the mighty Prince of Orange, and he promised that the Bantam government
would be allowed to see all the official documents which the admiral
had brought if they would deign to visit the ships. This invitation was
not well received. The Bantam people had been familiar with the ways
of white men for almost a hundred years. They distrusted all cordial
invitations to come on board foreign ships, and they asked that the
Hollanders send their papers ashore. "No," Van Neck told them through
his envoy, "a document given to me by the mighty Prince of Orange is
too important to be allowed out of my immediate sight."

In the end the sultan, curious to see whether these letters could
perhaps tell him something of further ships which might be on their
way, agreed to make his appearance upon the ship of the admiral, where
he was received with great courtesy.

Then, after the fashion of the Indian ruler of his day and of our own,
he demanded to know what his profits were to be in case he allowed the
Hollanders to trade in his city. Van Neck began negotiations about
the bribe which the different functionaries were to receive. For a
consideration of 3200 reals to the sultan and the commander of the
harbor, the Dutch ships were at last given permission to approach the
shore and buy whatever they wanted. For ten days long canoes filled
with pepper and nutmeg surrounded the ships. The pepper was bought for
three reals a bag. Everything was very pleasant, but one day Abdul,
the native who came from Bali, got on shore and visited the city.
Here among his own people he cut quite a dash, and bragging about the
wonders of the great Dutch Republic, he volunteered the information
that on the Amsterdam market he had seen how a bag of pepper was sold
for 100 reals. That sum, therefore, was just ninety-seven reals
more than the people in Bantam received for their own raw product.
Of course they did not like the idea of getting so little, and at
once they refused to sell to Van Neck at the old rate. It was a great
disappointment. He tried to do business with some Chinamen, but
they were worse than the Javanese. They offered their pepper to the
Hollanders at a ridiculously low price, but after the bags had been
weighed they were found to be weighted with stones and sand and pieces
of glass.

There was no end to all the small annoyances which the Dutch admiral
was made to suffer. There were a number of Portuguese soldiers hanging
about the town. They had been made prisoners during the last fatal
expedition against Bantam, and they suffered a good many hardships.
One day they were allowed to pay a visit to the Dutch ships, and the
tales of their misery were so harrowing that the admiral had given them
some money to be used for the purpose of buying food and clothes. No
sooner, however, were the prisoners back on dry land than they started
the rumor that the Hollanders were dangerous pirates and ought not to
be trusted. Van Neck vowed that he would hang his ungrateful visitors
if ever they came to him again with their tales of woe. Meanwhile, in
order to stop further talk, he promised to raise the price of pepper
two reals. For five reals a bag his ships were now filled with a cargo
of the costly spice.

In a peaceful way the month of December went by. It was the last day
of the year 1598 when quite unexpectedly the lost ships that had been
driven away from their admiral near the Cape of Good Hope appeared at
Bantam. They had passed through many exciting adventures. After they
had lost sight of the commander-in-chief, they had first spent several
days trying to discover his whereabouts. Then they had continued their
way to get fresh water in Madagascar. They had reached the coast of
the island safely, but just before they could land a sudden storm had
driven them eastward. On the seventeenth of September they had again
seen land, and they had dropped their anchors to discover to what part
of the world they had been blown by the wind. The map did not show
that there was any land in this region. Therefore on the eighteenth
of September of the year 1598 they had visited the island which lay
before them, and they found that they had reached paradise. All the
sailors had been taken ashore, it being Sunday, and the ships' pastor
had preached a wonderful sermon. So eloquent were his words that one
of the Madagascar boys who was on the fleet had accepted Christian
baptism then and there. After that for a full month officers and men
had taken a holiday. Whatever they wished for the island provided in
abundance. There was fresh water. There were hundreds of tame pigeons.
There were birds which resembled an ostrich, although they were smaller
and tasted better when cooked. There were gigantic bats and turtles so
large that several men could take a ride on their back. Fish abounded
in the rivers and the sea around the island, and it was thickly covered
with all sorts of palm-trees. Indeed, it looked so fertile that it was
decided to use it as a granary for future expeditions. Grain had been
planted, and also beans and peas for the use of ships which might
come during the next years. Then the island had been officially annexed
for the benefit of the republic. It had been called Mauritius after
Prince Maurice of Nassau, the Stadholder of Holland. Finally after a
rooster and seven chickens had been given the freedom of this domain,
to assure future travelers of fresh eggs, the four ships had hoisted
their sails and had come to Bantam to join their admiral.

[Illustration]

Van Neck now commanded several ships, which were loaded. But the others
must await the arrival of a new supply of pepper, which was being
brought to Bantam from the Moluccas by some enterprising Chinamen. This
would take time, and Van Neck was still in a great hurry. He refused
to consider the tempting offers of the Sultan of Bantam, who still
wanted his help against his Portuguese enemies. Instead, he entered
into negotiations with a Hindu merchant who offered to bring the other
ships directly to the Moluccas, where they would be in the heart of
the spice-growing islands. The Hindu was engaged, and navigated the
ships safely to their destination. Here through their good behavior
the Hollanders made such an excellent impression upon the native ruler
that they were allowed to establish two settlements on shore and leave
a small garrison until they should return to buy more mace and nutmeg
at incredibly reasonable terms. As for Van Neck, having saluted his
faithful companions with a salvo of his big guns, which started a panic
in the good town of Bantam, where the people still remembered the
departure of Houtman, he sailed for the coast of Africa.

He had every reason to be contented with his success. In a final
audience with the governor of the city of Bantam he had promised this
dignitary that the Hollanders would return the next year, "because
that was the will of their mighty ruler." The governor, from his side,
who upon this occasion had to deal with a much better class of men
than Houtman and his crew of mutinous sailors, had decided that the
Hollanders were preferable to the Portuguese, and he assured Van Neck
of a cordial reception.

The return voyage was not as prosperous as the outward trip had been.
Dysentery attacked the fleet, and many of the best officers and men
had to be sewn into their hammocks to be dropped into the ocean, where
they found an honorable burial. St. Helena, with its fresh water and
its many wild animals, was reached just when the number of healthy men
had fallen to thirty. A week of rest and decent food was enough to cure
all the men, and then they sailed for home. But so great was the hurry
of this rich squadron to reach the markets of Amsterdam that Van Neck's
ship was almost destroyed when it hoisted too many sails and when the
wind broke two of the masts. It was not easy to repair this damage in
the open sea. After several days some sort of jury rig was equipped.
The big ship, with its short stubby mast, then looked so queer that
several Dutch vessels which saw it appear upon the horizon off the Gulf
of Biscay beat a hasty retreat. They feared that they had to do with
a new sort of pirate, sailing the seas in the most recent piratical
invention.

On the nineteenth of July, after an absence of only one year and two
months, the first part of Van Neck's fleet returned safely to Holland.
The cargo was unloaded, and was sold on the Amsterdam exchange. After
the full cost of the expedition had been paid, each of the shareholders
received a profit of just one hundred per cent. Van Neck, who had
established the first Dutch settlement in the Indies, was given a
public reception by his good city and was marched in state to the town
hall.




CHAPTER VI

VAN NOORT CIRCUMNAVIGATES THE WORLD


Oliver van Noort was the first Hollander to sail around the world.
Incidentally, he was the fourth navigator to succeed in this dangerous
enterprise since in the year 1520 the little ships of Magellan had
accomplished the feat of circumnavigating the globe. Of the hero of
this memorable Dutch voyage we know almost nothing. He was a modest
man, and except for a few lines of personal introduction which appear
in the printed story of his voyage, which was published in Rotterdam,
his home town, in the year 1620, in which he tells us that he had
made many trips to different parts of the world, his life to us is a
complete mystery.

[Illustration: Olivier van Noort.]

He was not, like Jacob van Heemskerk and Van Neck, a man of education;
neither was he of very low origin. He had picked up a good deal of
learning at the common schools. Very likely he had been the mate or
perhaps the captain of some small schooner, had made a little money,
and then had retired from the sea. Spending one's days on board a ship
in the latter half of the sixteenth century was no pleasure. The ships
were small. The cabins were uncomfortable, and so low that nowhere one
could stand up straight. Cooking had to be done on a very primitive
stove, which could not always be used when the weather was bad. The
middle part of the deck was apt to be flooded most of the time, and the
flat-bottomed ships rolled and pitched horribly. Therefore, as soon as
a man had made a little competency as the master of a small craft he
was apt to look for some quiet occupation on shore. He had not learned
a regular trade which he could use on shore. Very often, therefore,
he opened a small hotel or an inn or just an ale-house where he could
tell yarns about whales and wild men and queer countries which he had
seen in the course of his peregrinations. And when the evening came
and the tired citizen wanted to smoke a comfortable pipe and discuss
the politics of the pope, the emperor, kings, dukes, bishops and their
Mightinesses, his own aldermen, he liked to do so under the guidance
of a man who knew what was what in the world and who could compare the
stadholder's victories over the Spaniards with those which King Wunga
Wunga of Mozambique had gained over his Hottentot neighbors, and who
knew that the wine of Oporto sold in Havana for less than the vinegar
from Dantsic and the salted fish from Archangel.

Therefore we are not surprised when in the year 1595 we find Oliver
van Noort described as the owner of the "Double White Keys," an
ale-house in the town of Rotterdam. He might have finished his days
there in peace and prosperity, but when Houtman returned from his
first voyage and the craze for the riches of the Indies, or at least
a share thereof, struck the town of Rotterdam, Van Noort, together
with everybody else who could borrow a few pennies, began to think
of new ways of reaching the marvelous island of Java, made of gold
and jewels and the even more valuable pepper and nutmeg. Van Noort
himself possessed some money and the rest he obtained from several of
his best customers. With this small sum he founded a trading company
of his own. He petitioned the estates general of the republic and the
estates of his own province of Holland to assist him in an expedition
toward the "Kingdom of Chili, the west coast of America, and if need
be, the islands of the Moluccas." To make this important enterprise
successful, the estates general were asked to give Van Noort and his
trading company freedom of export and import for at least six voyages,
and to present it with ten cannon and twelve thousand pounds of
gunpowder. He asked for much in the hope of obtaining at least part of
what he desired.

In the winter of 1597 his request was granted. He received four guns,
six thousand pounds of bullets, twelve thousand pounds of gunpowder,
and a special grant which relieved him of the customary export tax
for two voyages. This demand for cannon, gunpowder, and bullets gives
us the impression that the expedition expected to meet with serious
trouble. That was quite true. The southern part of America was the
private property of the Spaniards and the Portuguese. Anybody who
ventured into those regions flying the Dutch colors did so at his own
peril. Among his fellow-citizens Van Noort had the reputation of great
courage. Nobody knew any precise details of his early life, but it was
whispered, although never proved, that many years ago, long before
the days of Houtman, he had tried to reach the Indies all alone, but
that he had preferred the more lucrative profession of pirate to the
dangerous calling of the pioneer. Since, however, all his privateering
had been done at the expense of the Spaniards, nobody minded these
few alleged irregularities of his youthful days. And the merchants
who drank their pot of ale at his inn willingly provided him with the
money which he needed, bade him go ahead, and helped him when during
the winter of the year 1597 he was getting his two ships ready for the
voyage.

Now, it happened that at that time a number of merchants in Amsterdam
were working for the same purpose. They, too, wanted to sail to the
Moluccas by way of the Strait of Magellan. For the sake of greater
safety the two companies decided to travel together. In June of the
year 1597 their fleet, composed of four ships, was ready for the
voyage. Van Noort was to command the biggest vessel, the _Mauritius_,
while the commander of the Amsterdam company was to be vice-admiral
of the fleet on board the _Henrick Frederick_. The name of the
vice-admiral was Jacob Claesz. We know nothing about his early career,
but we know all the details of his tragic end. There were two other
small ships. There was a yacht called the _Eendracht_, and there was
a merchantman called the _Hope_. The tonnage of the ships is not
mentioned, but since there were only two hundred and forty-eight men on
the four ships, they must have been small even for that time.

In a general way our meager information about the invested capital,
the strange stories of the early lives of the commanders, and the very
rough character of the crew show that we have to do with one of the
many mushroom companies, an enterprise which was not based upon very
sound principles, but was of a purely speculative nature. During the
earliest days of Indian trading, however, all good merchants were in
such a hurry to make money to get to Java long before anybody else and
to reach home ahead of all competitors that there was no time for the
promoting of absolutely sound companies.

On the other hand, the men who commanded those first expeditions had
all been schooled in the noble art of self-reliance during the first
twenty terrible years of the war against Spain. They were brave, they
were resourceful, they succeeded where others, more careful, would have
failed.

On the twenty-eighth of June of the year 1597 Van Noort left Rotterdam
to await his companions from Amsterdam in the Downs, England. He waited
for several weeks, but the ships did not appear, so he went back to
Holland to find out what might have become of them. He found them lying
at anchor in one of the Zeeland streams. Evidently there had been a
misunderstanding as to the exact meeting-place of the two squadrons.
Together they then began the voyage for a second time. They had lost a
month and a half in waiting for each other, but at that date forty-five
days more or less did not matter. The trip was to take a couple of
years, anyway.

[Illustration]

First of all Van Noort went to Plymouth, where he had arranged to meet
a British sailor, commonly referred to as "Captain Melis," a man
who had been around the world with Captain Cavendish in 1588, and who
was familiar with the stormy regions around the southern part of the
American continent. In exchange for one Englishman, Van Noort lost
several good Dutchmen. Six of his sailors deserted, and could not be
found again.

The first part of the trip was along the coast of Africa, a road which
we know from other expeditions. Then came a story with which we are
only too familiar from previous accounts, for the much dreaded scurvy
appeared among the men. When the fleet passed the small island of
Principe in the Gulf of Guinea, it was decided to land there and try
to obtain fresh water and fresh food. Unfortunately, this island was
within the established domain of the Portuguese, and the Hollanders
must be careful. Early in the morning of the day on which they intended
to look for water they sent three boats ashore flying a white flag as
a sign of their peaceful intentions. The inhabitants of the island
came near the boats, also carrying a white flag. They informed the
Hollanders that if they would kindly visit the near-by villages the
natives would sell them everything they wanted, provided the Hollanders
paid cash. The men were ordered to stay near the boats, but four
officers went farther inland. They were asked to come first of all
to the Portuguese castle that was on the island. They went, but once
inside, they were suddenly attacked, and three of them were murdered.
The fourth one jumped out of the gate just in time to save his life. He
ran to the shore. This was a great loss to the Hollanders, for among
the men who had been killed was a brother of Admiral van Noort and
the English pilot upon whom they depended to guide them through the
difficult Strait of Magellan.

[Illustration]

To uphold the prestige of the Dutch Republic, Van Noort decided to
make an example. The next day after he landed with 120 of his men and
entrenched himself near the mouth of a river, so that he might fill his
water-tanks at leisure. Then, following this river, he went into the
interior of the country and burned down all the plantations and houses
he could find.

Well provided with fresh water, he thereupon crossed the Atlantic
Ocean and steered for the coast of Brazil. On the ninth of February he
dropped anchor in the harbor of Rio de Janeiro, which was a Portuguese
town. He carefully kept out of reach of the menacing guns of the
fortification. The reception in Brazil was little more cordial than it
had been on the other side of the ocean. The Portuguese sent a boat
to the Dutch ships to ask what they wanted. The answer was that the
Hollanders were peaceful travelers in need of fresh provisions. The
provisions were promised for the next day, but Van Noort, who had
heard similar promises before, was on his guard and for safety's sake
he kept a few Portuguese sailors on his ship as hostages.

On the morning of the next day he sent several of his men to the shore
to get the supplies. They landed near a mountain called the Sugarloaf.
Once more the Portuguese did not play the game fairly. They had posted
a number of their soldiers in a well-hidden ambush near the Sugarloaf.
These soldiers suddenly opened fire, wounded a large number of the
Dutch seamen and took two of them prisoners. A little later a shot
fired from one of the cannon of the castle killed a man on board the
_Eendracht_. The two Dutch prisoners were safely returned the next day
in exchange for the Portuguese hostages, but Van Noort was obliged to
leave the town without getting his provisions. Therefore a few days
later he landed on a small island near the coast where he found water
and fruit, and his men caught fish and wild birds and were happy. Again
the Portuguese interfered. They had ordered a number of Indians to
follow the Dutch fleet and do whatever damage they could. When a Dutch
boat with six men came rowing to the shore it was suddenly attacked by
a large number of Indians in canoes. Two of the six men were killed.
The other four were taken prisoner and were never seen again.

Of course adventures of this sort were not very encouraging. Some of
the officers suggested that, after all, it might be a better idea to
discontinue the voyage around the South American coast before it was
too late. They proposed that the ships should cross the Atlantic once
more, and should either go to St. Helena and wait there until the next
spring or should sail to India by way of the Cape of Good Hope; for it
was now the month of March, and in that part of the world our summer is
winter and our winter is summer. Wherefore they greatly feared that the
ships could not reach the Strait of Magellan before the winter storms
of July should set in. It was upon such occasions that Van Noort showed
his courage and his resolute spirit. His expedition was in bad shape.
One of the ships, the _Eendracht_, was leaking badly. Through the
bad water, the hard work, and the insufficient food a large number
of sailors had fallen ill, and every day some of them died. Wherever
the expedition tried to land on the coast of Brazil to get water and
supplies they found strong Portuguese detachments which drove them
away. Not for a moment, however, did Van Noort dream of giving up his
original plans.

[Illustration]

At last, after many weeks and by mere chance, he found a little island
called St. Clara where there were no Portuguese and no unfriendly
natives and where he could build a fort on shore to land the sick
men and cure them of their scurvy with fresh herbs. The expedition
remained on Santa Clara for three weeks. Gradually the strength of the
men returned, but they were still very weak, and it was now necessary
that they should get plenty of exercise in the open air. Therefore the
admiral ordered the kitchens to be built at a short distance from the
fort. Those men who walked out to the kitchen got more dinner than
those who demanded that their food be brought to them. Soon they all
walked, and they greatly benefited by this little scheme of their
commander. On June 28 they were able to go back to the ship, and then
they set sail for the south. Two men, however, who had caused trouble
since the beginning of the voyage and who seemed to be incorrigible
were left behind on the island to get home as best they could. They
never did. Even such a severe punishment was not a deterrent. A few
days later a sailor attacked and wounded one of the officers with a
knife. He was spiked to the mast with the same knife stuck through his
right hand. Then he was left standing until he had pulled the knife
out himself. It was a very rough crew, and only a system of discipline
enforced in this cruel fashion saved the officers from being murdered
and thrown overboard, so that the men might return home or become
pirates.

I have just mentioned the bad condition of the _Eendracht_. The ship
was so unseaworthy, and so great was the danger of drowning all on
board, that Van Noort at last decided to sacrifice the vessel. The
sailors were divided among the other ships, and the _Eendracht_ was
burned off the coast of Brazil.

Van Noort now reached the southern part of the American continent.

The Strait of Magellan had been discovered in 1530. But even in the
year 1598 it was little known. The few mariners who had passed through
had all told of the difficulty of navigating these narrows, with
their swift currents running from ocean to ocean and their terrible
storms, not to speak of the fog. Crossing from the Atlantic into the
Pacific was therefore something which was considered a very difficult
feat, and Van Noort did not dare to risk it with his ships in their
bad condition. He made for the little Island of Porto Deseado, which
Cavendish had discovered only a few years before. There was a sand-bank
near the coast, and upon this the ships were anchored at high tide.
Then, when the tide fell, the ships were left on the dry sand, and
the men had several hours in which to clean, tar, and calk them and
generally overhaul everything that needed repairing. On the shore of
the island a regular smithy was constructed. For three months everybody
worked hard to get the vessels in proper condition for the dangerous
voyage.

[Illustration]

While they were on the island the captain of the _Hope_ died. He was
buried with great solemnity, and the former captain of the _Eendracht_
was made commander of the _Hope_, which was rebaptized the _Eendracht_.
This word means harmony in Dutch, and the Good Lord knows that they
needed harmony during the many difficult months which were to follow.
On November 5, fourteen months after Van Noort left Holland, and when
the number of his men had been reduced to 148, he at last reached the
Strait of Magellan. The ship of the admiral entered the strait first,
and was followed by the new _Eendracht_. The _Henrick Frederick_,
however, commanded by Jacob Claesz, the vice-admiral, went her own way.
Van Noort signaled to this ship to keep close to the _Mauritius_, but
he never received an answer. Van Noort then ordered Claesz to come to
the admiral's vessel and give an account of himself. The only answer
which he received to that message was that Captain Claesz was just as
good as Admiral van Noort, and was going to do just exactly what he
pleased.

[Illustration]

This was a case of open rebellion, but Van Noort was so busy navigating
the difficult current that he could not stop to make an investigation.
Four times his ship was driven back by the strong wind. At the fifth
attempt the ship at last passed the first narrows and anchored well
inside the strait. The next day they passed a high mountain which they
called Cape Nassau, and where they saw many natives running toward the
shore. The natives in the southern part of the continent were not like
the ordinary Indian with whom the Hollanders were familiar. They were
very strong and brave and caused the Hollanders much difficulty. They
handled bows and arrows well, and their coats, made of skin, gave them
a general appearance of greater civilization than anybody had expected
to find in this distant part of the world. When the Dutch sailors rowed
to the shore of the strait, the Indians attacked them at once. It was
an unequal battle of arrows against bullets. The natives were driven
back into their mountains, where they defended themselves in front of
a large hollow rock. At last, however, all the men had been killed,
and then the sailors discovered that the grotto was filled with many
women and children. They did not harm these, but captured four small
boys and two little girls to take home to Holland. It seems to have
been an inveterate habit of early expeditions to distant countries to
take home some natives as curiosities. Beginning with Columbus, every
explorer had brought a couple of natives with him when he returned
home. The poor things usually died of small-pox or consumption or some
other civilized disease. In case they kept alive, they became a sort of
nondescript town-curiosity. What Van Noort intended to do with little
Patagonians in Rotterdam I do not know, but he had half a dozen on
board when on November 28 his two ships reached the spot where they
expected to find a strong Spanish castle.

[Illustration]

This fortress, so they knew, had been built after the attack of Drake
on the west coast of America. Drake's expedition had caused a panic
among the Spanish settlements of Chile and Peru. Orders had come from
Madrid to fortify the Strait of Magellan and close the narrows to
all foreign vessels. A castle had been built and a garrison had been
sent. Then, however, as happened often in Spain, the home government
had forgotten all about this isolated spot. No provisions had been
forwarded. The country itself, being barren and cold, did not raise
anything which a Spaniard could eat. After a few years the castle had
been deserted. When Cavendish sailed through the strait he had taken
the few remaining cannon out of the ruins. Van Noort did not even find
the ruins. Two whole months Van Noort spent in the strait. He took his
time in this part of the voyage. He dropped anchor in a bay which he
called Olivier's Bay, and there began to build some new life-boats.

After a few days the mutinous _Henrick Frederick_ also appeared in this
bay. Van Noort asked Claesz to come on board his ship and explain
his strange conduct. The vice-admiral refused to obey. He was taken
prisoner, and brought before a court-martial. We do not know the real
grounds for the strange conduct of Claesz. He might have known that
discipline in those days meant something brutally severe; and yet
he disobeyed his admiral's positive orders, and when he was brought
before the court-martial he could not or would not defend himself.
He was found guilty, and he was condemned to be put on shore. He was
given some bread and some wine, and when the fleet sailed away he was
left behind all alone. There was of course a chance that another ship
would pick him up. A few weeks before other Dutch ships had been in the
strait. But this chance was a very small one, and the sailors of Van
Noort knew it. They said a prayer for the soul of their former captain
who was condemned to die a miserable death far away from home. Yet
no one objected to this punishment. Navigation to the Indies in the
sixteenth century was as dangerous as war, and insubordination could
not be tolerated, not even when the man who refused to obey orders was
one of the original investors of the expedition and second in command.

On the twenty-ninth of February Van Noort reached the Pacific. The last
mile from the strait into the open sea took him four weeks. He now
sailed northward along the coast of South America. Two weeks later,
during a storm, the _Henrick Frederick_ disappeared. Such an occurrence
had been foreseen. Van Noort had told his captains to meet him near the
island of Santa Maria in case they should become separated from him
during the night or in a fog. Therefore he did not worry about the fate
of the ship, but sailed for the coast of Chile.

After a short visit and a meeting with some natives, who told him that
they hated the Spaniards and welcomed the Hollanders as their defenders
against the Spanish oppressors, Van Noort reached the island of Santa
Maria. In the distance he saw a ship. Of course he thought that this
must be his own lost vessel waiting for him; but when he came near, the
strange ship hoisted her sails and fled. It was a Spaniard called the
_Buen Jesus_. The Dutch admiral could not allow this ship to escape.
It might have warned the Spanish admiral in Lima, and then Van Noort
would have been obliged to fight the entire Spanish Pacific fleet.
The _Eendracht_ was ordered to catch the _Buen Jesus_. This she did,
for the Dutch ships could sail faster than the Spanish ones, though
they were smaller. Van Noort had done wisely. The Spaniard was one of
a large fleet detailed to watch the arrival of the Dutch vessels. The
year before another Dutch fleet had reached the Pacific. It suffered a
defeat at the hands of the Spaniards. This had served as a warning.
The Hollanders did not have the reputation of giving up an enterprise
when once they had started upon it, and the Spanish fleet was kept
cruising in the southern part of the Pacific to destroy whatever Dutch
ships might try to enter the private domains of Spain.

[Illustration]

From that moment Van Noort's voyage and his ships in the Pacific were
as safe as a man smoking a pipe in a powder-magazine. They might be
destroyed at any moment. As a best means of defense, the Hollanders
decided to make a great show of strength. They did not wait for
the assistance of the _Henrick Frederick_, but sailed at once to
Valparaiso, took several Spanish ships anchored in the roads, and
burned all of the others except one, which was added to the Dutch
fleet. From the captain of the _Buen Jesus_ Van Noort had heard that a
number of Hollanders were imprisoned in the castle of Valparaiso. He
sent ashore, asking for information, and he received letters from a
Dutchman, asking for help.

Van Noort, however, was too weak to attack the town, but he thought
that something might be done in this case through kindness. So he set
all the crew of the _Buen Jesus_ except the mate free, and him he
kept as an hostage, and sent the men to the Spanish commander with
his compliments. Thereupon he continued his voyage, but was careful
to stay away from Lima, where he knew there were three large Spanish
vessels waiting for him. Instead of that, he made for the Cape of San
Francisco, where he hoped to capture the Peruvian silver fleet. Quite
accidentally, however, he discovered that he was about to run into
another trap. Some Negro slaves who had been on board the _Buen Jesus_,
and who were now with Van Noort, spread the rumor that more than fifty
thousand pounds of gold which had been on the _Buen Jesus_ had been
thrown overboard just before the Hollanders captured the vessel. The
mate of the ship was still on the _Mauritius_, and he was asked if this
was true. He denied it, but he denied it in such a fashion that it was
hard to believe him. Therefore he was tortured. Not very much, but just
enough to make him desirous of telling the truth. He then told that
the gold had actually been on board the _Buen Jesus_; and since he
was once confessing, he volunteered further information, and now told
Van Noort that the captain of the _Buen Jesus_ and he had arranged to
warn the Spanish fleet to await the Hollanders near Cape San Francisco
and to attack them there while the Hollanders were watching the coast
of Peru for the Peruvian silver fleet. No further information was
wanted, and the Spaniard was released. He might have taken this episode
as a warning to be on his good behavior. Thus far he had been well
treated. He slept and took his meals in Van Noort's own cabin. But soon
afterward he tried to start a mutiny among the Negro slaves who had
served with him on the Spanish man-of-war. Without further trial he was
then thrown overboard.

The expedition against the silver fleet, however, had to be given
up. It would have been too dangerous. It became necessary to leave
the eastern part of the Pacific and to cross to the Indies as fast
as possible. The Spanish ship which had been captured in Valparaiso
proved to be a bad sailor and was burned. The two Dutch ships, with a
crew of about a hundred men, sailed alone for the Marianne Islands.
Some travelers have called these islands the Ladrones. That means
the islands of the Thieves, and the natives who came flocking out to
the ships showed that they deserved this designation. They were very
nimble-fingered, and they stole whatever they could find. They would
climb on board the ships of Van Noort, take some knives or merely a
piece of old iron, and before anybody could prevent them they had dived
overboard and had disappeared under water. All day long their little
canoes swarmed around the Dutch ships. They offered many things for
sale, but they were very dishonest in trade, and the rice they sold was
full of stones, and the bottoms of their rice baskets were filled with
cocoanuts. Two days were spent getting fresh water and buying food, and
then Van Noort sailed for the Philippine Islands. On the fourteenth of
October of the year 1600 he landed on the eastern coast of Luzon. By
this time the Dutch ships were in the heart of the Spanish colonies,
and it was necessary to be very careful not to be detected as
Hollanders. The natives on shore, who had seen them in the distance,
warned the Spanish authorities, and early in the morning a sloop rowed
by natives brought a Spanish officer.

[Illustration]

Van Noort arranged a fine little comedy for his benefit. He hoisted the
Spanish flag and he dressed a number of his men in cowls, so that they
would look like monks. These peeped over the bulwarks when the Spaniard
came near, mumbling their prayers with great devotion.

Van Noort himself, with the courtesy of the professional innkeeper,
received his guest, and in fluent French told him that his ship was
French and that he was trading in this part of the Indies with the
special permission of his Majesty the Spanish king. He regretted to
inform his visitor that his first mate had just died and that he did
not know exactly in which part of the Indies his ship had landed.
Furthermore he told the Spaniard that he was sadly in need of
provisions and this excellent boarding officer was completely taken
in by the comedy and at once gave Van Noort rice and a number of live
pigs. The next day a higher officer made his appearance. Again that
story of being a French ship was told, and, what is more, was believed.
Van Noort was allowed to buy what he wanted and to drop anchor on the
coast. To expedite his work, he sent one of his sailors who spoke
Spanish fluently to the shore. This man reported that the Spaniards
never even considered the possibility of an attack by Dutch ships so
far away from home and so well protected by their fleet in the Pacific.
Everything seemed safe.

But at last the Spaniards, who had heard a lot about the wonderful
commission given to this strange captain by the King of France and
the King of Spain, but who had never seen it, became curious. Quite
suddenly they sent a captain accompanied by a learned priest who could
verify the documents. It was a difficult case for the Dutch admiral.
His official letters were all signed by the man with whom Spain was
in open warfare, Prince Maurice of Nassau. When this name was found
at the bottom of Van Noort's documents, his little comedy was over.
Nobody thereafter was allowed to leave the ship, and the natives were
forbidden to trade with the Hollander. Van Noort, however, had obtained
the supplies he needed. He had an abundance of fresh provisions, and
two natives had been hired to act as pilot in the straits between the
different Philippine Islands.

[Illustration]

The next few weeks Van Noort actually spent among those islands, and
with his two ships terribly battered after a voyage of more than two
years of travel he spread terror among the Spaniards. Many ships were
taken, and landing parties destroyed villages and houses. Finally
he even dared to sail into the Bay of Manila. Under the guns of the
Spanish fleet he set fire to a number of native ships, and then spent
several days in front of the harbor taking the cargo out of the ships
which came to the Spanish capital to pay tribute. As a last insult, he
sent a message to the Spanish governor to tell him that he intended to
visit his capital shortly, and then got ready to depart for further
conquest. He had waited just a few hours too long and he had been
just a trifle too brave, for before he could get ready for battle his
ships were attacked by two large Spanish men-of-war. The _Mauritius_
was captured. That is to say, the Spaniards drove all the Hollanders
from her deck and jumped on board. But the crew fought so bravely
from below with guns and spears and small cannon that the Spaniards
were driven back to their own ship. It was a desperate fight. If the
Hollanders had been taken prisoner, they would have been hanged without
trial. Van Noort encouraged his men, and told them that he would blow
up the ship before he would surrender. Even those who were wounded
fought like angry cats. At last a lucky shot from the _Mauritius_ hit
the largest Spaniard beneath the water-line. It was the ship of the
admiral of Manila, and at once began to sink. There was no hope for
any one on board her. In the distance Van Noort could see that the
_Eendracht_, which had only twenty-five men, had just been taken by
the other Spanish ship. With his own wounded crew he could not go to
her assistance. To save his own vessel, he was obliged to escape as
fast as possible. He hoisted his sails as well as he could with the few
sailors who had been left unharmed. Of fifty-odd men five were dead and
twenty-six were badly wounded. Right through the quiet sea, strewn with
pieces of wreckage and scores of men clinging to masts and boxes and
tables, the _Mauritius_ made her way. With cannon and guns and spears
the survivors on the _Mauritius_ killed as many Spaniards as possible.
The others were left to drown. Then the ship was cleaned, the dead
Spaniards were thrown overboard, and piloted by two Chinese traders who
were picked up during the voyage, Van Noort safely reached the coast
of Borneo. Here the natives almost succeeded in killing the rest of
his men. In the middle of the night they tried to cut the cables of
the last remaining anchor. The _Mauritius_ would have been driven on
shore, and the natives could have plundered her at leisure; but their
plan was discovered by the Hollanders. A second attempt to hide eighty
well-armed men in a large canoe which was pretending to bring a gift of
several oxen came to nothing when the natives saw that Van Noort's men
made ready to fire their cannon.

 [Illustration: La bataille d'dutre nous et contpe sieux de Manille
 faicte le 14 Decembre an^o 1600]

Another year had now gone by. It was January of 1601, and Van Noort's
condition was still very dangerous. There were no supplies on board.
The Chinese pilots did not know the coast of Borneo. There were many
islands and many straits, and Van Noort had lost all idea as to
his exact position. When he met a Chinese vessel on the way to India
he forced it to heave to and stole the mate, who was an experienced
sailor. Then the wind suddenly refused to blow from the right
direction, and it was many weeks before the _Mauritius_ reached the
harbor of Cheribon, in the central part of Java, many miles away from
Bantam.

[Illustration]

Van Noort called upon his few remaining officers to decide what they
ought to do. If his expedition were to be a financial success, he must
find some place where he could buy spices. Bantam was near by, but
according to the stories of Houtman and his expedition, the people
in Bantam were very unfriendly. With his twenty-three men the Dutch
commander did not dare to risk another battle. It is true that since
the visit of Houtman his successor Van Neck had established very good
relations with the sultan; but Van Noort had been away from home for
over three years, and knew nothing of Van Neck's voyage.

He might have guessed that there were Hollanders in Bantam when he
found that there were no spices to be had in any of the other Javanese
ports. Wherever he went he heard the same story. All the spices were
now being sent to Bantam, where the Hollanders paid a very high price
for them. But Van Noort distrusted this report. It might be another
plot of the Portuguese to catch him, and to keep out of harm's way, he
sailed through the straits of Bali, avoided the north coast of Java and
went to the Cape of Good Hope.

The home trip was the most successful part of the entire voyage. It is
true that, without good instruments, the Dutch ships once more lost
their bearings. They thought that they were two hundred miles away
from the coast of Africa when they had already passed the cape. On
the twenty-sixth of May Van Noort landed at St. Helena. Three weeks
later he met a large fleet. The ships flew the Dutch flag. They were
part of a squadron commanded by Jacob van Heemskerk, outward bound for
their second voyage to India. From them the Hollanders got their first
news from home; how Van Neck's expedition had been a great success,
and how Bantam, which had been carefully avoided, was now a Dutch
settlement. Van Noort told them of his fight with the Spanish fleet
in different parts of the Pacific, and in turn he was informed of the
great victory which Prince Maurice had just won over the Spaniards near
Nieuwpoort which had assured the Dutch Republic its final liberty. Then
both fleets continued their voyage. On the twenty-eighth of August Van
Noort and forty-four out of the two hundred and forty-eight who had
sailed away with him three years before came back to Rotterdam.

 [Illustration: La baye de Isle et Cite de Borneo. Bapt. a Deutechum
 fec.]

The next year a few other men who had belonged to the expedition
reached Holland. They had served on the _Henrick Frederick_ which had
disappeared just after Van Noort had left the Strait of Magellan. They
had waited for their commander near the island of Santa Maria, but the
arrival of the Spanish man-of-war had spoiled all idea of meeting each
other on that spot. The _Henrick Frederick_ had crossed the Pacific
alone. Many of her men had died, and the others were so weak that when
they reached the Moluccas they could no longer handle the ship. They
had sold it to the Sultan of Ternate for some bags of nutmeg, and with
a small sloop of their own construction they had reached Bantam in
April of the year 1602. There they had found a part of the same fleet
of Heemskerk which Van Noort had met on the coast of Africa. On one
of the ships many sailors had just died. Their place had been offered
to the men of the old _Henrick Frederick_. In the winter of 1602 they
returned to their home city.

That ended one of the most famous of the expeditions which tried to
establish for the Hollanders a new route to the Indies through the
Strait of Magellan. But while Van Noort was in the Pacific the route
of the cape had proved to be such a great and easy success that
further attempts to reach Java and the Moluccas by way of the Strait
of Magellan were hereafter given up. The Pacific trading companies
were changed into ordinary Indian companies which sent all their ships
around the cape. As for Van Noort, who was the first Hollander to sail
around the world, he entered the naval service of the republic, and had
a chance to practise his very marked ability as a leader of men in more
dangerous circumstances. As an Indian trader he would not have been a
great success. The old irresponsible buccaneering days of that trade
were gone forever. The difficult art of founding a commercial empire by
persuasion rather than by force was put into the hands of men who were
not only brave, but also tactful.




CHAPTER VII

THE ATTACK UPON THE WEST COAST OF AMERICA


This is the story of another expedition which tried to get possession
of the Indian route by way of the Strait of Magellan. It was a sad
business.

[Illustration]

Oliver Van Noort, although he met with many difficulties, managed
to bring one ship home and added greatly to the fame of the Dutch
navigators. But the second expedition, equipped by two of the richest
men of Rotterdam and sent out under the best of auspices, proved to be
a total failure. The capital of half a million guilders which had been
invested was an absolute loss. Most of the participants in the voyage
died. The ships were lost. Perhaps everything had been prepared just a
trifle too carefully. Van Noort, with his little ships, knew that he
had to depend upon his own energy and resourcefulness; but the captains
of the five ships which left Rotterdam on the twenty-seventh of July,
1598, with almost five hundred men were under the impression that half
of the work had been done at home by the owners. Perhaps, too, there is
such a thing as luck in navigating the high seas. One fleet sails for
the Indies and has good weather all the way across the ocean. When the
wind blows hard it blows from the right direction. The next squadron
which leaves two weeks later meets with storms and suffers from one
unfortunate accident after the other; everybody gets sick, and when the
sailors look for relief on land they find nothing but a barren desert.
And so it goes. It is not for us to complain, but to recite faithfully
the sad adventures of the good ships the _Hoop_, the _Liefde_, the
_Geloof_, the _Trouwe_, and the _Blyde Boodschap_, all of which tried
very hard to accomplish what Van Noort had been allowed to do with much
less trouble.

The ships, as we said, left Rotterdam in July, and after two months
they reached the Cape Verde Islands. There they found a couple of
ships from Hamburg, for the Germans at the early period of exploring
and discoveries were very active sailors. A few years later, however,
the Thirty Years' War was to destroy their seafaring enterprises for
centuries at least.

Near these islands the Hollanders had their first encounter with the
Portuguese. The stories of such meetings between the early Dutch
navigators and the Portuguese owners of African and Asiatic islands
always read the same way. The Hollanders ask for leave to go on
shore to get fresh water and to buy provisions. This leave is never
granted. Then the two parties fight each other. In most cases the
Hollanders are victorious, though they still have too much respect for
the traditional power of the Portuguese to risk a definite attack upon
their strongholds. Very slowly and only after many years of experiment
do they venture to drive the Portuguese out of their colonies and take
possession of this large, but badly managed, empire.

When our five Dutch ships reached the island of San Thome they sent a
messenger to the Portuguese commander and asked him, please, to give
them some fresh water. The Portuguese told the Hollanders to wait. But
they could not wait, for the water on board the ships had all been used
up. Therefore they landed with one hundred and fifty men and charged
the hill upon which the Portuguese had built a fortress. The garrison
was forced to surrender. Before any more fighting took place the
Portuguese offered to treat the Hollanders as welcome guests if they
would sail to the next harbor of San Iago, where there was an abundance
of stores and where general provisions were for sale at reasonable
prices. This proposal was accepted. The sailors went back to their
ships and made for San Iago. The wind, however, was not favorable, and
they did not reach their destination until the hour appointed to meet
the Portuguese officials had passed. When they arrived near the shore
they noticed that the soldiers on land were very active and had placed
a number of cannon in an ambush from which they could destroy the Dutch
ships as soon as they should have dropped anchor. This, of course, was
a breach of good faith. So back they went to their first landing-place.
They landed, filled all their water-tanks, took the corn stored in a
small storehouse, killed several Portuguese, caught a large number of
turtles for the sick people on board, and hoisted sail to cross the
Atlantic Ocean.

And then the bad luck which was to follow this expedition began. The
admiral of the fleet, Jacques Mahu, died suddenly of a fever and was
buried at sea. Two weeks later so many men were desperately ill with
the same fever that the ships were obliged to return upon their own
track and establish a hospital upon one of the islands off the coast
of Guinea. All this time the wind blew from the wrong direction. When
at last they saw land, they found that they were near the coast of
Lower Guinea. They sent a boat to the shore to discover some native
tribe which owned cattle. But the natives, who feared all white men as
possible slave-dealers, ran into the bushes and carefully took their
possessions with them. Fortunately, after a few days another Dutch
ship appeared upon the horizon, and the first mate of this vessel, a
Frenchman by birth, knew the language of the negroes. Through him a
message was sent to the king of a small tribe, and when it had been
proved that the Hollanders were not slave-dealers, but honest merchants
on their way to the Indies and willing to pay money for whatever they
bought, their newly elected commander, Sebalt de Weert was received in
state and invited to dine with his Majesty.

[Illustration]

This dinner, much to the regret of the hungry guests, was a poor
affair. The negro chieftain tried to be very civil to his guests. In
their honor he had powdered himself white with the ashes of a wood
fire, but the food was neither abundant nor very good. The Hollanders
decided to invite his Majesty to one of their own dinners as a good
example and a hint. From among the few supplies which were left on
board they arranged so excellent a dinner that his royal Highness ate
everything on the table and then fell fast asleep in his chair. But
when the next day the Hollanders tried to buy the fresh provisions
which they expected to get, they found that the domains of the king
produced nothing but one single goat, a lean goat at that, and four
puny chickens.

The coast of Guinea, sometimes called the "dry Gallows," gets its
agreeable reputation from the fact that the malarial fevers of this
swampy region usually kill all the white people who venture to settle
there. The new commander of the expedition caught this malaria, and
was sick in his bed for over two months. Sixteen of his sailors died,
and finally the expedition was obliged to flee to the healthy islands,
which of course belonged to the Portuguese. Early in December they
sailed toward Annabon. Once again the Portuguese refused them both
water and food. A troop of men were landed to take by force what they
could not obtain through an appeal to Christian charity. The Portuguese
did not await this attack, but surrendered their fortress and fled
toward the mountains. From there they arranged sniping expeditions
which killed many Hollanders. As a punishment, Admiral de Weert burned
the white settlement and the church. He took all the provisions which
were stored in the little town, and on the second of January of the
year 1599 he tried once more to cross the Atlantic Ocean.

This time the wind was favorable. Soon the ships had passed out of the
hot equatorial regions. The sailors who had suffered from scurvy and
malaria began to feel better in the colder climate of the Argentinian
coast. They recovered so fast and they had such a great appetite after
their long-enforced fast that many of them threatened to die from
over-feeding. And one poor fellow who was so hungry that he stole bread
at night from the ship's pantry was publicly hanged to stop further
theft of the meager supplies. When the ships were near the coast of
South America things went wrong once more. First of all the sailors
were frightened by the sudden appearance of what they supposed to be
blood upon the surface of the ocean. As far as the eye could reach,
the water was of a dark-red color. This phenomenon, however, proved
to be caused by billions of little plants. They made the water look
quite horrible, but they were entirely harmless. A few days later one
of the men, an Englishman, while at dinner suddenly uttered a dreadful
scream and fell backward, dead. The next day another one of the sailors
suddenly became insane and tried to scratch and bite everybody who
came near him. After three days his condition improved somewhat, but
he never recovered his reason. When he was put to bed at night he
would not allow himself to be covered up. One very cold night both his
feet were frozen and had to be amputated. That was the end of the poor
fellow. He did not survive the operation.

It was a sad expedition which at last reached the Strait of Magellan
on the sixth of April of the year 1599. Happily the weather near the
strait was fine. There was plenty of fresh water on the shore. The men
killed hundreds of birds, caught geese and ducks, and found a large
supply of oysters. But when finally the day came on which they tried
to enter the strait, the wind suddenly veered around, and during four
months the ships were forced to stay in their little harbor. They had
enough to eat and they had found wood to keep warm, but much valuable
time was lost, and when the winter at last came upon them with sudden
violence they were entirely unprepared for it. The reports of the
expeditions of Magellan and Drake and Cavendish had shown that an
expedition around the world was apt to suffer from too much heat, but
rarely from too much cold. Except for the few miles of the Strait of
Magellan, the ships sailed in tropical or semi-tropical regions all
the time. Therefore the Dutch ships had not brought any heavy clothes
or furs, which would have taken up a lot of room, and the food which
had been put up for them in Holland had been prepared with the idea
of supporting men who did their work under a blazing sun. When they
were obliged to live for a long time in a raw, cold climate and work
hard, hunting and fishing and gathering wood amid snow and icy winds,
the sailors did not get sufficient nourishment. From sheer misery and
exposure one hundred and twenty men died within less than four months.
Among them was the captain of the _Trouwe_. He was the second officer
to perish before his ship had reached the Pacific Ocean.

[Illustration]

But illness was not the only enemy of this expedition. The natives of
the south coast joined the terrible climate in its attack upon the
Hollanders. They murdered Dutch sailors when these had gone on shore
to look for fire-wood or to examine their traps. They killed several
men and they wounded more. Being wounded was almost as bad as being
killed outright, for the spears of the natives were made with nasty
barbs which caused very bad wounds. When they once had penetrated into
a man's arm or hand, the only way to get them out successfully was by
pushing them through until they came out again at the other side, or
cut away all the flesh, in both cases a very painful operation.

At last, on the twentieth of August, the wind turned, and the ships
were able to enter the strait. The joy of the men did not last very
long. The next day there was no wind at all, and once more the fleet
anchored. To keep his few remaining men busy, the commander arranged an
expedition on shore. It was the first time that a Dutch fleet had been
in this part of the world, and the event must be properly celebrated.
A high pole was planted in a conspicuous spot on shore, and the
adventures of the expedition and the names of the leaders were carved
on the pole. Near this pole a small cemetery was made where two sailors
who had died the night before were buried. In the evening all went
back to their ships. When they returned the next morning, they found
that the natives had hacked the monument to pieces and the corpses of
the dead Hollanders had been dug out of the earth and had been cut
into little bits and were spread all over the shore. This humiliating
experience was the last one which they suffered in the strait. The wind
at last turned to their advantage and on the third of September the
ships reached the Pacific Ocean.

[Illustration]

The good weather lasted just seven days. A week later, in the night
of the tenth of September, a severe storm attacked the little fleet,
and the next morning the ships had lost sight of one another. They
came together after a short search, but during the next night there
was another gale, and in the morning three of the five ships had
disappeared. Only the _Trouwe_ and the _Geloof_ were apparently saved.
During three weeks these two ships floated aimlessly about, driven
hither and thither upon the angry waves of the Pacific Ocean. They had
few supplies left, and they could not repair the damage that was done
to their masts because both ships had sent their carpenters to one
of the other vessels which had been in need of a general overhauling
and which was now lost. A month went by, and then they discovered
that they had been driven back into the strait. The admiral discussed
the situation with his chief officers. Did they advise going back
to Holland without having accomplished anything, or would they keep
on? The sailors all wanted to return to Holland. They did not have
any faith left in the results of this unhappy voyage. Many of them
were ill. Others pretended that they were too weak to work. Others
murmured about a lack of provisions. There was ground for this talk.
The supply-room was getting emptier and emptier in a very mysterious
way. At last the admiral decided to investigate this strange case. He
discovered that an unknown member of the crew possessed a key to the
bread-boxes and stuffed himself every night while his comrades were
kept on short rations. It was a gross breach of discipline. Apparently
the expedition was going from bad to worse. On the afternoon of the
tenth of December Admiral de Weert paid a call to the _Trouwe_ to talk
over the situation. The next morning the _Trouwe_ had disappeared.
De Weert never saw her again. He was all alone, and his safe return
depended upon his own unaided efforts. His first duty was to get enough
food. On a certain Sunday afternoon the few men of his ship who could
still walk were on shore looking for things to eat when they had an
encounter with a large number of natives who had just arrived in three
canoes. The natives fled, and hid themselves among the cliffs. One
woman and two small babies could not get away and were brought back to
the ship. The woman was kept a prisoner for forty-eight hours while the
Hollanders studied the habits and customs of the wild people of Tierra
del Fuego. The subject of their study refused to eat cooked food, but
dead birds which were thrown to her she ate as if she had been a wild
animal. The children did the same thing, tearing at the feathers with
their sharp teeth. After two days the mother and one of the children
were sent back to the shore with a number of presents. The other
child was kept on board and was taken back to Holland, where it died
immediately after arrival. On the sixteenth of December a last attempt
was made to find the _Trouwe_. A blank cartridge was fired, and a few
minutes later a distant answer was heard. Soon a ship came sailing
around a nearby cape. It was not the _Trouwe_, but the ship of Oliver
van Noort, who at the head of his expedition had just entered upon the
last stretch of his voyage through the strait. Van Noort had a story to
tell of a fairly successful voyage, plenty to eat, and little illness.
The hungry men of De Weert looked with envy at the happy faces of Van
Noort's sailors. The latter had just caught several thousand penguins
on a little island not far away. The starving crew of the _Geloof_
asked that they be allowed to sail to this island and catch whatever
Van Noort had left alive. De Weert, however, refused this request.
Here was his last chance to get to the Indies in the company of the
squadron of Van Noort, and he meant to take it. The next morning he
joined the new ships on their westward course. But his sailors, weak
and miserable after more than a year of illness, could not obey their
captain's commands as fast as those who were on the other ships. Soon
the _Geloof_ was left behind. The next morning, when Van Noort entered
the Pacific, De Weert was helplessly blown back into the strait. It
seemed impossible to do more than he had tried to accomplish against
such great odds. He called all his remaining sailors together to hear
what they wanted him to do. They all had just one wish, to get home
as fast as possible by way of Brazil and Africa. The Pacific, so they
argued, offered nothing but disappointment. De Weert promised to give
his final decision on the next day, which was the first of January of
the year 1600. When the morning came, he found himself once more in
the company of other ships. Van Noort had reached the Pacific, but the
Western storms had been too much for his strong ships. For the second
time the Hollanders were all united in a cold little harbor inside the
Strait of Magellan.

[Illustration]

Van Noort now paid a personal visit to De Weert and asked what he could
do to help him. De Weert was much obliged for this offer, and asked for
bread enough to last him another four months. Unfortunately Van Noort
could not do this. He had still a very long voyage before him, and did
not dare to deprive his own men of their supplies. He advised De Weert
to go to the island of the penguins and to fill his storeroom with the
dried meat of these birds. Meanwhile, much to his regret, he must leave
De Weert as soon as possible, for he was in a hurry.

[Illustration]

The next day they said farewell to one another for the last time. De
Weert took the precautions to leave instructions for the captain of
the lost _Trouwe_. He wrote a letter which was placed inside a bottle,
and this bottle was buried at the foot of a high tree. On the tree
itself a board was hammered, and on this board a message was painted
telling in Dutch where to look for an important document at the foot
of the tree. Then the ship sailed to the penguin island, and the
thirty men who could do any work at all hunted the fat and lazy birds
until they had killed several thousand. It was easy work. The penguins
obligingly waited on their nests until they were killed. But the trip
to the island almost destroyed the entire expedition. There was only
one boat left, and in this boat the men who were not sick had rowed to
the shore. They had been careless in fastening her, and a sudden squall
caught her and threw her on the rocks. She was badly damaged and could
not be used without being repaired, but the men on shore had no tools
with which to do any repairing, while those on the ship were so ill
that they could not swim to the shore with the necessary hammers and
saws. Two entire days were used to get that boat into order with the
help of one ax and some pocket-knives, and during those two days the
men lived out in the open on the cold shore and lived on raw penguin
meat.

The island, among other things, contained material evidences of Van
Noort's presence. A dead native, with his hands tied behind his
back, was found stretched out upon the sand. In a little hollow in
the rocks they discovered a woman who had been wounded by a gunshot.
They took good care of the woman, bandaged her wounds, and gave her
a pocket-knife. To show her gratitude, she told De Weert of another
island where there were even more penguins. The next week was spent
on this island, and now the men had plenty of food. But the ship was
without a single anchor and had only one leaking lifeboat. With the
certainty that he could not land anywhere unless boats were sent for
him from shore De Weert decided to return to the coast of Guinea and
try to reach home. On the eighteenth of January the _Geloof_ went
back upon her track. Two months later the vessel reached the coast
of Guinea. This trip back was not very eventful except for one small
incident. One of the sailors who was a drunkard had broken into
the storeroom and had stolen a lot of rice and several bottles of
wine. Theft was one of the things which was punished most severely.
Therefore, the man had been condemned to death and was to be hanged.
But while he was sitting in the rigging and waiting for somebody to
push him into eternity the other members of the crew felt sorry for him
and asked their captain to spare his life. At first he refused, but
finally he agreed to show clemency if the men would never bother him
again with a similar request. The prisoner was allowed to come down
from his high perch, and to show his gratitude he broke again into the
storeroom that same night. He was a very bad example. As such he was
hanged from the yardarm of the highest mast, and his body was dropped
into the sea.

The crew, however, were so thoroughly demoralized by this time that
even such drastic measures did no good. They continued to pillage the
storeroom, and when at last four of them had been detected and had been
found guilty, their comrades were so weak that nobody could be found to
hang the prisoners properly and they had to be taken home.

[Illustration]

In July of the year 1600 the _Geloof_ reached the English Channel, and
on the thirteenth of that month she entered the mouth of the Maas.
There, within sight of home, one more sailor died. He was number
sixty-nine. Only thirty-six men came back to Rotterdam. They were
ill and had a story to tell of constant hardships and of terrible
disappointments. The great expedition of the two courageous merchants
and all their investments were a complete loss. None of the other ships
ever came back to Holland. But year after year stragglers from the
other four ships reached home and told of the fate of the other three
hundred sailors who had taken part in the unfortunate voyage. Some of
these reports have come down to us, and we are able to give a short
account of the adventures of each ship after that day early in the year
1600 when the Pacific storms had separated them from one another.

First of all there was the _Trouwe_, which had remained faithful to
De Weert after the other three vessels had disappeared. The wind had
blown the _Trouwe_ out of the strait into the Pacific Ocean. For many
weeks her captain had lost all track of his whereabouts. Through
sheer luck he had at last reached a coast which he supposed to be the
continent of South America and after a search of a few days he had
found some natives who were friendly. The natives told the Hollanders
that this was not the American continent, but an island called Chiloe,
situated a few miles off the Chilean coast. The Dutch ships had been
made welcome. They were invited to stay in the harbor as long as they
wished. Meanwhile the natives told their captain about a plan of their
own which undoubtedly would please him. It seemed that the inhabitants
of Chiloe had good reason to hate the Spaniards, who were mighty on
the near-by continent and who recently had built a strong fort on the
island, from which they exercised their tyrannical rule over all the
natives and made them pay very heavy tribute. Perhaps, so the natives
argued, the Hollanders could be induced to give their assistance in a
campaign against the Spaniard. De Cordes, who commanded the _Trouwe_,
was a Catholic, but he was quite ready to offer his services in so good
a cause and was delighted to start a little private war of his own
upon the Spaniards. He made ready to sail for that part of the coast
where, according to his informants, the Spaniard had fortified himself.
Meanwhile the natives were to proceed on shore toward the same Spanish
fortress. An attack was to follow simultaneously from the land and the
sea. On the way to the fortress all Spanish houses and plantations,
storerooms and churches, were burned down and at last the fortress
itself was reached. The commander of the fortress, however, had heard
of the approach of this handful of Hollanders, and he sent them an
insulting message telling them that he needed a new stable boy, anyway,
and would bestow this high office upon the Dutch captain as soon as he
could have the necessary arrangements made. But when the Dutch captain
actually appeared upon the scene with a well-armed vessel and a band of
native auxiliaries and informed the Spaniard that the new stable boy
had come to take possession of his domain, the commander changed his
mind and offered the Hollanders whatever they wished if they would only
leave him alone. De Cordes, however, attacked the fort at once. He took
it, and the garrison was locked up in the church as prisoners. Then the
Chilean natives in their rage attacked the church and killed several of
the Spaniards. This was not what De Cordes wanted to be done. He did
not mind if a Hollander killed a Spaniard, but it did not look well for
one white man to allow a native to kill another while he himself stood
by. Therefore he returned their arms to the Spaniards and together they
then drove the natives away. When the natives, however, told the Dutch
sailors that the fort contained hidden treasures of which the Spaniards
had made no mention, the former allies attacked each other for the
second time, and the Spanish prisoners were sent on board the Dutch
ship. The story which we possess of this episode of the voyage is not
very clear. It was written many years later by one of the few sailors
who came back to Holland. His account of these adventures was so badly
printed and the spelling of the original pamphlet was so extraordinary
that a second scribe was later hired to turn the booklet into more or
less readable Dutch. The present translation has been made from this
second version. Everything is a bit mixed, and it is not easy to find
out what really happened. A common and ignorant sailor of the year 1600
was not very different from the same sort of fellow who at present is
fighting in the European war. They both remember events in chunks, so
to speak. They have very vivid impressions of a few occurrences, but
they have forgotten other things of more importance because at the
time these did not strike their unobservant brain as being of any
special interest. But we have no other account of the adventures of the
_Trouwe_. We must use this information such as it is.

[Illustration]

The booty found in this small settlement had not been of great value.
The expedition felt inclined to move toward a richer port. They did
not have food enough for their prisoners, and fourteen of the nineteen
Spaniards who were locked up in the hold were thrown overboard. This
sounds very cruel, but it was the custom of the time that these two
nations rarely gave each other quarter. Whosoever was made a prisoner
was killed. The Spaniards started this practice in the middle of the
sixteenth century because the Hollanders as heretics deserved no better
fate. The Hollanders reciprocated. On this distant island of the
Pacific both parties obeyed the unwritten law. The Hollanders drowned
their prisoners. When Spanish reinforcements reached Chiloe and retook
the fort, they killed the Dutch garrison, for such was the custom of
the time.

The _Trouwe_ after this famous exploit was in a difficult position, all
alone in the heart of the Pacific, with enemies on every side and a bad
conscience. The idea of attacking some other Spanish harbor in Chile
and Peru was given up as too dangerous. Near the harbor of Truxillo a
Spanish ship loaded with grain and wine was captured, and provided with
new supplies, De Cordes decided to risk the trip across the Pacific. On
the third of January, 1601, he reached Ternate in the Indies, where Van
Noort had been the year before, and where they found a Dutch settlement
commanded by that same Van der Does whose account of Houtman's first
trip to India we have given in the fourth chapter of this little book.
Van der Does warned De Cordes not to visit the next island of Tidore.
There were only twenty-four Hollanders left on board the _Trouwe_.
It was too dangerous to visit an unfriendly Portuguese colony with a
damaged ship and so small a crew. But De Cordes, who seems to have
been a reckless sort of person, went to Tidore all the same. Much to
his surprise he was very cordially received by the commander of the
Portuguese garrison and the governor of the town. They both assured him
that he might trade in their colony as much as he wished. If, however,
he would let them know what he wished to buy, they would give orders
that provisions and a cargo of spice should be got ready for their
distinguished visitors. They invited him to come on shore the next
morning. They wanted to make him a present of an ox for the benefit
of his hungry crew and entertain him personally, and, then after a
few more days further arrangements for the purpose of a mutually
profitable trade might be made. The next morning the Dutch captain
and six men went ashore to get their ox. The ship itself was left in
the care of the first mate. Soon a Portuguese boat rowed out to the
_Trouwe_ and asked the mate to come on shore, too, and have breakfast
with his Portuguese colleagues. The mate was suspicious and refused the
invitation. He suggested that the Portuguese officer come on board the
_Trouwe_ and breakfast with him. But the officer said that he was too
heavy a man to climb on board so high a ship, and he did not care to
take this exercise so early in the morning. So the mate left the ship,
together with the ship's carpenter, to see what a Portuguese kitchen
served for breakfast. The moment the two men landed a loud outcry was
heard from the _Trouwe_. The mate at once jumped into the sea and
looked for his comrade. The carpenter was dead and his head, hacked
from his body, was used as a football by the Portuguese. The mate swam
out to the ship, but when he reached it he found that the Portuguese
had jumped on board the moment he had left for his breakfast party.
He swam back to the shore, was made a prisoner, and was locked up in
the fortress. With six other men he escaped the general murder which
had taken place as soon as he landed. De Cordes himself had been killed
with a dagger. The six men who had accompanied him on shore had heard
the noise of the attack upon the _Trouwe_ and had rowed away from shore
in a boat, trying to get back to their vessel. But the _Trouwe_ was
already in the hands of the Portuguese, and since the Hollanders had
no arms, they surrendered after the Portuguese had given their oath
not to hurt them and to spare their lives. They were taken on board
a Portuguese ship. As soon as they were on deck they had been placed
in a row, and a soldier had been ordered to take his sword and hack
their heads off. He had killed four men when the other two managed to
jump overboard. One of these was drowned. The other was fished out of
the water and was sent to the fortress with the mate and five sailors
who had put up such a desperate fight on board the _Trouwe_ that the
Portuguese had promised to treat them with clemency if only they would
surrender.

The six men were afterward taken to Goa. Gradually one after the other
they had managed to escape and find their way back to Holland. Two of
them returned to Rotterdam in the autumn of 1603. Another one we find
mentioned in later years as commander of an Indian trader. As for the
_Trouwe_, Van Neck on his second voyage to India found the vessel being
used by the Portuguese as a man-of-war.

Of the other ships, the _Blyde Boodschap_ also had a very sad career
and met with extraordinary adventures. This small vessel was commanded
by a certain Dirck Gerritsz, a native of Enkhuizen, a fellow-citizen
of Linschoten. As a matter of fact the two men had heard of each
other many years before. While Linschoten was in Goa he was told of a
Hollander who was a native of his own city and who had traveled not
only in the Indies, but who also had visited Japan and China. We know
very little of the man. Some information of his travels in Asia have
been printed in a general hand-book on navigation of that time, though
he did not follow Linschoten's example and print a full account of
his adventures. When the city of Rotterdam sent this expedition to
the Strait of Magellan, Dirck Gerritsz had been engaged as first mate
of the _Blyde Boodschap_. When her captain died he had succeeded him.
The ship of Gerritsz had suffered from the same storm which had driven
the _Trouwe_ out of her course. An attempt had been made to reach the
island of Santa Maria, but the maps on board proved to be faulty, and
the little island could not be found. With only provisions enough for
another week Gerritsz had finally reached the harbor of Valparaiso.
Of his original crew of fifty-six men, twenty-three were left, and of
these only nine were strong enough to sail the ship. Therefore he had
been forced to surrender himself and his vessel to the Spaniards. The
Dutch sailors were forced to take service in the Spanish navy. From
that moment on we lose sight of all of them. A few reached home after
many years of strange adventure. Others died in the Spanish service.
Of the fate of the ship we know nothing. As for Dirck Gerritsz, rumor
has it that he found his way back to Enkhuizen.

There were two other ships, the _Hoop_ and the _Liefde_. Of these the
_Liefde_ had reached Santa Maria, and after leaving the island had
landed at Punta Lapavia, where an attempt had been made to find fresh
water. Unfortunately, the captain and twenty-three of his men had been
murdered by natives who mistook them for Spaniards and had carried
their heads in triumph to the Spanish town of Concepcion, where they
were shown to the garrison as a promise of what was in store for them
should the settlement ever fall into the hands of the enraged native
population. The rest of the sailors had saved their ship by fleeing
to Santa Maria, where they met the _Hoop_. The _Hoop_ had suffered a
similar calamity. Her captain and twenty-seven of his men had been
murdered on another island. Of the officers of both ships hardly a
single one was still alive.

New officers were elected from among the men, and the ships continued
their northward course apparently without a definite idea of what they
intended to do. They could not go back through the strait, and they
were obliged to cross the Pacific. They decided to avoid all Spanish
and Portuguese settlements and to make for Japan, where they might be
able to sell their cargo, and where a peaceful couple of ships might
find it possible to do some honest trading without being attacked by
wild natives or lying Spaniards. On the twenty-seventh of November
the island of Santa Maria was left, and soon the ships passed the
equator. They kept near the land, and lost eight more of their men when
these had gone to the shore to get fresh water and were attacked by
natives. On the twenty-third of February, during a gale, the ships were
separated from each other. The _Liefde_ was obliged to make the voyage
to Japan alone. On the twenty-fourth of March of the year 1600 the
first Japanese island was reached.

The people of Japan were very kind-hearted and very obliging. The sick
Hollanders were allowed to come on shore, and the others could trade
as much as they liked. But Japan for many years had been a field of
successful activities for Portuguese Jesuits. These Jesuits smiled
pleasantly upon the Dutch visitors, but to the Japanese they hinted
that the Hollanders were pirates and could not be trusted. Holland
was not a country at all, and these men were all robbers and thieves.
They advised the Japanese authorities to let these dangerous people
starve or send them away from their island, which would mean the same
thing. But the news of the arrival of some strange ships had reached
the ears of the Emperor of Japan. He sent for some of the crew to come
to his court. An Englishman among the sailors by the name of William
Adams was chosen for this dangerous mission. He not only represented
to his imperial Majesty the sad state of affairs among the shipwrecked
Hollanders, but he made himself so useful at the imperial court that he
was asked to remain behind and serve the Japanese state. He had a wife
and children at home in England, but he liked this new country so well
that he decided to stay. He lived happily for twenty years, married a
Japanese woman, and when he died in 1620 divided his fortune equally
among his Japanese and his English families.

Without the assistance of Adams, who seems to have been the leader of
the remaining sailors on the _Liefde_, it was impossible to accomplish
anything with the big ship. Of the twenty-four men who had reached
Japan only eighteen were left. The ship, therefore, was deserted, and
all the men went on shore. Except for two, the others all disappeared
from view. They probably settled down in Japan. But in the year 1605,
in the month of December, two Hollanders came to the Dutch settlement
of Patani, on the Indian peninsula. They had made the voyage from Japan
to India on a Japanese ship, and they brought to the Dutch company
trading in that region an official invitation from the Emperor of Japan
asking them to come and enter into honorable commerce with the Japanese
islands. This invitation was accepted. In the year 1608 one of the two
Dutch messengers returned to Japan with letters announcing the arrival
of a Dutch fleet for the next summer. He continued to live in Japan
until his death in 1634. The other sailor found a chance to go back
to Holland on a Dutch ship, but near home he was killed in a quarrel
with some Portuguese. The net result of this unfortunate voyage of the
_Liefde_ was the establishment of a very useful trade relation with
Japan--a relation which became more important after the Portuguese had
been expelled, and which lasted for over two centuries.

Finally there was the ship called the _Hoop_, which had become
separated from the _Liefde_ on the coast of South America in February
of the year 1600. It went down to the bottom of the ocean with
everybody on board.




CHAPTER VIII

THE BAD LUCK OF CAPTAIN BONTEKOE


Captain Bontekoe was a pious man who sailed the ocean in command of
several Dutch ships during the early part of the seventeenth century.
He never did anything remarkable as a navigator, he never discovered
a new continent or a new strait or even a new species of bird but he
was blown up with his ship, flew heavenward, landed in the ocean, and
survived this experience to tell a tale of such harrowing bad luck that
the compassionate world read his story for over three centuries with
tearful eyes. Wherefore we shall copy as much as is desirable from his
famous diary, which was published in the year 1647.

[Illustration]

On the twenty-eighth of December of the year 1618, William Ysbrantsz
Bontekoe, with a ship of 550 ton and 206 men, left the roads of Texel
for India. The name of the vessel was the _Nieuw Hoorn_, and it was
loaded with gunpowder. Kindly remember that gunpowder. There were the
usual storms, the usual broken masts; the customary number of sick
sailors either died or recovered; the customary route along the coast
of Africa was followed. The weather, once the cape was left behind, was
fine, and a short stay on the island of Reunion allowed the sick to
regain their health and the dead to be buried. The natives were well
disposed and traded with Bontekoe. They entertained him and danced for
the amusement of his men, and everything was as happy as could be.

At last the voyage across the Indian Ocean was started under the best
of auspices, and the _Nieuw Hoorn_ had almost reached the Strait of
Sunda when the great calamity occurred. On the nineteenth of November,
almost a year, therefore, after the ship had left Holland, one of the
pantrymen went into the hold to get himself some brandy. It was very
dark in the hold, and therefore he had taken a candle with him. This
candle, in a short iron holder, with a sharp point to it, he stuck into
a barrel which was on top of the one out of which he filled his bottle.
When he got through with his job he jerked the iron candlestick out of
the wood of the barrel. In doing so a small piece of burning tallow
fell into the brandy. That caused an explosion, and the next moment the
brandy inside the barrel had caught fire. Fortunately there were two
pails of water standing near by, and the fire was easily extinguished.
A lot more water was pumped upon the dangerous barrels, and the fire,
as far as anybody could see or smell, had been put out. But half an
hour later the dreadful cry of "Fire!" was heard once more all through
the ship. This time the coals which were in the hold near the brandy,
and which were used for the kitchen stove and the blacksmith shop, had
caught fire. They filled the hold with poisonous gas and a thick and
yellowish smoke. For the second time the pumps were set to work to
fill the hold with water. But the air inside the hold was so bad that
the firemen had a difficult task. As the hours went by the fire grew
worse. Bontekoe proposed to throw his cargo of gunpowder overboard. But
as I have related in my first chapters, there always was a civilian
commander on board such Indian vessels. It was his duty to look after
the cargo and to represent the commercial interest of the company.
Bontekoe's civilian master did not wish to lose his valuable gunpowder.
He told the captain to leave it where it was and try to put out the
fire. Bontekoe obeyed, but soon his men could no longer stand the smoke
in the hold. Large holes were then hacked through the deck and through
these water was poured upon the cargo. Now Bontekoe was a pious man,
but he was neither very strong of character nor very resourceful of
mind. He spent his time in running about the ship giving many orders,
the majority of which were to no great purpose. Meanwhile he did not
notice that part of the crew, from fear of being blown up, had lowered
the boats and were getting ready to leave the ship. The civilian
director, who had just told the captain to save the gunpowder, had been
the first to join in the flight. He was soon safely riding the waves in
a small boat far away from the doomed ship.

[Illustration]

For those who had been deserted on board there was only one way to
salvation; they must try to put out the fire or be killed. Under
personal command of their captain they set to work and pumped and
pumped and pumped. But the fire had reached several barrels of oil,
and there was a dense smoke. It was impossible to throw 310 barrels of
powder overboard in the suffocating atmosphere of the hold, yet the
men tried to do it. They worked with desperate speed, but before the
sixth part of the dangerous cargo was in the waters of the ocean the
fire reached the forward part, where the powder was stored. A few
moments later one hundred and ninety men were blown skyward, together
with pieces of the masts and pieces of the ship and heavy iron bars
and pieces of sail and everything that belongs to a well-equipped
vessel. "And I, Captain Willem Ysbrantsz Bontekoe, commander of the
ship, also flew through the sky, and I thought that my end had come.
So I stretched my hands and arms toward heaven and said: 'O dear Lord,
there I go! Please have pity upon this miserable sinner!' because I
thought that now the next moment I must be dead; but all the time I was
flying through the air I kept my mind clear, and I found that there was
happiness in my heart; yes, I even found that I was quite gay, and so
came down again, and landed in the water between pieces of the ship
which had been blown into little scraps."

[Illustration]

This is the captain's own minute account of the psychology of being
blown up. He continues:

"And when I was now once in the water of the sea, I felt my courage
return in such a way that it was as if I had become a new man. And when
I looked around I found a piece of the mainmast floating at my side,
and so I climbed on top of it, and looking over the scene around me, I
said, 'O Lord, so hath this fine ship been destroyed even as Sodom and
Gomorrah.'"

[Illustration]

For a short while the skipper floated and contemplated upon his mast,
and then he noticed that he was no longer alone. A young German who
had been on board as a common sailor came swimming to the wreckage.
He climbed on the only piece of the ship's stern that was afloat, and
pulling the captain's mast nearer to him with a long stick which he had
fished out of the water, he helped our good Bontekoe to pull himself on
board his wreckage. There they were together on the lonely ocean on
a few boards and with no prospect of rescue. Both the boats were far
away, and showed themselves only as small black dots upon the distant
horizon. Bontekoe told his comrade to pray with him. For a long time
they whispered their supplications to heaven. Then they looked once
more to see what the boats were doing. And behold! their prayer had
been answered. The boats came rowing back as fast as they could. When
they saw the two men they tried to reach the wreckage; but they did not
dare to come too near for their heavily loaded boats ran the risk of
being thrown against the remains of the hulk. In that case they would
have been swamped. Bontekoe had felt very happy as long as he had been
up in the air. Now, however, he began to notice that he had hurt his
back badly and that he had been wounded in the head. He did not dare
to swim to the boats, but the bugler of the ship, who was in the first
boat, swam back to the wreckage, fastened a rope around Bontekoe's
waist, and in this fashion the commander was pulled safely on board,
where he was made as comfortable as could be. During the night the two
boats remained near the place of the misfortune because they hoped that
they might find a few things to eat in the morning. They had only a
little bread and no water at all.

[Illustration]

Meanwhile the exhausted skipper slept, and when in the morning his men
told him that they had nothing to eat he was very angry, for the day
before the sea around his mast had been full of all sorts of boxes and
barrels and there had been enough to eat for everybody. During the
night, however, the boats had been blown away from the wreckage by
the wind. There was no chance to get anything at all. Eight pounds of
bread made up the total amount of provisions for seventy strong men.
Of these there were forty-six in one and twenty-six in the second boat.
Part of that bread was used by the ship's doctor to make a plaster
for Bontekoe's wounds. With the help of a pillow which had been found
in the locker of the biggest boat and which he wore around his head,
Bontekoe was then partly restored to life, and he took command of his
squadron and decided what ought to be done. There were masts in the
boat, but the sails had been forgotten. Therefore he ordered the men
to give up their shirts. Out of these, two large sails were made. They
were primitive sails, but they caught the breeze, and with the help of
the western wind Bontekoe hoped to reach the coast of Sumatra, which,
according to the best guess of all those on board, must be seventy
miles to the east. All those who had the map of that part of India
fairly well in their heads were consulted, and upon a piece of wood a
chart of the coast of Sumatra, the Sunda Islands, and the west coast of
Java was neatly engraved with the help of a nail and a pocket-knife.
A few simple instruments were cut out of old planks, and the curious
expedition was ready to navigate further eastward.

[Illustration]

Fortunately it rained very hard during the first night. The sails made
out of shirts were used to catch the rain, and the water was carefully
saved in two small empty barrels which had been found in one of the two
boats. A drinking-cup was cut out of a wooden stopper, and each of the
sailors in turn got a few drops of water. For many hours they sailed,
and they became dreadfully hungry. Again a merciful Heaven came to
their assistance. A number of sea-gulls came flying around the boats,
and many of them ventured so near that they seemed to say "Please catch
us." Of course they were caught and killed, and although there was
no way of cooking them, they were eaten by the hungry men as fast as
they came. But a sea-gull is not a very fat bird, and again there was
hunger, and not yet any sight of land. The big boat was a good sailor,
but the small one could not keep up with her. Therefore the men in the
small boat asked that they might be taken on board the big one, so
that they might either perish together or all be saved. The sailors in
the large boat did not like the idea. They feared that their boat could
not hold all of the seventy-six men. After a while, however, they gave
in. The men from the small boat were taken on board. Out of the extra
oars a sort of deck was rigged up on top of the boat, and under this a
number of the men were allowed to sleep while the others sat on top and
looked for land or prayed for food and water.

[Illustration]

No further sea-gulls came to feed this forlorn expedition, but just
when they were so hungry that they could not stand it any longer,
large shoals of flying-fish suddenly jumped out of the water into the
boats. Again the men were saved. The two little barrels of water had
been emptied by this time. For the second time the men expected that
they would all perish. They sailed eastward, but they saw no land, and
finally they got so hungry and thirsty that they talked about killing
the cabin boy and eating him. Bontekoe asked them please not to do
it, and he prayed the good Lord not to allow this horrible thing to
happen. The men, however, said that they were very hungry and must have
something to eat. Then he asked that they should wait just three days
more. If no land was seen after three days, they might eat the cabin
boy.

On the thirteenth day after the explosion there was a severe
thunder-storm, and the barrels were filled with fresh water. Most of
the men then crept under the little cover to be out of the rain, and
only one of the mates was left on deck. It was very hazy, but when
the fog parted for a moment he saw land very near the boat. The next
morning the survivors reached an uninhabited island, where there was no
fresh water, but an abundance of cocoanut-trees. The men attacked these
cocoanuts with such greedy hunger and they drank the sap with such
haste that on the succeeding day they were all very ill, with great
pains and a feeling that they might explode at any moment just as their
ship had done.

From the presence of this island Bontekoe argued that the coast of
Sumatra must be about fifteen miles distant. He filled the boat with
many cocoanuts, a wonderful fruit because it is food and drink at the
same time, and sailed farther eastward. After seventy hours he actually
reached Sumatra, but the surf did not allow him to land at once. It
took an entire day before his men managed to row through that terrible
surf, and then only at the cost of a swamped boat. At last, however,
they did reach the shore, bailed out their boat, and made a fire to dry
their clothes and to rest from the fatigue of this terrible experience.
Some of the sailors meanwhile explored the country near by, and to
their great astonishment they found the ashes of an old fire and near
it some tobacco. This was very welcome, for the men had not smoked for
many weeks. They also found some beans. These they ate so greedily
that they were all ill, and in the middle of the night, when they lay
around groaning and moaning, they were suddenly attacked by the natives
of the island. They had no arms, but they defended themselves as well
as possible with sticks and pieces of burning wood which they picked
up out of the fire. The natives fled, and the next morning sent three
messengers to have a talk with the shipwrecked Hollanders. They wanted
to know why he and his men had come to their island. They were told the
story of the burning ship and the explosion which had killed many of
the other sailors. Bontekoe said that he was a peaceful traveler, and
would pay for everything he bought. The natives believed this story,
and came back with chickens and rice and all sorts of eatables, for
which Bontekoe paid with money. The natives then told him that this
land was Sumatra and that Java was a little farther to the east. They
even knew the name of the governor-general, and Bontekoe now felt
certain that he was on the right road to a Dutch harbor.

Before he left he made a little trip up the river to buy more food,
for he counted upon a long voyage in the small boat. This visit almost
cost him his life. One day he had bought a carabao. He had paid for the
animal, and told the four sailors who were with him to bring it to the
camp; but the carabao was so wild that they could not manage it. The
four sailors decided to spend the night in the village and try their
luck once more the next morning. Bontekoe thought that this was too
dangerous, and when his men refused to return to join the others, he
hired two natives to paddle him back in their own canoe. The natives
told him the price for which they would row him back to the camp, and
he gave them the required sum; but when they were out in the middle of
the river they threatened to kill Bontekoe unless he gave them more
money. Bontekoe said a short prayer and felt very uncomfortable. Then
he heard a voice inside himself tell him to sing a funny song. This
he did. He sang so loud that the noise resounded through the quiet
forests on both sides of the river. The two natives thought that this
was the funniest thing that they had ever heard, and they laughed so
uproariously that they forgot all about their plan to kill the white
man, and Bontekoe came safely back to his own people.

[Illustration]

The next morning a number of natives appeared with a carabao, but
Bontekoe saw at once that it was not the same one that he had bought
the day before. He asked about it, and wanted to know where his men
were. "Oh," the natives said, "they are lazy and they will come a
little later." This looked suspicious, but whatever happened, Bontekoe
must have his carabao to be eaten on the trip across the Strait of
Sunda. Therefore he tried to kill the animal, but when they saw this
the natives suddenly began to call him names and they shrieked until
several hundred others came running from the bushes and attacked the
Hollanders. These fled back to their boat, but before they could reach
it eleven men had been killed. Of those who scrambled on board one had
been hit in the stomach with a poisoned arrow. Bontekoe performed an
operation, trying to cut away the flesh around the wound, but he did
not succeed in saving the life of the poor fellow. There were now only
fifty-six men left.

[Illustration]

With only eight chickens for so many men Bontekoe did not dare to
cross the strait. The next morning, armed, he went on shore, and,
having gathered a lot of clams and filled the small barrels with fresh
water, sailed away for the coast of Java. They sailed all day long,
but at night there came so violent a wind that the sails had to be
taken down, and the boat drifted whither it pleased the good Lord to
send it. It pleased Him to bring it the next morning near three small
islands densely covered with palm-trees. Out of the bamboo which grew
near the shore several water-barrels were improvised. There was still
some food, but not much. Therefore the discovery of these islands did
not bring much relief to the poor shipwrecked people. Bontekoe wandered
about in a despondent mood, and when he saw a small hill he climbed to
the top of it to be alone and to pray to the good Lord for his divine
counsel. He prayed for a long time, and when at last he opened his eyes
he saw that the clouds on the horizon had parted and that there was
more land in the distance, and out of this he saw two bluish-looking
mountains lifting their peaks. Suddenly he remembered that his friend,
Captain Schouten, who had been in those parts of India, had often told
him of two strange blue mountains which he had often seen in Java. He
had sailed across the sea which separated Sumatra from Java, and the
island on which he and his men now were was a little island off the
coast of Java. He knew his way now, and he ordered his men to row as
fast as they could. A boy was told to climb the mast and keep watch.
And, behold! the next day the sailors suddenly saw a large Dutch fleet
of twenty-three ships, under Frederik Houtman, who had left Texel with
Bontekoe and was on his way to Batavia. He took all the men on board
his ships. He fed them, gave them clothes, and carried them to Batavia,
the newly founded capital of the Dutch East Indies, where the governor
general, one Jan Pieterszoon Coen, received them very kindly, and
appointed Bontekoe to be captain of a new ship, of thirty-two guns,
which plied between the different colonies and carried provisions and
supplies of war from Java to the other colonies. It also brought to
Java the granite which was necessary to build the strong fort where
the government of the colony was to reside. Later on Bontekoe was made
captain of another ship called the _Groningen_, and he visited China,
where the Dutch company tried to capture the Portuguese colony in Macao
and to build a fort on one of the Pescadores Islands to protect their
Chinese trade.

After two years of this work Bontekoe wanted to return home, and he
asked to be given the command of a ship that was about to leave for
Holland. He was given command of the _Hollandia_, which with two other
ships left Batavia on the sixth of February of the year of our Lord
1625. But Bontekoe's bad luck had not yet come to an end. This patient
man, who never lost his temper and accepted everything that happened to
him with devout resignation, once more became the victim of all sorts
of unfortunate occurrences. On the nineteenth of March his ship was
attacked by a terrible storm, and soon the waves threatened to swamp
the vessel. Bontekoe ordered the men to work the pumps as hard as they
could. Then the pepper stowed away in the hold broke loose, got into
the pumps and clogged them. Finally baskets were placed about the lower
part of the pumps to keep the pernicious pepper out of them, and the
_Hollandia_ was saved.

[Illustration]

Of the other two ships, one, the _Gouda_, had disappeared when the
morning came, and the other, the _Middelburg_, had suffered much.
Her masts were broken, and they had no spare the Atlantic. Finally
the _Middelburg_ left part of his spare yards for masts, and then
he sailed with all possible haste for Madagascar to repair his own
damage. He reached the island inside a week, and cut himself a mast
out of a tree. He repaired his ship and spent a month on the island,
where he was well received by the natives, who flocked from all over
to see how the Hollanders made a new ship out of the wreck which they
had saved from the storm. Here Bontekoe waited for the other ships.
But the _Gouda_ had sunk, and the other, the _Middelburg_, reached
Madagascar much later, and spent several months in the bay of Antongil.
Most of her people were ill and among those who died on the island
was the commander of the ship, Willem Schouten, who with Le Maire had
discovered the new route between the Pacific and the Atlantic. Finally
the _Middleburg_ left Madagascar and sailed to St. Helena. There she
got into a fight with two Portuguese vessels, and that is the last
word we have ever received of her. As for Bontekoe, he, too, reached
St. Helena, where he wanted to take in fresh water. But a Spanish ship
had landed troops, and he was not allowed to come on shore. So he went
farther on, and at last reached Kinsale in Ireland. This time the joys
of life on land almost finished the brave captain who so often had
escaped the anger of the waves. His sailors went on shore, and after
the long voyage they appreciated the hospitality of the Irish inns so
well that they refused to come back on board. They stayed on shore
until the mayor of the city, at the request of Bontekoe, forbade the
owners of ale-houses to give the Hollanders more than seven shillings'
credit apiece. As soon as this was known the men, many of whom had
spent much more than that, hastened back to their ship. Crowds of
furious innkeepers and their wives, crying aloud for their money,
followed them.

Good Captain Bontekoe paid everybody what he or she had a right to
ask, and finally, on the twenty-fifth of November of the year 1625,
he reached home. Bontekoe went to live quietly in his native city of
Hoorn. He had written a short account of his voyage, but he had never
printed it because he did not think that he could write well enough.
But one of his fellow-townsmen wanted to write a large volume upon the
noble deeds of the people of Hoorn, and he asked Bontekoe to write
down the main events of his famous voyage, and he promised to edit the
little book for the benefit of the reading public.

And behold! this same public, saturated with stories of wild men
and wild animals and terrible storms and uninhabited islands and
treacherous Portuguese and hairbreadth escapes, took such a fancy to
the simple recital of Bontekoe's pious trip toward heaven and the
patience with which he had accepted the vicissitudes of life that they
read his little book long after the more ponderous volumes had been
left to the kind ministrations of the meritorious book-worm.




CHAPTER IX

SCHOUTEN AND LE MAIRE DISCOVER A NEW STRAIT


This is the story of a voyage to a country which did not exist. The men
who risked their capital in this expedition hoped to reach a territory
which we now call Australia. It was not exactly the Australia which we
know from our modern geography. It was a mysterious continent of which
there had been heard many rumors for more than half a century. What the
contemporary traveler really hoped to find we do not know, but we have
the details of an expedition to this new land called "Terra Australis
incognita" or "the unknown southern land," an expedition which left the
harbor of Hoorn on the fifteenth of June of the year 1615.

Hoorn is a little city on the Zuyder Zee, just such a little city as
Enkhuizen, from which Linschoten had set out upon his memorable voyage.
This voyage had a short preface which has little to do with navigation,
but much with provincial politics and commercial rivalry. The original
idea of allowing everybody to found his own little Indian trading
company after his own wishes had been a bad one from an economic
point of view. There was so much competition between the three dozen
little companies that all were threatened with bankruptcy. Therefore a
financial genius, the eminent leader of the province of Holland, John
of Barneveldt, took matters into his own capable hands and combined
all the little companies into one large East India Trading Company,
a commercial body which existed until the year 1795 and was a great
success from start to finish.

Among the original investors there had been a certain Jacques le Maire,
a native of the town of Antwerp who had fled when the Spaniards took
that city for the second time, and who now lived in Amsterdam with his
wife and his twenty-two children. He was respected for his ability,
and was chosen into the body of directors who managed the affairs of
the East India Company. But Le Maire was not the sort of man to stay
in the harness with others for a very long time. He complained that
the company cared only for dividends and immediate profits. He wanted
to see the ships of his adopted country make war upon the Spaniards,
besides trying to steal their colonies.

[Illustration]

After a few years Le Maire quarreled openly with several of the other
directors, and he planned to form an Indian company of his own. In
Amsterdam, however, he was so strongly opposed by his enemies, who were
still in the old company, that he was forced to leave the city. He
went to live in a small village near by and continued to work upon his
schemes. With Hendrik Hudson he discussed a plan of reaching the Indies
by way of the Northwestern Route--a route which was as yet untried. To
King Henry IV of France he made the offer of establishing a new French
company as a rival of the mighty Dutch institution. All these many
ideas came to nothing. Henry IV was murdered, and Hudson went into the
service of another employer.

Le Maire was obliged to invent something new. He was in a very
difficult position. The Estates General of the Dutch Republic had given
to their one East India Company a practical monopoly of the entire
Indian trade. They decided that no Dutch ships should be allowed to
travel to the Indies except through the Strait of Magellan or by way of
the Cape of Good Hope. That meant that the entrance to the Indian spice
islands was closed at both sides. It was of course easy enough to
sail through the strait or past the cape. There was nobody to prevent
one from doing so. But when one tried to trade in India on his own
account, the Dutch company sent their men-of-war after the intruder.
These wanted to know who he was and how he came within the domain of
the company. Since there were only two roads, he must have trespassed
in one way or the other upon the privileges of the company. Therefore
the company, which was the sovereign ruler of all the Indian islands,
had the right to confiscate his ships.

[Illustration]

If Le Maire could only find a new road to India, he would not interfere
with the strict rules of the Estates General. His ships could then
trade in the Pacific and in the Indian Ocean, and he would be the most
dangerous rival of the old company, which he had learned to hate since
the days when he had first invested sixty thousand guilders and had
been one of the directors. For a long time Le Maire studied books and
maps and atlases, and finally came to the conclusion that there must be
another way of getting from the Atlantic into the Pacific besides the
long and tortuous Strait of Magellan. And if there were a strait, there
must be land on the other side of it. If only this could be discovered,
Le Maire would be rich again, and could laugh at the pretentions of the
East India Company.

Le Maire did not go to Amsterdam to get the necessary funds for his
expedition. He interested the good people of the little town of Hoorn,
and with a fine prospectus about his "Unknown Southern Land" he soon
got all the money he needed. The Estates General were willing to give
him all the privileges he asked for provided he did not touch the
monopolies of their beloved East India Company. Even Prince Maurice
interested himself sufficiently in this voyage to a new continent to
give Le Maire a letter of introduction which put the expedition upon
more official footing.

Two small ships were bought, and eighty-seven men were engaged for two
years. On the largest ship of the two, called the _Eendracht_, there
were sixty-five men, and on the small yacht the _Hoorn_ there were
twenty-two. William Cornelisz Schouten was commander-in-chief. He had
made three trips to India by way of the cape. Two sons of Le Maire,
one called Jacques, the other Daniel, went with the expedition to keep
a watchful eye upon everything and to see to it that their father's
wishes were carefully executed. The ships were forbidden to enter the
Strait of Magellan. In case of need they might return by way of the
Cape, but they must be careful not to trade with any of the Indian
princes who now recognized the rule of the East India Company. The main
purpose of the expedition was to find the unknown continent in the
Pacific. For this main purpose they must sacrifice everything else. And
so they left Hoorn, and they sailed toward the south.

[Illustration]

It was more than twenty years since the first expedition had sailed
for India. The route across the Atlantic was well known by this time.
There is nothing particular to narrate about the dull trip of three
months enlivened only by the attack of a large monster, a sort of
unicorn, which stuck his horn into the ship with such violence that he
perished and left behind the horn, which was found when the ships were
overhauled near the island of Porto Deseado, where Van Noort, too, had
made ready for his trip through the strait many years before.

The cleaning of the smaller of the two vessels, however, was done so
carelessly that it caught fire. Since it had been placed on a high bank
at high tide and the water had ebbed, there was no water with which to
extinguish the conflagration. Except for the guns, the entire ship and
its contents were lost.

The sailors were taken on board the _Eendracht_, and on the thirteenth
of January of the year 1616 the ship passed by the entrance of the
Strait of Magellan and began to search for a new thoroughfare into
the Pacific farther toward the South. On the twenty-third of January
the most eastern promontory of Tierra del Fuego was seen. The next
day the high mountains of another little island further toward the
east appeared in the distance. Evidently Le Maire had been right in
his calculations. There was another strait, and the _Eendracht_ had
discovered it. Such big events are usually very simple affairs. The
southernmost point of Tierra del Fuego was easily reached and was
called Cape Hoorn, after the town which had equipped the expedition.
The _Eendracht_ now sailed further westward, and in less than two
weeks found herself in the Pacific Ocean. On the twelfth of February
the great discovery was celebrated with a party for the benefit of the
sailors. They had been the first to pass through the Strait of Jacques
le Maire and the dangerous route discovered by Magellan ninety-five
years before could now be given up for the safer and shorter passage
through Strait le Maire and the open water south of Tierra del Fuego.

[Illustration: T'eylandt van Guan Fernando]

The ship had an easy voyage until it dropped its anchors before Juan
Fernandez, the famous island of Robinson Crusoe. It was found to be
the little paradise which De Foe afterward painted in his entertaining
novel. Fresh water was taken on board, and the voyage was continued.
After a month of rapid progress, with a good eastern wind, land was
seen. It was a small coral island, probably one of the Paomuta group.
Some men swam ashore, for it was impossible to use the boat on account
of the heavy surf. They saw nothing but a flat, naked island and three
strange dogs that did not bark. They found some fresh fruit, which
they brought back to the ship for the sick people. Of course there
were sick people. That was a part of every voyage. But the illness was
not serious. Four days later they discovered a second island somewhat
larger. This was inhabited. A canoe with painted savages came out
to the Dutch ship. Since the savages spoke neither Dutch, Spanish,
Portuguese, nor Malay, and the Dutch sailors did not know the Papua
dialect, it was impossible to have conversation with these ignorant
people who refused to come on board. Captain Schouten was not in need
of anything, and he went on his way to try his luck at the next island.
The natives had now discovered that there was no harm in this strange,
large floating object. They came climbing over all the sides of the
ship. They stole brass nails and small metal objects, hid them in their
wooly and long hair, and then jumped overboard. Everywhere the same
thing happened. Schouten sailed from one island to the next, but of any
new continent, however, he found no sign. When you look at the map you
will notice that this part of the Pacific is thickly dotted with small
islands. Their inhabitants are great mariners, and in their little
boats travel long distances. Schouten with his big ship caused great
consternation among these simple fishermen, who hastily fled whenever
they saw this strange big devil bearing down upon them.

The trip was very pleasant, but it grew tiresome to discover nothing
but little islands. At last, however, on the tenth of May, a big one
with high mountains and forests was reached. It was called Cocos Island
because there were many cocoanut-trees near the shore. The inhabitants
of the island, being unfamiliar with white people, were very hospitable
and were willing to trade fresh cocoanuts and other eatable things for
a few gifts of trinkets and perhaps a small pocket-knife. But jealousy
was not unknown even in this distant part of the South Seas. Soon
there was a quarrel between those canoes nearest to the ship which had
obtained presents and others too far away to receive anything. Also
there was a good deal of annoyance caused by the fact that the natives
insisted upon stealing everything they could find on the ship. Finally
Schouten was obliged to appoint a temporary police of Hollanders armed
with heavy canes to keep the natives in their proper place. Otherwise
they might have stolen the ship itself, just as they had once tried to
make away with all the boats. Upon that occasion they had made their
first acquaintance of fire-arms. When they saw what a little bullet
could do they respected the mysterious lead pipes which made a sudden
loud noise and killed a man at a hundred yards. Near Cocos Island there
appeared to be more mountainous land, and Schouten decided to visit it.
The king came out in state in his canoe to greet the Dutch captain. He
was entertained royally with a concert. To show how much he appreciated
the lovely music which he had just heard the king yelled and shrieked
as loudly as he could. It was very funny, and everybody was happy. But
this pleasant relation did not last long, for when the Hollanders were
about to reciprocate the visit their ship was attacked, and several
volleys from the large cannon were necessary to drive the natives away.
These islands were called the Islands of the Traitors, because the king
had tried to kill the people whom he had invited as his guests, and
they are known to-day as the Ladrones.

[Illustration]

The _Eendracht_ was now sixteen hundred miles to the west of Peru, and
as yet the unknown Southern continent had not been discovered. The
wind continued to blow from the east. In a council of the officers of
the ship it was decided to keep a more northern course until it could
be ascertained with precision where they were in this vast expanse of
pacific water and small coral islands. It was an unfortunate decision.
The ship was then very near the coast of Australia. Sailing from one
group of islands to the next it had followed a course parallel to the
northern coast of the continent for which the men were searching with
great industry. After a while they were obliged to land on another
island for fresh water. They were again entertained by the king of
the island. He gave a dinner and a dance in their honor, and they had
a chance to admire the graceful motions of the young girls of the
villages. They must have been among the Fiji Islands. Farther westward,
however, they discovered that the attitude of the natives toward them
began to change. Evidently they were reaching a region where the white
man was not unknown and was accordingly distrusted. Chinese and
Japanese objects, here and there a knife or a gun of European origin,
were found among the natives who came paddling out to the Dutch ship.
Their map told them that they were approaching the domains of the East
India Company. It had not been their intention to do this, but the
reputed Southern continent seemed to be a myth. It was time for them
to try and reach home and report their adventures to the owners of the
ship.

[Illustration]

Sailing along the coast of New Guinea, they at last reached the port
of Ternate on the seventeenth of September. Here they found a large
Dutch fleet which had just reached the Indies by way of the Strait of
Magellan. This fleet was under command of Admiral van Spilbergen, who
was much surprised to hear that the _Eendracht_ had reached the Pacific
through a new strait. He showed that he did not believe the story which
Schouten told of his new discoveries. If there were such a strait, then
why had it taken the _Eendracht_ such a long time to reach Ternate?
etc. The admiral suspected that this ship was a mere interloper sent
by Le Maire to trade in a region where, according to the instructions
of the East Indian Company, no other ships than those of the company
were allowed to engage in commerce.

This suspicion was very unpleasant for the brave Schouten, but there
were other things to worry him. Before the expedition started old Le
Maire, a shrewd trader, had thought of the possibility that his ships
might not be able to find this unknown continent. In that case he did
not want them to come home without some profit to himself, and he had
invented a scheme by which he might perhaps beat the company at her
own game. The governor-general of the Dutch colonies at that time
was a certain Gerard Reynst, who was known to be an avaricious and
dishonest official. Le Maire counted upon this, and to his eldest son
he had given secret instructions which told him what to do in such
circumstances. The idea was very simple. Young Le Maire must bribe
Reynst with an offer of money or whatever would be most acceptable to
the governor. In return for this Reynst would not be too particular
if the _Eendracht_ went to some out-of-the-way island and bought a few
hundred thousand pounds worth of spices.

It was a very happy idea, and it undoubtedly would have worked.
Unfortunately Reynst had just died. His successor was no one less than
Jan Pietersz Coen, the man of iron who was to hammer the few isolated
settlements into one strong colonial empire. Coen could not be bribed.
To him the law was the law. The _Eendracht_ did not belong to the East
India Company; therefore, it had no right to be in India according
to Coen's positive instructions. The ship was confiscated. The men
were allowed to return to Holland. And the owners were told that
they could start a lawsuit in the Dutch courts to decide whether the
governor-general had acted within his rights or not.

Young Le Maire sailed for Holland very much dejected. He had lost his
father's ship, and nobody would believe him when he told of his great
discovery of the new and short connection between the Pacific and the
Atlantic. He died on the way home, died of disappointment. His hopes
had been so great. He had done his task faithfully, and he and Schouten
had found a large number of new islands and had added many thousands
of miles of geographical information to that part of the map which
was still covered with the ominous letters of _terra incognita_. Yet
through an ordinance which many people did not recognize as just he
was deprived of the glory which ought to have come to him. His younger
brother reached Holland on the second of July of the year 1617, and a
week later he appeared in the meeting of the Estates General. This time
the story which he told was believed by his hearers. The idea of an old
man being the chief mover in equipping such a wonderful enterprise with
the help of his sons and only a small capital against all sorts of odds
assured Le Maire the sympathy of the man in the street. For a while
Governor-General Coen was highly unpopular.

Old Le Maire started a suit for the recovery of his ship and its
contents. After two years of pleading he won his case. The East India
Company was ordered to pay back the value of the ship and the goods
confiscated. All his official papers were returned to Le Maire. His
name and that of the little town of Hoorn, given to the most southern
point of the American continent and to the shortest route from the
Atlantic to the Pacific, tell of this great voyage of the year 1618.




CHAPTER X

TASMAN EXPLORES AUSTRALIA


It often happened that ships of the Dutch East India Company on their
way to the Indies were blown out of their course or were carried by the
currents in a southern direction. Then they were driven into a part of
the map which was as yet unknown, and they had to find their way about
very much as a stranger might do who has left the well-known track of
the desert. Sometimes these ships were lost. More often they reached
a low, flat coast which seemed to extend both east and west as far as
the eye could reach, which offered very little food and very little
water, and appeared to be the shore-line of a vast continent which was
remarkably poor in both plants and animals. Indeed, so unattractive
was this big island, as it was then supposed to be, to the captains of
the company that not a single one of them had ever taken the trouble
to explore it. They had followed the coast-line until once more they
reached the well-known regions of their map, and then they had hastened
northward to the comfortable waters of their own Indian Ocean. But
of course people talked about this mysterious big island, and they
wondered. They wondered whether, perhaps, the stories of the Old
Testament, the stories of the golden land of Ophir, which had never yet
been found, might not yet be proved true in that large part of the map
which showed a blank space and was covered with the letters of _terra
incognita_.

If there were any such land still to be discovered by any European
people, the Dutch East India Company decided that they ought to benefit
by it. Therefore their directors studied the question with great care
and deliberation.

A number of expeditions were sent out one after the other. In the year
1636 two small vessels were ordered to make a careful examination of
the island of New Guinea, which was supposed to be the peninsula part
of the unknown Southern continent. But New Guinea itself is so large
that the two vessels, after spending a very long time along the coast,
were obliged to return without any definite information.

Anthony van Diemen, the governor-general of the Dutch East Indies,
however, was a man of stubborn purpose, and he refused to discontinue
his search until he should have positive knowledge upon this puzzling
subject. Six years after this first attempt he appointed a certain
Franz Jacobsz Visscher to study the question theoretically from every
possible angle and to write him a detailed report. Visscher had crossed
the Pacific Ocean a few years after the discovery of Strait Le Maire,
and he had visited Japan and China, and was familiar with all the
better known parts of the Asiatic seas. He set to work, and he gave
the following advice. The ships of the company must take the island
of Mauritius as their starting-point. They must follow a southeastern
course until they should reach the 54 degree of latitude. If, in the
meantime, they had not found any land, they must turn toward the
east until they should reach New Guinea, and from there, using this
peninsula or island or whatever it was as a starting-point, they
should establish its correct relation to the continent of which it was
supposed to be a solid part. If it should prove to be an island, then
the ships must chart the strait which separated it from the continent,
and they must find out whether these did not offer a short route from
India to Strait Le Maire and the Atlantic Ocean.

Van Diemen studied those plans carefully. He approved of them, and
ordered two ships to be made ready for the voyage. They were small
ships. There was the _Heemskerk_, with sixty men, and the _Zeehaen_,
with only forty. Visscher was engaged to act as pilot and general
adviser of the expedition. The command was given to one Abel Tasman.
Like most of the great men of the republic, he had made his own career.
Born in an insignificant village in the northern part of the republic
somewhere in the province of Groningen,--the name of the village was
Lutjegat,--he had started life as a sailor, had worked his way up
through ability and force of character, and in the early thirties of
the seventeenth century he had gone to India. Thereafter he had spent
most of his life as captain or mate of different ships of the company.
He had been commander of an expedition sent out to discover a new
gold-land, which, according to rumor, must be situated somewhere off
the coast of Japan, and although he did not find it,--since it did not
exist,--he had added many new islands to the map of the company. Since
he was a man of very independent character, he was specially fitted to
be in command of an expedition which might meet with many unforeseen
difficulties.

His instructions gave him absolute freedom of action. The chief purpose
of this expedition was a scientific one. Professional draughtsmen
were appointed to accompany the _Heemskerk_ and make careful maps of
everything that should be discovered. Special attention must be paid to
the currents of the ocean and to the prevailing direction of the wind.
Furthermore, a careful study of the natives must be made. Their mode
of life, their customs, and their habits must be investigated, and they
must be treated with kindness. If the natives should come on board and
should steal things, the Hollanders must not mind such trifles. The
chief aim of the expedition was to establish relations with whatever
races were to be discovered. Of course there was little hope of finding
anything except long-haired Papuans, but if by any chance Tasman should
discover the unknown southland and find that this continent contained
the rumored riches, he must not show himself desirous of getting gold
and silver. On the contrary, he must show the inhabitants lead and
brass, and tell them that these two metals were the most valuable
commodities in the country which had sent him upon his voyage. Finally,
whatever land was found must be annexed officially for the benefit
of the Estates General of the Dutch Republic, and of this fact some
lasting memorial must be left upon the coast in the form of a written
document, well hidden below a stone or a board planted in such a way
that the natives could not destroy it.

On the nineteenth of August, Tasman and his two ships went to
Mauritius, where the tanks were filled with fresh water and all the men
got a holiday. They were given plenty of food to strengthen them for
the voyage which they were about to undertake through the unknown seas.
After a month of leisure the two ships left on the sixth of October of
the year 1642 and started out to discover whatever they might find. The
farther southward they got the colder the climate began to be. Snow and
hail and fog were the order of the day. Seals appeared, and everything
indicated that they were reaching the Arctic Ocean of the Southern
Hemisphere. Day and night they kept a man in the crow's-nest to look
for land. Tasman offered a reward of money and rum for the sailor who
should first see a light upon the horizon, but they found nothing
except salt water and a cloudy sky.

Tasman consulted Visscher, and asked him whether it would not be better
to follow the 44 degree of latitude than to go farther into this
stormy region. Since they had been sailing in a southern direction
for almost a month without finding anything at all, Visscher agreed to
this change in his original plans. Once more there followed a couple of
weeks of dreary travel without the sight of anything hopeful. At last
on the twenty-ninth of November of the year 1642, at four o'clock of
the afternoon, land was seen. Tasman thought that it was part of his
continent and called it Van Diemen's Land, after the governor-general
who had sent him out. We know that it was an island to the south of the
Australian continent, and we now call it Tasmania.

[Illustration]

On the second of December Tasman tried to go on shore with all his
officers, but the weather was bad and the surf was too dangerous for
the small boat of the _Heemskerk_. The ship's carpenter then jumped
overboard with the flag of the Dutch Republic and a flagpole under his
arm. He reached the shore, planted his pole, and with Tasman and his
staff floating on the high waves of the Australian surf and applauding
him the carpenter hoisted the orange, white, and blue colors which were
to show to all the world that the white man had taken possession of a
new part of the world. The carpenter once more swam through the waves,
was pulled back into the boat, and the first ceremony connected with
the Southern continent was over.

The voyage was then continued, but nowhere could the ships find a safe
bay in which they might drop anchor. Everywhere the coast appeared to
be dangerous. The surf was high, and the wind blew hard. At last, on
the eighteenth of December, after another long voyage across the open
sea, more land was seen. This time the coast was even more dangerous
than it had been in Tasmania and the land was covered with high
mountains. Furthermore the Hollanders had to deal with a new sort of
native, much more savage and more able to defend themselves than those
who had looked at the two ships from the safe distance of Van Diemen's
Land, but had fled whenever the white man tried to come near their
shore.

At first the natives of this new land rowed out to the _Heemskerk_ and
the _Zeehaen_ and paddled around the ships without doing any harm.
But one day the boat of the _Zeehaen_ tried to return their visit. It
was at once attacked by the ferocious natives. Three Dutch sailors
were killed with clubs, and several were wounded with spears. Not
until after the _Heemskerk_ had fired a volley and had sunk a number
of canoes did the others flee and leave the Dutch boat alone. The
wounded men were taken on board, where several of them died next day.
Tasman did not dare to risk a further investigation of this bay with
his small vessels, and after the loss of several of his small company
he departed. The place of disaster he called Tasman Bay, and sailed
farther toward the north. If he had gone a few miles to the east, he
would have discovered that this was not a bay at all but the strait
which divides the northern and southern part of New Zealand. Now it is
called Cook Strait after the famous British sailor who a century later
explored that part of the world and who found that New Zealand is not
part of a continent, but a large island which offered a splendid chance
for a settlement. It was very fertile, and the natives had reached
a much higher degree of civilization than those of the Australian
continent. Cook made another interesting discovery. The natives who had
seen the first appearance of the white man had been so deeply impressed
by the arrival of the two Dutch ships that they turned their mysterious
appearance into a myth. This myth had grown in size and importance with
each new generation, and when Captain Cook dropped anchor off the coast
of New Zealand and established relations with the natives, the latter
told him a wonderful story of two gigantic vessels which had come to
their island ever so long ago, and which had been destroyed by their
ancestors while all the men on board had been killed.

It is not easy to follow Tasman on the modern map. After leaving Cook
Strait he went northward, and passing between the most northern point
of the island, which he called Cape Maria van Diemen, and a small
island which, because it was discovered on the sixth of January, was
called the "Three Kings Island," he reached open water once more.

[Illustration]

He now took his course due north in the hope of reaching some of
the islands which Le Maire had discovered. Instead of that, on the
nineteenth of January, the two ships found several islands of the Tonga
group, also called the Friendly Islands. They baptized these with
names of local Dutch celebrities and famous men in the nautical world
of Holland. Near one of them, called Amsterdam, because it looked a
little more promising than any of the others, the ships stopped, and
once more an attempt was made to establish amicable relations with the
natives. These came rowing out to the ship, and whenever anything was
thrown overboard they dived after it and showed an ability to swim
and to remain under water which ever since has been connected with
the idea of the South Sea population. By means of signs and after all
sorts of presents, such as little mirrors and nails and small knives,
had been thrown overboard to be fished up by the natives, Tasman got
into communication with the Tonga people. He showed them a mean, thin
chicken and pointed to his stomach. The natives understood this and
brought him fresh food. He showed an empty glass and went through the
motion of drinking. The natives pointed to the land and showed him by
signs that they knew what was wanted, and that there was fresh water
to be obtained on shore.

[Illustration]

Gradually the natives lost their fear and climbed on board. In exchange
for the cocoanuts which they brought they received a plentiful supply
of old rusty nails. When those on shore heard that the millennium of
useful metal had come sailing into their harbor, their eagerness to get
their own share was so great that hundreds of them came swimming out
to the Dutch vessels to offer their wares before the supply of nails
should be exhausted. Tasman himself went on land, and the relations
between native and visitor were so pleasant that the first appearance
of the white man became the subject of a Tonga epic which was still
recited among the natives when the next European ship landed here a
century and a quarter later.

Going from island to island and everywhere meeting with the same
sort of long-haired, vigorous-looking men, Tasman now sailed in a
south-western direction. He spent several weeks between the Fiji
Islands and the group now called Samoa. During all this time his
ships were in grave danger of running upon the hidden reefs which are
plentiful in this part of the Pacific. At last the winter began to
approach and the weather grew more and more unstable, and as the ships
after their long voyage were in need of a safe harbor and repair, it
was decided to try and return within the confines of the map of the
known and explored world. Accordingly the ships sailed westward and
discovered several islands of the Solomon group, sailed through the
Bismarck Archipelago, as it is called now, and after several months
reached the northern part of New Guinea, which they, too, supposed to
be the northern coast of the large continent of which they had touched
the shores at so many spots, but which instead of the promised Ophir
was a dreary, flat land surrounded by little islands full of cocoanuts,
natives, and palm-trees, but without a scrap of either gold or silver.

[Illustration]

Tasman then found himself in well-known regions. He made straightway
for Batavia, and on the fifteenth of June of the year 1644 he landed
to report his adventures to the governor-general and the council
of the Indian Company. A few months later he was sent out upon a
new expedition, this time with three ships. He made a detailed
investigation of the northern coast of the real Australian continent.
He sailed into the Gulf of Carpentaria. He found the Torres Strait,
which he supposed to be a bay between New Guinea and Australia,--for
the report of the Torres discovery in 1607 was as yet in the dusty
archives of Manila, and had not been given to the world,--and once
more he returned by way of the western coast of New Guinea to inform
the governor-general that whatever continent he had found produced
nothing which could be of any material profit to the Dutch East India
Company. In short, New Holland, as Australia was then called, was not
settled by the Hollanders because it had no immediate commercial value.
After this last voyage no further expeditions were sent out to look
for the supposed Southern Continent. From the reports of several ships
which had reached the west coast of Australia and from the information
brought home by Tasman it was decided that whatever land there might
still be hidden between the 110 and 111 degree of longitude, offered
no inducements to a respectable trading company which looked for gold
and silver and spices, but had no use for kangaroos and the duck-billed
platypus. New Holland was left alone until the growing population of
the European continent drove other nations to explore this part of the
world once more a hundred and twenty years later.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XI

ROGGEVEEN, THE LAST OF THE GREAT VOYAGERS


The Hollanders entered the field of geographical exploration at a late
date. The Spaniards and the Portuguese had discovered and navigated
distant parts of the world for almost two centuries before the
Hollander began to leave his own shores. But when we remember that they
were a small nation and were engaged upon one of the most gigantic
wars which was ever fought, the result of their labors as pioneers of
the map was considerable. They found Spitzbergen and many new islands
in the Arctic, and gave us the first reliable information about the
impracticability of the Northeastern Passage. They discovered a new
route to the Pacific shorter and less dangerous than the Strait of
Magellan. They charted the southern part of the Pacific, and made
the first scientific inspection of the Australian continent, besides
discovering New Zealand and Tasmania. They discovered a number of new
islands in the Indian Ocean and settled upon the fertile islands of
Mauritius. Of course I now enumerate only the names of their actual
discoveries. They established settlements in North and South America
and all over Asia and in many places of Africa. They opened a small
window into the mysterious Japanese Empire, and got into relation with
the Son of Heaven who resided in Peking. They founded a very prosperous
colony in South Africa. They had colonies along the Red Sea and the
Gulf of Persia. But about these colonies I shall tell in another book.
This time I give only the story of the voyages of actual discovery.
The adventures of men who set out to perform the work of pioneers, the
career of navigators who had convinced themselves that here or there
a new continent or an undiscovered cape or a forgotten island awaited
their curious eyes, and who then risked their fortunes and their lives
to realize their dreams; in one word, the men of constructive vision
who are of greater value to their world than any others because they
show the human race the road of the future.

[Illustration]

In Holland the last of those was a certain Jacob Roggeveen, a man of
deep learning, for many years a member of the High Tribunal of the
Indies, and a leader among his fellow-beings wherever he went. He
had traveled a great deal, and he might have spent the rest of his
few years peacefully at home, but when he was sixty-two years old
the desire to learn more of the Southern Continent which had been
seen, but which had never been thoroughly explored, the wish to know
definitely whether there remained anything as yet undiscovered in the
Pacific Ocean, drove him across the equator. With three ships and six
hundred men he left Texel on the first of August of the year 1721, and
the next year in February he was near Juan Fernandez in the Pacific
Ocean. An expedition like this had never been seen before. All the
experience of past years had been studied most carefully. It was known
that people fell ill and died of scurvy because they did not get enough
fresh vegetables. Wooden boxes filled with earth were therefore placed
along the bulwarks of all the ships. In these some simple and hardy
vegetables were planted. Instead of the old method of taking boxes full
of bread which turned sour and got moldy, ovens were placed on board,
and flour was taken along from which to bake bread. An attempt was
made to preserve carrots and beets in boxes filled with powdered peat.
People still fell ill during this voyage, but the wholesale death of at
least half of the crew of which we read in all the old voyages did not
take place. When Roggeveen reached Juan Fernandez he found the cabin of
Robinson Crusoe just as it had been left in the year 1709. Otherwise
the island proved to be uninhabited. On the seventeenth of March the
ships continued their way, and a southern course was taken. Nothing
was seen until Easter day, when a new island was found on the spot
where an English map hinted at the existence of a large continent. This
island, however, contained nothing except a few natives. It did not in
the least resemble the unknown Southern Continent of which Roggeveen
dreamed. Therefore he went farther toward the south. For a while he
followed the route taken many years before by Le Maire. Some of the
islands which Le Maire had visited he found on his map. Others he could
not locate. Still others were now seen for the first time. It was a
very dangerous sea to navigate. The Pacific Ocean is full of reefs.
These reefs now appear upon the map, but even in this day of scientific
navigation they wreck many a ship. On the nineteenth of April one of
Roggeveen's ships ran upon such a hidden reef in the middle of the
night. The crew was saved, and was divided among the other two vessels.
The ship, however, was a total loss. Nothing could be saved of the
personal belongings of the men and the provisions. It is a curious fact
that the South Sea islands always have had a wonderful fascination
for a certain kind of temperament. Many times while ships crossed the
Pacific in the seventeenth and eighteenth century sailors preferred to
remain behind on some small island and spend the rest of their lives
there with the natives and the fine weather and the long days of
lazy ease. Five of Roggeveen's crew remained behind on one of those
islands, and when in the year 1764 the British explored the King George
Archipelago, they actually found one of these five, then a very old man.

[Illustration]

More than half a year was spent by Roggeveen in exploring the hundreds
of islands and the many groups of larger islands which the industrious
coral insect had built upon the bottom of the ocean. He found the
Samoan Islands, and visited several of the Fiji group. Everywhere he
met with the same sort of natives. How they got there was a puzzle
to Roggeveen. They must have come from some large continent, and he
intended to find that continent. But time went by, and his supplies
dwindled away, and he did not see anything that resembled his famous
continent. Whenever a new peak appeared upon the horizon, there was
hope of reaching the land of promise. But from near by the peak always
proved to be another rock sticking out of a placid sea, and giving
shelter to a few thousand naked savages.

Roggeveen did not stop his search until his men began to get sick and
until he had eaten his last piece of bread. Finally, when two-thirds
of the crew had died, he considered himself beaten in his search, and
after visiting New Guinea he went to the Indies. This expedition, the
last one to sail forth to find the land of Ophir of the Old Testament,
was a failure. We have been obliged to make the same observation about
many of the other voyages which we have described in this little book.

It is true they added some positive knowledge to the map. They located
new islands and described rivers and reefs and currents and the
velocity or absence of wind in distant parts of the Pacific Ocean;
but they always cost the lives of many people, and they ruined the
investors in a most cruel fashion.

Yet they had one great advantage: They forced people to leave their
comfortable homes. They made them go forth and search for things about
which they had had expectant visions. To the rest of the world they
gave the tangible sign that in this little Dutch corner of the North
Sea there lived a people of enterprise and courage who, although very
rich, could yet see beyond mere material gain.

And what more can we ask?

       *       *       *       *       *

The Author wishes to state his indebtedness to the work of Dr. de
Boer, who first of all turned the lengthy and often tedious reports
of foreign travel into a concise and readable form and brought the
knowledge of these early adventures among a larger number of readers
than before. Copies of the voyages in original and reprint can be found
in many American libraries. The material for illustrations is very
complete. Where no originals were available reprints were made from the
pictures which the publishing firm of Meulenhof and Co. of Amsterdam
printed in Dr. de Boer's first series of ancient voyages.

THE END

       *       *       *       *       *

 TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES

 Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

 Inconsistent spelling of proper names retained.

 p19 "and called it "a lot of of useless noise."" replaced with
     "and called it "a lot of useless noise.""

 p58 "and was an agreeable change f om the dreary diet" replaced with
     "and was an agreeable change from the dreary diet"

 p197 "La bataille d'dutre nous et contpe sieux de Manille" has been
      left as in the original text. The original intention may have been
      "contre nous et contre ceux de Manille".
      The battle described took place near Fortune Island, where the
      wreck of the San Diego was discovered in 1992.

 p273 "that is the last word word we have ever received" replaced with
      "and that is the last word we have ever received"






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Golden Book of the Dutch Navigators, by
Hendrik Willem van Loon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLDEN BOOK OF THE DUTCH NAVIGATORS ***

***** This file should be named 45799.txt or 45799.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/7/9/45799/

Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
