The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Grapes of New York, by U. P. Hedrick

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Grapes of New York

Author: U. P. Hedrick

Release Date: June 15, 2014 [EBook #45978]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GRAPES OF NEW YORK ***




Produced by Steven Giacomelli, Mark C. Orton, Chuck Greif
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
produced by Core Historical Literature in Agriculture
(CHLA), Cornell University)








[Illustration: EDWARD STANIFORD ROGERS]

             STATE OF NEW YORK--DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
               Fifteenth Annual Report--Vol. 3--Part II

                                  THE
                          GRAPES OF NEW YORK

                                  BY
                             U. P. HEDRICK

                              ASSISTED BY
                              N. O. BOOTH
                             O. M. TAYLOR
                             R. WELLINGTON
                             M. J. DORSEY

Report of the New York Agricultural Experiment Station for the Year 1907
                                  II

                                ALBANY
                  J. B. LYON COMPANY, STATE PRINTERS
                                 1908




               NEW YORK AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION,
                  GENEVA, N. Y., _December 31, 1907_.

     _To the Honorable Board of Control of the New York Agricultural
     Experiment Station_:

GENTLEMEN.--I have the honor to submit herewith Part II of the report of
this institution for the year 1907, to be known as The Grapes of New
York. It is the second in the series of fruit publications which is now
being prepared under your authority.

This volume is the result of years of recorded observations by members
of the Station staff, to which has been added the collection of a large
amount of information from practical growers of the grape. Every effort
has been made to insure completeness and accuracy of statement, and to
make the work a reliable guide as to all the varieties of grapes that
are likely to meet the attention of New York grape-growers. It is
believed that this volume will occupy a useful place in grape literature
and will be serviceable to an important industry in this State.

W. H. JORDAN,

_Director_.




PREFACE


The purpose of _The Grapes of New York_ is to record the state of
development of American grapes. The title implies that the work is being
done for a locality but in this matter New York is representative of the
whole country. The contents are: Brief historical narratives of Old
World and New World grapes; an account of the grape regions and of
grape-growing in New York, with statistics relating to the grape, wine
and grape juice industries in this State; a discussion of the species of
American grapes; and the synonymy, bibliography, economic status, and
full descriptions of all of the important varieties of American grapes.
In the footnotes will be found brief biographical sketches of those
persons who have contributed most to the evolution of the grape and to
grape-growing in America and some historical and descriptive notices of
certain things pertaining to the grape which do not belong in the text
and yet serve to give a better understanding of it or otherwise add to
the completeness of the book. Color-plates are shown of varieties which
from various standpoints are considered most important.

In the brief account of the Old World grape there is little that is new.
Its history is on record from the earliest times in the literature of
nearly all civilized peoples. A few facts, selected here and there, have
been taken to serve as an introduction to the accounts of the New World
grapes. So, too, the history of the American grape has been written by
others and, here, only the main facts have been set down as recorded in
the score or more books dealing with this fruit. A few excursions have
been made in hitherto unexplored fields. The purpose of these historical
sketches is to give the reader a proper perspective of the work in hand.

The grape is probably influenced to a greater degree by soil, climate,
and culture than any other fruit, and a discussion of its status cannot
be complete without due consideration of the environment in which it is
growing. Hence there is included as full an account of grape-growing and
of the grape regions in New York as space permits. This part of the work
may serve the prospective planter somewhat in selecting soils and
locations but as it is not written with this as a chief end, it falls
far short of some of the standard treatises on grape culture in this
respect.

Comparatively few statistics are given, only those which are necessary
to show the volume of grape products and the extent of the vineyards in
the State and country at the present time. The figures for the whole
country are surpassed by those of no other native fruit, and only by
corn and tobacco among all the domesticated native plants.

The botany of the grape has been the most perplexing problem to deal
with in the preparation of this work. The variability of the grape is so
great, and the variations are so often toward closely related species,
that it is difficult to tell where one species ends and another begins.
This, of course, has led to differences in opinions. Then, too, the
several monographers have not had the same specimens to work with; men
do not have the same powers of discrimination; and the arrangement of
botanical groups, based upon the characters of the plants and the theory
of descent with adaptive modifications, is not governed by definite
rules; hence botanical divisions are arbitrary and differ with the
judgments of the botanists who make them. For these reasons we have as
many different arrangements of species of grapes as there are men who
have worked them over.

Since this work is not written from the standpoint of the botanist but
of the horticulturist, no effort has been made to revise the botany of
the grape. But it has been necessary to select some arrangement of
species in order to make such disposition of the cultivated varieties
that their characters and relationships can best be shown. In making a
choice of the several recent classifications of American grapes, three
main considerations have been in mind: First, that the arrangement
should separate the species in the genus freely, thus decreasing the
size of the groups so that they may be more easily studied. Second, that
it should show as clearly as possible the relationships of the various
groups and of their development--the evolution of the grape. Third, that
it be an arrangement in good standing with botanists and
horticulturists. After having examined all American classifications of
grapes and all recent European ones, Bailey's classification, as set
forth in his monograph of the Vitaceae in _Gray's Synoptical Flora_, in
the _Evolution of our Native Fruits_, and in the _Cyclopedia of American
Horticulture_, was adopted.

_The Grapes of New York_ makes its chief contribution to the pomology of
the country in the description of varieties. The authors have tried to
study varieties from every point of view, not alone nor chiefly, it must
be said, with regard to their cultural value; for most of the varieties
pass out of cultivation and such information would be worthless within a
few years at most. But, rather, the effort has been to determine what
elementary or unit characters the grape possesses as shown in its
botanical and horticultural groups. The Twentieth Century begins with
the unanimous judgment of scientists that the characters of plants are
independent entities which are thrown into various relationships with
each other in individuals and groups of individuals. This conception of
unit characters lies at the foundation of plant improvement. We are but
beginning the breeding of American grapes and it has seemed to the
writer that the most important part of this undertaking is to discover
and record as far as possible these unit characters of grapes, thereby
aiding to furnish a foundation for grape-breeding. The great problem of
plant-breeding in the future will be to correlate the characters known
to exist in the plant being improved; we must know what these are before
we begin to combine and rearrange them.

The varieties are arranged alphabetically throughout, though, were
present knowledge exact enough, it would be far better to arrange them
in natural groups. Such a classification is probably possible, but it
remains for future workers to search out the relationships which the
structures and qualities of plant and fruit indicate and to group the
varieties naturally rather than alphabetically. Wherever possible in
this work, however, the relationships of varieties have been indicated
as fully as knowledge permits, thus making a start toward natural
classification.

In the lists of synonyms given, all known names for a variety used in
the American literature of the grape are brought together. These lists
ought to be useful in correcting and simplifying the nomenclature of the
grape which, like that of all of our fruits, is in more or less
confusion. It is hoped that the work may become a standard guide, for
some time to come at least, in the identification of varieties and in
nomenclature, and that it will aid originators of new grapes and
nurserymen in avoiding the duplication of names. In matters pertaining
to nomenclature, the revised rules of the American Pomological Society
have been followed, though in a few cases it has not seemed best to make
changes which their strict observance would have required. The necessity
for rules is shown by an examination of the synonymy of any considerable
number of varieties as given in the body of the work. In some cases
varieties have from ten to twenty names and very often different
varieties are found to have the same name. This chaotic condition is
confusing and burdensome and it has been one of the aims in the
preparation of the work to set straight the horticultural nomenclature
of the grape, thus lessening the difficulty and uncertainty of
identification and making the comparative study of varieties easier.

It would be impossible, and not worth while, could it be done, to give
all of the references to be found in even the standard grape literature.
Only such have been given as have been found useful by the writers or as
would serve to give the future student of the literature of grape
varieties a working basis.

A brief history of each variety is given so far as it can be determined
by correspondence and from grape literature. In these historical
sketches the originator and his method of work justly receive most
attention. The place, date and circumstances of origin, the distributor,
and the present distribution of the variety, are given when known and
are of about equal importance in the plan of this work.

The technical descriptions of grapes are all first-hand and made by
members of the present horticultural department of the Station from
living plants. But rarely has it been necessary to go to books for any
one character of a vine or fruit though the leading authorities have
been consulted in the final writing of the descriptions and
modifications made when the weight of authority has been against the
records of the Station. Some differences must be expected between
descriptions of varieties made in different years, different localities
and by different men. For most part the varieties described are growing
on the Station grounds but every opportunity has been taken to study
several specimens of each variety and especially of the fruit. In many
instances the descriptions have been submitted to the originators,
introducers, or to some recognized grape specialist.

A number of considerations have governed the selection of varieties for
full descriptions. These are: First, the value of a variety for the
commercial or amateur grower for any part of the State as determined by
the records of this Station, by reports collected from over 2000
grape-growers, and by published information from whatever source.
Second, the probable value of new sorts as determined by their behavior
elsewhere. Third, to show combinations of species or varieties, or new
characters hitherto unknown in fruit or vine, or to portray the range in
variation, or to suggest to the plant-breeder a course of future
development. Fourth, a few sorts have been described because of their
historical value--for the retrospection of the grape-grower of the
present and the future. It is needless to say that many of the varieties
described are worthless to the cultivator.

In all of the descriptions the effort has been to depict living plants
and not things existing only in books; to give a pen picture of them
that will show all of their characters. An attempt has been made, too,
to show the breeding of the plants, their relationships; to show what
combination of characters exist in the different groups of varieties; to
designate, as far as possible, the plastic types; in short to show
grapes as variable, plastic plants capable of further improvement and
not as unchangeable organisms restricted to definite forms.

It is hoped that the color-plates will be of great service in
illustrating the text. All possible means at the command of photography
and color printing have been used to make them exact reproductions. The
specimens, too, have been selected with the utmost care. In preparing
these illustrations the thought has been that technical descriptions,
however simply written, are not easily understood, and that the readiest
means of comparison and identification for the average reader would be
found in the color-plates. Through these and the accompanying
descriptions it is hoped that all who desire may acquire, with time and
patience, a knowledge of the botanical characters of grapes and thereby
an understanding of the technical descriptions. The plates have been
made under the personal supervision of the writer.

With all care possible, due allowance must yet be made for the failure
to reproduce nature exactly in the color-plates. The plates are several
removes from the fruit. Four negatives were taken of each subject with
a color filter between the lens and the fruit. A copper plate was made
from each negative, one for each of the four colors, red, yellow, black
and blue. The color-plates in the book are composed of these four
colors, combined by the camera, the artist, the horticulturist and the
printer. With all of these agencies between the fruit and the
color-plate they could not be exact reproductions. It must ever be in
mind, too, that grapes grown in different localities vary more or less
in all characters and that the reproduction can represent the fruit from
but one locality. The specimens from which the plates were made came for
most part from the Station grounds. The illustrations are life size and
as far as possible from average specimens.

Acknowledgments are due to Professor Spencer A. Beach of Ames, Iowa,
who, while in charge of this Department previous to August, 1905, had
begun the collection and organization of information on grapes, much of
which has been used in this volume; to Mr. F. H. Hall, who as Station
Editor has read the manuscripts and proof sheets and given much valuable
assistance in organizing the information presented; to Zeese-Wilkinson &
Co., through whose zeal and painstaking skill the color-plates, which
add so much to the beauty and value of the book, have been made; and
lastly to the grape-growers of New York who have given information
whenever called upon and who have generously furnished grapes for
descriptive and photographic work.

U. P. HEDRICK,

_Horticulturist, New York Agricultural Experiment Station_.




TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                        PAGE.

PREFACE                                                    v

INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS                                  xiii

CHAPTER I.--The Old World Grape                            1

CHAPTER II.--American Grapes                              26

CHAPTER III.--The Viticulture of New York                 68

CHAPTER IV.--Species of American Grapes                   95

CHAPTER V.--The Leading Varieties of American Grapes     157

CHAPTER VI.--The Minor Varieties of American Grapes      433

BIBLIOGRAPHY AND REFERENCES WITH ABBREVIATIONS USED      531

INDEX                                                    537




INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS


PORTRAIT OF EDWARD STANIFORD ROGERS                        _Frontispiece_

                                                             FACING PAGE

AGAWAM                                                               158

AMERICA                                                              168

AMINIA                                                               170

AUGUST GIANT                                                         172

BACCHUS                                                              174

BARRY                                                                178

BERCKMANS                                                            182

BLACK EAGLE                                                          184

BLACK HAMBURG (REDUCED SIZE)                                         186

BRIGHTON                                                             192

BRILLIANT                                                            194

CAMPBELL EARLY                                                       196

CANADA                                                               200

CARMAN                                                               202

CATAWBA                                                              204

CHAMPION                                                             210

CLINTON                                                              214

COLERAIN                                                             218

CONCORD                                                              220

COTTAGE                                                              222

CREVELING                                                            224

CROTON                                                               226

CYNTHIANA                                                            228

DELAWARE                                                             232

DIAMOND                                                              236

DIANA                                                                238

DOWNING                                                              242

DRACUT AMBER                                                         244

DUTCHESS                                                             246

EARLY OHIO                                                           248

EARLY VICTOR                                                         250

EATON                                                                252

ECLIPSE                                                              254

ELVIRA                                                               260

EMPIRE STATE                                                         262

EUMELAN                                                              266

GOETHE                                                               276

GOFF                                                                 278

GREIN GOLDEN                                                         282

HARTFORD                                                             284

HEADLIGHT                                                            288

HERBERT                                                              292

HERCULES                                                             294

HIDALGO                                                              296

HIGHLAND                                                             298

HYBRID FRANC                                                         300

IONA                                                                 302

IRONCLAD                                                             306

ISABELLA                                                             308

IVES                                                                 312

JAMES                                                                314

JANESVILLE                                                           316

JEFFERSON                                                            318

JEWEL                                                                320

KENSINGTON                                                           322

LADY                                                                 324

LADY WASHINGTON                                                      326

LINDLEY                                                              330

LUCILE                                                               332

LUTIE                                                                334

MCPIKE                                                               336

MANITO                                                               338

MARION                                                               340

MASSASOIT                                                            342

MERRIMAC                                                             346

MILLS                                                                348

MISSOURI RIESLING                                                    350

MONTEFIORE                                                           352

MOORE EARLY                                                          352

MOYER                                                                354

MUSCAT HAMBURG (REDUCED SIZE)                                        356

NECTAR                                                               358

NIAGARA                                                              360

NOAH                                                                 362

NORTON                                                               366

OTHELLO                                                              374

POCKLINGTON                                                          380

RED EAGLE                                                            384

ROCHESTER                                                            388

ROMMEL                                                               392

RUPESTRIS DU LOT                                                     114

SALEM                                                                398

SENASQUA                                                             402

TRIUMPH                                                              412

ULSTER                                                               414

VERGENNES                                                            416

_VITIS AESTIVALIS_, shoot of                                         138

VITIS, CANES OF SPECIES OF                                           100

VITIS, FLOWERS OF                                                    104

_VITIS LABRUSCA_, SHOOT OF                                           150

_VITIS RIPARIA_, Shoot of                                            118

_VITIS ROTUNDIFOLIA_, Shoot of                                       108

VITIS, SEEDS OF SPECIES OF                                           102

_VITIS VINIFERA_, SHOOT OF                                           154

WALTER                                                               420

WILDER                                                               424

WINCHELL                                                             426

WOODRUFF                                                             428

WORDEN                                                               430

WYOMING                                                              432

WYOMING, SHOOT OF                                                    152




THE GRAPES OF NEW YORK




CHAPTER I

THE OLD WORLD GRAPE


A single species of the grape is cultivated in the Old World. This is
_Vitis vinifera_, the grape of ancient and modern agriculture, the vine
of the allegories of sacred record and of the myths, fables and poetry
of the Old World countries. It is the vine which Adam and Eve cared
for:--

    "* * * they led the vine
     To wed his elm; * * *." _Milton._

It is the vine which Noah planted after the deluge; the vine of Judah
and Israel, and of the promised land. Dionysus of the Greeks, Bacchus of
the Romans, found the grape and devoted his life to spreading it; for
which he was raised to the rank of a deity--god of vines and vintages.
The history of this grape is as old as that of mankind. It has followed
civilized man from place to place throughout the world and is one of the
chief cultivated plants of temperate climates. This fruit of sacred and
profane literature has so impressed itself upon the human mind that when
we think or speak of the grape, or vine, it is the Old World species,
the vine of antiquity, that presents itself.

The history of the Old World grape goes back to prehistoric times. Seeds
of the grape are found in the remains of the Swiss lake dwellings of the
Bronze Period and entombed with the mummies of Egypt. Its printed
history is as old as that of man and is interwritten with it. According
to the botanists, the probable habitat of _Vitis vinifera_ is the region
about the Caspian Sea.[1] From here it was carried eastward into Asia
and westward into Europe and Africa. It is probable that the
Phoenicians, the earliest navigators, tradesmen and colonizers on the
Mediterranean, carried it to the countries bordering on this sea. Grape
culture was developed in this region a thousand years before Christ,
for Hesiod, who wrote at this time, gave directions for the care of the
vine which need to be changed but little for present practice in Europe.
Pliny, writing a thousand years after, quotes Hesiod as an authority on
vine culture. Vergil and Pliny, during Christ's time, gave specific
directions for the care of the vine. Vergil describes fifteen varieties
while Pliny gives even fuller descriptions of ninety-one varieties and
distinguishes fifty kinds of wine.

The authentic written history of the grape and of its culture really
begins with Vergil. Many other writers, Greeks and Romans, had discussed
the vine, but none so fully nor so well as Vergil in his Georgics, of
which the parts having to do with the vine may still be read with profit
by the grape-grower; as, for example, the following[2] in which he tells
how to cultivate and train:--

    "Be mindful, when thou hast entomb'd the shoot,
     With store of earth around to feed the root;
     With iron teeth of rakes and prongs, to move
     The crusted earth, and loosen it above.
     Then exercise thy sturdy steers to plow
     Between thy vines, and teach the feeble row
     To mount on reeds, and wands, and, upward led,
     On ashen poles to raise their forky head,
     On these new crutches let them learn to walk,
     'Till, swerving upwards with a stronger stalk,
     They brave the winds, and, clinging to their guide,
     On tops of elms at length triumphant ride."[3]

His directions for pruning are equally fitting for present practice:--

    "But in their tender nonage, while they spread
     Their springing leaves, and lift their infant head,
     And upward while they shoot in open air,
     Indulge their childhood, and the nurslings spare;
     Nor exercise thy rage on new-born life;
     But let thy hand supply the pruning knife,
     And crop luxuriant stragglers, nor be loth
     To strip the branches of their leafy growth.
     But when the rooted vines with steady hold
     Can clasp their elms, then, husbandman, be bold
     To lop the disobedient boughs, that strayed
     Beyond their ranks; let crooked steel invade
     The lawless troops, which discipline disclaim,
     And their surperfluous growth with rigor tame."

The history of the development of the vine from Vergil's time through
the early centuries of the Christian Era and of the Middle Ages to our
own day, is largely the history of agriculture in the southern European
countries; for the vine during this period has been the chief cultivated
plant of the Greek and Latin nations. This history should furnish most
instructive lessons in grape-growing and in grape-breeding.

But interesting and profitable as a detailed account of the development
of the Old World grape would be, the brief outline in the few preceding
paragraphs must suffice for this work. The reader who desires further
information may find it in the agricultural literature in many languages
and dating back two thousand years.

What are the characters of the European grape and how does it differ
from the native grapes of America? The Old World grape is grown for
wine; the American grapes for the table. The differences in the fruit of
the vines of the two continents are largely the differences necessary
for the two distinct purposes for which they are grown. The varieties of
_Vitis vinifera_ have a higher sugar and solid content than do those of
the American species. Because of this richness in sugar they not only
make better wine but keep much longer and can be made into raisins. The
American grapes do not keep well and do not make good raisins. Taken as
a whole the European varieties are better flavored, possessing a more
delicate and a richer vinous flavor, a more agreeable aroma, and they
lack the acidity and somewhat obnoxious foxy odor and taste of many
American varieties. It is true that there is a disagreeable astringency
in some Vinifera grapes and that many varieties are without character of
flavor, yet, all and all, the species produces by far the better
flavored fruit. On the other hand, American table grapes are more
refreshing; one does not tire of them so quickly as they do not cloy the
appetite as do the richer grapes; and the unfermented juice makes a much
more pleasant drink. The characteristic flavor and aroma of the
varieties of _Vitis labrusca_, our most commonly cultivated native
species, are often described by the terms "foxy"[4] or "musky." If not
too pronounced this foxiness is often very agreeable though, as with the
flavor in many exotic fruits, the liking for it must often be acquired,
and of course may never be acquired; yet the universal condemnation of
this taste by the French and some other Europeans is sheer prejudice.
The bunches and berries of the European grape are larger, more
attractive in appearance, and are borne in greater quantity, vine for
vine or acre for acre. The pulp and skin of the berries of _Vitis
vinifera_ are less objectionable than those of any native species and
the pulp separates more easily from the seeds. The berries do not shell
from the stem nearly so quickly, hence the bunches ship better.

In comparing the vines, those of the Old World grape are more compact in
habit, make a shorter and stouter annual growth, therefore require less
pruning and training. The roots are fleshier, and more fibrous. The
species, taken as a whole, is adapted to far more kinds of soil, and to
much greater differences in environment, and is more easily propagated
from cuttings, than most of the species of American grapes. The
cultivated forms of the wild vines of this country have few points of
superiority over their relative from the eastern hemisphere, but these
few are such as to make them now and probably ever the only grapes
possible to cultivate in America in the commercial vineyards east of the
Rocky Mountains. Indeed, but for the fortunate discovery that the vine
of _Vitis vinifera_ could be grown on the roots of any one of several
species of the American grapes, the vineyards of the Old World grape
would have been almost wholly destroyed within the last half century
because of one of its weaknesses. This destructive agent is the
phylloxera,[5] a tiny plant louse working on the leaf and root of the
grape, which in a few years wholly destroys the European vine but does
comparatively little harm to most of the American vines. Three other
pests are much more harmful in the Old World vineyards than to the vines
of the New World; these are black-rot (_Guignardia bidwellii_ (Ell.) V.
& R.), downy mildew (_Plasmopara viticola_ (B. & C.) Berl. & De Toni),
and powdery mildew (_Uncinula necator_ (Schw.) Burr.).

The susceptibility of the Old World grape to these parasites debars it
from cultivation in eastern America and so effectually that there is but
little hope of any pure-bred variety of it ever being grown in this
region. American viticulture must, therefore, depend upon the native
species for its varieties, though it may be hoped that by combining the
good qualities of the foreign grape with those of one or several of the
species of this country, or by combining and rearranging the best
characters of the native species, we may in time secure varieties equal
in all respects to those of the Old World. The comparative resistance of
the American species to the phylloxera, the mildews, and black-rot has
been due to natural selection in the contest that has been waged for
untold ages between host and parasite. The fact that the native species
have been able to survive and thrive is a guarantee of the permanence of
the resistance thus acquired.

We have said that the Old World grape is debarred from cultivation in
eastern America. It is worth while considering how thorough the attempts
to grow it in this region have been and to give a more exact account of
the failures and their causes, for there are yet those who are
attempting its culture with the hope that we may sometime grow some
offshoot of _Vitis vinifera_ in the region under consideration.

It is probable that the first European grapes planted in what is now
American soil, were grown by the Spanish _padres_ at the old missions in
New Mexico, Arizona and California. Early accounts of some of these
missions speak of grapes which must have been planted before settlements
were made in eastern America. We need take no further account of these
vineyards except to say that in this region the European grape has
always been grown successfully, and that under the skilled hands of the
mission fathers, ever notable vineyardists and wine-makers, these early
plantings must have succeeded.

The English were the first to plant the Old World grape in the territory
in which this species fails because of the attacks of native parasites.
Lord Delaware seems to have been the original promoter of grape-growing
in the New World. In 1616 he wrote to the London Company urging the
culture of the grape as a possible source of revenue for the new
colony.[6] His letter seems to have been convincing, for it is on record
that the Company in 1619 sent a number of French vine-dressers and a
collection of the best varieties of the grapes of France to Virginia.
The Colonial Assembly showed quite as much solicitude in encouraging the
cultivation of the vine as did the Company in London. The year of the
importation of vines and vine-dressers, 1619, the Assembly passed an act
compelling every householder to plant ten cuttings and to protect them
from injury and stated that the landowners were expected to acquire the
art of dressing a vineyard, either through instruction or by
observation. The Company, to increase the interest in vine-growing,
showed marked favors to all who undertook it with zealousness; promises
of servants, the most valuable gifts that could be made to the
colonists, were frequent. Under the impulse thus given vineyards were
planted containing as many as ten thousand vines.[7]

In spite of a rich soil, congenial climate, and skilled vine-dressers,
nothing of importance came from the venture, some of the historians of
the time attributing the failure to the massacre of 1622; others to poor
management of the vines; and still others to disagreements between the
English and their French vine-dressers, who, it was claimed, concealed
their knowledge because they worked as slaves. It is probable that the
latter explanation was fanciful but the former must have been real for
we are told that the farms and outlying settlements were abandoned after
the great massacre. But the colony could hardly have recovered from the
ravages of the Indians before efforts to force the colonists to grow
grapes were again made; for in 1623 the Assembly passed a law that for
every four men in the colony a garden should be laid off a part of which
was to be planted to vines.[8]

In 1639 the Assembly again tried to encourage vine-growing by
legislative enactment, this time with an act giving a premium to
successful grape-growers.[9] Later, about 1660, a premium of ten
thousand pounds of tobacco was offered in Virginia for each "two tunne
of wine" from grapes raised in the colony. Shortly after, some wine was
exported to England but whether made from wild plants or cultivated
ones does not appear. In spite of the encouragement of legislative acts,
grape-growing did not flourish in Virginia.[10] The fact that tobacco
was a paying crop and more easily grown than the grape may have had
something to do with the failure to grow the latter. Or it may have been
that the cheapness of Madeira, "a noble strong drink," as one of the
Colonial historians puts it, had a depressing influence on the industry.
But still more likely, the foreign plants did not thrive.

Encouragement of the home production of wine did not cease in Virginia
for at least one hundred and fifty years; for in 1769 an enactment of
the Assembly was passed to encourage wine-making in favor of one Andrew
Estave, a Frenchman. As a result of the act of this time, land was
purchased, buildings erected, and slaves and workmen with a complete
outfit for wine-making were furnished Estave. The act provided that if
he made within six years ten hogsheads of merchantable wine--land,
houses, slaves, the whole plant was to be given to him. It is stated
that this unusual subsidy is made "as a reward for so useful an
improvement." Estave succeeded in making the wine but it was poor stuff
and he had difficulty in getting the authorities to turn over the
property which was to be his reward. This was finally done by an act of
the Assembly, however, the failure to make good wine being attributed by
all parties to the "unfitness of the land."

An attempt was made to cultivate the European grape in Virginia early in
the eighteenth century on an extensive scale. Soon after taking office
as governor in 1710, Alexander Spotswood brought over a colony of
Germans from the Rhine and settled them in Spottsylvania County on the
Rapidan river. The site of their village on this river is now marked by
a ford, Germania Ford, a name which is a record of the settlement. That
they grew grapes and made wine is certain, for the Governor's "red and
white Rapidan, made by his Spottsylvania Germans" is several times
mentioned in the published journals and letters of the time. But the
venture did not make a deep nor lasting impress on the agriculture of
the colony.[11]

Several early attempts were made in the Carolinas and Georgia to grow
the Vinifera grape. It was thought, in particular, that the French
Huguenots who settled in these states in large numbers toward the close
of the seventeenth century would succeed in grape-growing but even these
skilled vine-growers failed. Their failures are recorded by Alexander
Hewitt in 1779 as follows: "European grapes have been transplanted, and
several attempts made to raise wine; but so overshaded are the vines
planted in the woods, and so foggy is the season of the year when they
ripen, that they seldom come to maturity, but as excellent grapes have
been raised in gardens where they are exposed to the sun, we are apt to
believe that proper methods have not been taken for encouraging that
branch of agriculture, considering its great importance in a national
view." In Georgia, Abraham De Lyon, encouraged by the authorities of the
colony, imported vines from Portugal and planted them at Savannah early
in the eighteenth century but his attempt, though carried out on a small
scale in a garden, soon failed.

In Maryland, if the records are correct, a greater degree of success was
attained than in the states to the south. Lord Charles Baltimore, son of
the grantee of the territory, in 1662 planted three hundred acres of
land in St. Mary's to vines. It is certain that he made and sold wine in
considerable quantities and the old chroniclers report that it was as
good as the best Burgundy. Efforts to grow the European grape in
Maryland continued until as late as 1828 when the _Maryland Society for
Promoting the Culture of the Vine_ was incorporated by the State
Legislature.[12] The object of the Society was to "carry on experiments
in the cultivation of both the European and native grapes and to collect
and disseminate all possible information upon this interesting
subject." The organization was in existence for several years and
through its exertions practically all of the native sorts were tried in
or about Baltimore as well as many seedlings. Besides the achievements
of the Society as a body, their Secretary reports in 1831 that, through
the individual efforts of its members, there were then under cultivation
near the city of Baltimore several vineyards of from three to ten acres
each and a great number of smaller ones. This was several years after
the introduction of the Catawba and Isabella for which grape-growers in
other parts of the United States had largely given up the Vinifera
sorts. Seemingly in every part of the Union the grape of the Old World
was tried, not once only, but time and again before its culture could be
given up.

The Swedes made some attempts at an early day to grow grapes on the
Delaware. Queen Christina instructed John Printz, governor of New
Sweden, to encourage the "culture of the vine" and to give the industry
his personal attention. Later when New Sweden had become a part of
Pennsylvania, William Penn encouraged vine-growing by importing cuttings
of French and Spanish vines; and several experimental vineyards were set
out in the neighborhood of Philadelphia, but all efforts to establish
bearing plantations came to naught. Penn's interest in grape-growing
seems to have been greatly stimulated by wine made by a friend of his
from native grapes which grew about Germantown.

There are no detailed accounts of grape-growing by the Dutch of New York
but the following taken from the writings of Jasper Dankers and Peter
Sluyter, two Hollanders who visited New York in 1679, soon after the
English took possession of New Netherland, indicates that there had been
attempts to cultivate grapes.[13] "I went along the shore to Coney
Island, which is separated from Long Island only by a creek, and around
the point, and came inside not far from a village called _Gravesant_,
and again home. We discovered on the roads several kinds of grapes still
on the vines, called _speck_ (pork) grapes, which are not always good,
and these were not; although they were sweet in the mouth at first, they
made it disagreeable and stinking. The small blue grapes are better, and
their vines grow in good form. Although they have several times
attempted to plant vineyards, and have not immediately succeeded, they,
nevertheless, have not abandoned the hope of doing so by and by, for
there is always some encouragement, although they have not, as yet,
discovered the cause of the failure." The "_speck_" grape was without
question _Vitis labrusca_ and the small blue grape was probably _Vitis
riparia_.

Thirty years before the visit of Dankers and Sluyter the people of New
Netherland addressed a remonstrance to the home government regarding
certain abuses in the colony. This document[14] is headed with a chapter
on the productions of New Netherland in which the wild grapes are
mentioned and their cultivation is suggested. "Almost the whole country,
as well the forest as the maize lands and flats, is full of vines, but
principally--as if they had been planted there--around and along the
banks of the brooks, streams and rivers which course and flow in
abundance very conveniently and agreeably all through the land. The
grapes are of many varieties; some white, some blue, some very fleshy
and fit only to make raisins of; some again are juicy, some very large,
others on the contrary small; their juice is pleasant and some of it
white, like French or Rhenish Wine; that of others, again, a very deep
red, like Tent; some even paler; the vines run far up the trees and are
shaded by their leaves, so that the grapes are slow in ripening and a
little sour, but were cultivation and knowledge applied here, doubtless
as fine Wines would then be made as in any other wine growing
countries."

Nicolls, the first English governor of New York, greatly desired to grow
the vine for wine-making. In 1664 he granted Paul Richards a monopoly of
the industry for the colony stipulating that he could make and sell
wines free of impost and gave him the right to tax any person planting
vines in the colony five shillings per acre.[15] Richards lived in the
city of New York but his vineyard, as indicated in the grant, was
located on Long Island. It may be assumed that this was the first
attempt to grow grapes commercially in the State of New York. It would
seem that the governor by granting a monopoly of the grape and wine
industry took the surest means of killing the infant industry. The Earl
of Bellomont, a later governor of the Colony, wrote to London with
assurances of a great future of viticulture in the Colony.[16] For over
a century after, there were spasmodic efforts to grow the Old World
grape in and about New York City, and at the beginning of the
Revolutionary War there were a few small vineyards and some wine-making
on Manhattan Island.

There were many attempts to grow foreign grapes in New England. John
Winthrop, governor of Massachusetts Bay Colony, had planted a vineyard
in one of the islands, known as "Governor's Garden," in Boston Harbor
before 1630. Vine-planters were sent to this colony in 1629.[17] There
were plantations at the mouth of the Piscataqua in Maine as early or
before Winthrop's plantings were made. In granting a charter to Rhode
Island in 1663, Charles II sought to encourage viticulture in that State
by offering liberal inducements to colonists who would grow grapes and
make wine.[18] But if grapes were grown, or wine made from the foreign
grape, no great degree of success was attained. Wine was made in plenty
from the wild grapes in all of the New England colonies so that it was
not because of Puritanical prejudices against wine that the grapes were
not grown. The glowing terms in which travelers returning to England
spoke of the native grapes and of the wine from them undoubtedly
stimulated those founding the colonies to make every effort to introduce
the cultivated grape even though the cold, bleak climate and thin soils
of this northern region were inhospitable to a plant which thrives best
in the sunny southern portions of Europe.

In only one of the states east of the Rockies is grape-growing recorded
to have gained even a foothold before the introduction of varieties of
native grapes. In this instance there is much doubt as to whether the
varieties grown were pure-bred _Vitis vinifera_. Louisiana, while owned
by France, grew grapes and made wine in such quantities, and the wine
was of such high quality, so several of the old chroniclers say, that
the French government forbade grape-growing in the colony. Since the
wine-making was in the hands of the Jesuits who had learned the art in
Europe, and since there were no cultivated varieties of native grapes at
that time of which there is record, the presumption among the early
writers was that these vineyards were of European grapes. Louisiana,
however, was a vast and undefined region and it is not known where these
oft-mentioned vineyards were located. It is probable in the light of
what we now know that these Louisiana Jesuits made wine from native
grapes either wild or cultivated.

The time covered so far is the two hundred years in which America was
being colonized. We have seen that all of our European forefathers
brought with them a love of the vine, or more correctly, a love of wine,
and that throughout the period many experiments were made in all parts
of the eastern United States to grow varieties of _Vitis vinifera_. The
experiments were on a large scale and in the hands of expert
vine-growers, as well trained as their fellow colonists in South Africa,
New Zealand, Australia and South America, countries where the colonists
grew the Old World grapes as easily and as well as they are grown in the
most favored parts of Europe. It is certain that the failures recorded
for these two hundred years were not due to lack of effort on the part
of the settlers. We now pass to more recent efforts, even more
thoroughly carried out, to grow the grape of the Old World in this part
of the New World. The discussion of these later attempts cannot be full.
The reader can readily turn to the horticultural literature of the
century just closed and find much fuller records of them than space
permits in this work.

One of the first and most notable of the vineyards in the eighteenth
century was that of Colonel Robert Bolling of Buckingham County,
Virginia. An account of his undertaking written by one of the Bolling
family some years later reads as follows: "It is now but little known
that this gentleman had early turned his attention to the cultivation of
the vine, and had actually succeeded in procuring and planting a small
vineyard of four acres, of European grapes, at Chellow, the seat of his
residence: that he had so far accomplished his object as to have the
satisfaction of seeing his vines in a most flourishing condition, and
arrived at an age when they were just beginning to bear; promising all
the success that the most sanguine imagination could desire, when,
unfortunately for his family, and perhaps for his country, he departed
this life while in the Convention in Richmond, in July, 1775. Thus all
his fond anticipations of being enabled, in a short time, to afford to
his countrymen a practical demonstration of the facility and certainty
with which grapes might be raised, and wine made, in Virginia, were
suddenly frustrated; all his hopes and prospects blasted; and owing to
the general want of information, in the management of vines, among us at
that time; and the confusion produced by the war of the revolution,
which immediately followed, this promising and flourishing little
vineyard was totally neglected and finally perished."[19]

At the time of Bolling's death he was preparing to send to press a book
on grape-growing entitled _A Sketch of Vine Culture_. The book was never
printed but the manuscript was copied several times and parts of it were
printed contemporaneously in the _Virginia Gazette_, and subsequently in
the _Bolling Memoirs_ and in the _American Farmer_.[20] Bolling's book
was largely a compilation from European sources but it contained the
experiences and observations of the author in cultivating European
grapes in America and though not printed, was sufficiently distributed
through manuscript copies and through the papers and books mentioned
above, to give its author the honor of being the first American writer
on grapes.

In an essay on the cultivation of the vine published in the first volume
of the _Transactions of the American Philosophical Society_[21] printed
in Philadelphia in 1771, a Mr. Edward Antill of Shrewsbury, New Jersey,
gives explicit directions for grape-growing and wine-making.[22] Antill
describes only foreign varieties and leads the reader to infer, though
he does not say so, that he has grown many varieties of these grapes
successfully. But neither his essay, nor his efforts at grape-growing,
seemed to have stimulated a grape industry worthy of note. This essay of
Antill's is the second American treatise on the cultivation of the grape
and was for many years the chief authority on grape-growing in America.
It is greatly to be regretted that a treatise which was to be quoted for
fifty years could not have been more meritorious. The eighty quarto
pages written by Antill give little real or trustworthy information. It
is a rambling discussion of European grapes, wine-making, the temperance
question, patriotism, "wellfare of country," and "good of mankind". He
quotes Columella, gives methods of curing grapes for raisins, and winds
up with a discussion of figs. Yet a hundred years ago it was the chief
work on grape-growing.

A Frenchman, Peter Legaux, founded a company in 1793 for the cultivation
of grapes at Spring Mill near Philadelphia. In 1800 he published an
account of his venture.[23] A vineyard of European grapes was set out
and the prospects seemed favorable for the success of the undertaking.
But the grapes began to fail, dissensions arose among the stock-holders,
the vineyards were neglected and the company failed. Legaux speaks of
his experience in grape-growing as follows:[24] "But if the native
grapes of America are not the most eligible for vineyards, others are
now within the reach of its inhabitants. Some years since I procured
from France three hundred plants from the three kinds of grapes in the
highest estimation, of which are made Burgundy, Champagne and Bordeaux
wines. These three hundred plants have in ten years produced 100,000
plants; which, were the culture encouraged, would in ten years more,
produce upwards of thirty millions of plants; or enough to stock more
than 8000 acres, at 3600 plants to the acre, set about three feet and a
half apart. I have also about 3000 plants raised from a single plant
procured a few years since from the Cape of Good Hope, of the kind which
produces the excellent Constantia wines. The gentlemen who at different
times have done me the honour to taste these wines can bear testimony to
their good quality. Although made in the hottest season, (about the
middle of August) yet they were perfectly preserved without the addition
of a drop of brandy or any other spirit. And in this will consist one
excellency of the wines here recommended to the notice of my fellow
citizens; that being made wholly of the juice of grapes, they will be
light, wholesome, and excite an agreeable cheerfulness, without
inflaming the blood, or producing the other ill effects of the strong
brandied wines, imported from the southern parts of Europe. Since 1793,
I have confined my attention chiefly to the multiplication of my vines,
to supply the demand for plants, and to furnish an extended vineyard
under my own direction, whenever my fellow citizens possessing pecuniary
means, should be inclined to encourage and support the attempt."

Out of this venture, however, came the Alexander grape, an offspring of
a native species, and not, as Legaux held, a foreign variety, which, as
we shall see later, was the first variety to be grown on a commercial
scale in eastern America. Johnson,[25] writing of Legaux's work with the
grape, says that in 1801 cuttings were sent from the Spring Mill
vineyards in quantities of fifteen hundred to Kentucky and Pennsylvania
and smaller quantities to Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Maryland,
Virginia and Ohio, and indicates that these cuttings in their turn were
multiplied so that many diverse experiments with foreign grapes arose
from Legaux's efforts.

Chief of the experiments which Legaux's partial success in vine-growing
stimulated was carried on in Kentucky by _The Kentucky Vineyard Society_
of which John James Dufour, a Swiss, was leader.[26] It was to this
Company that Legaux had sent the fifteen hundred cuttings mentioned
above as going to Kentucky. Before founding his grape colony, Dufour had
made a tour of inspection of all the vineyards that he could hear of in
what then constituted the United States. His account of what he saw,
given in his book _The Vine Dresser's Guide_, is the most accurate
statement we have of grape-growing in America at the beginning of the
nineteenth century.

Dufour's account, pages 18-24, runs as follows: "I went to see all the
vines growing that I could hear of, even as far as Kaskaskia, on the
borders of the Mississippi; because I was told, by an inhabitant of that
town, whom I met with at Philadelphia, that the Jesuits had there a very
successful vineyard, when that country belonged to the French, and were
afterwards ordered by the French government to destroy it, for fear the
culture of the grapes should spread in America and hurt the wine trade
of France. As I had seen but discouraging plantations of vines on that
side of the Alleghany, and as the object of my journey to America, was
purposely to learn what could be done in that line of business; I was
desirous to see if the west would afford more encouragement. I resolved
therefore on a visit to see if any remains of the Jesuits' vines were
still in being, and what sort of grapes they were; supposing very
naturally, that if they had succeeded as well as tradition reported,
some of them might possibly be found in some of the gardens there. But I
found only the spot where that vineyard had been planted, in a well
selected place, on the side of a hill to the north east of the town,
under a cliff. No good grapes, however were found either there, or in
any of the gardens of the country. * * * In my journeying down the Ohio,
I found at Marietta a Frenchman, who was making several barrels of wine
every year, out of grapes that were growing wild, and abundantly, on the
heads of the Islands of the Ohio River, known by the name of Sand
grapes, because they grow best on the gravels; a few plants of which are
now growing in one of our vineyards, given by the Harmonites under the
name of red juice. * * * The various attempts at vineyards that I heard
of, which I went to see, at Monticello, President Jefferson's place;
which, in 1799, I perceived had been abandoned, or left without any care
for three or four years before, which proved evidently, that it had not
been profitable: At Spring Mill, on the Schuylkill, near Philadelphia,
planted by Mr. LEGAUX, a French gentleman, and afterwards supported by a
wealthy Society formed by subscription, at that City, for the express
purpose of trying to extend the culture of the grape. I saw that
vineyard in 1796, 1799 and 1806. On the estate of Mr. CAROLL, of
Carollton, below Baltimore, in Maryland; whither I went on purpose from
Philadelphia in 1796, there was a small vineyard kept by a French
vinedresser, and where they had tried a few sorts of the indigenous
grapes. At the Southern Liberties of Philadelphia, I saw in 1806, a
plantation of a large assortment of the best species of French grapes;
which a French vinedresser had brought over the Atlantic. They were at
their 2d or 3d years: they had not been attacked by the sickness: their
nurse was yet full of hope.--In 1796, I saw also, near the Susquehannah
river, not far from Middletown, a vineyard that had been planted by a
German; but who having died sometime before, the vineyard had been
wholly neglected. I was told, it had produced some wine; but it had
suffered so much delapidation, that I could not recognize the species of
grapes."

With full knowledge of the failures of the past in growing grapes, and
after his disheartening visits to a score or more of worthless vineyards
planted with the grapes of his native country, Dufour embarked in the
_Kentucky Vineyard Society_ enterprise and gave the Old World grapes a
thorough trial on an extensive scale, with an abundance of capital, and,
to care for the vines, as skilled labor as could be obtained in the
vineyards of Europe. As was the case with all past undertakings of the
kind so this one proved a failure. In the words of Dufour "a sickness
took hold of all our vines except a few stocks of Cape and Madeira
grapes." The promoters became disheartened and the vineyard after being
cultivated for several years was abandoned.

Members of the colony, thinking that a more favorable location might be
found elsewhere in the valley of the Ohio, settled at Vevay, Indiana, in
1802. Dufour and several of his relatives were granted the privilege of
purchasing lands with extended credit by an act of Congress May 1st,
1802. They purchased 2500 acres at the location of the new colony in
Indiana and began anew the culture of the vine. For a time there was an
element of prosperity in the enterprise but the vines became diseased
and died, only one sort, the Cape or Alexander, gave returns for the
care bestowed and by 1835 the Vevay vineyards ceased to exist. Could
Dufour have foreseen the value of the native grapes for cultivation and
devoted the capital and energy spent on European sorts to the best wild
plants from the woods, grape culture in America would have been put
forward half a century.

Other experiments with Old World grapes were tried in 1803 by the
Harmonists, a religious-socialistic community founded in Germany, but
which finally settled in America. After temporary sojourns in other
settlements, the Harmonists founded a permanent colony in Pennsylvania
near Pittsburg. Here they planted ten acres of European grapes and grew
them with but temporary success, if any, for Dufour in 1826 visited the
colony and says: "None of the imported grapes do well there except the
Black Juice, of which I saw but one plant; it is too small a bearer to
be worth nursing."[27] Again there was disaster to an extensive
experiment in the hands of skilled men. Besides having tried grape
culture in Pennsylvania, the Harmonists made plantations at New Harmony,
Indiana, where they settled for a time; but exact accounts of this
experiment are wanting.

One other of the many organized attempts to grow the foreign grapes
needs mention. When the Napoleonic wars were over a number of
Bonaparte's exiled officers came to America. They were impoverished, and
in order to help them, as well as to insure their becoming permanent
settlers in the United States, the exiles were organized by American
sympathizers into a society for the cultivation of the vine and the
olive. The society was organized in the early fall of 1816 in
Philadelphia and the remainder of the year was spent in prospecting for
a suitable location for the venture. The colony finally decided to
settle on the Tombigbee river in Alabama and petitioned Congress for a
grant of land in that region. In the end the refugees obtained a grant
from Congress of four contiguous townships, each six miles square[28]
for the culture of the vine and the olive.

In 1817, an installment of one hundred and fifty French settlers left
Philadelphia taking with them an assortment of grape and olive plants.
December 12, 1821, Charles Villars, one of the company, reported to the
American government[29] that there were then in the colony eighty-one
actual planters, 327 persons all told, with 1100 acres in full
cultivation, including 10,000 vines and that the company had spent about
$160,000 in the venture. Villars tells in full of the ups and downs of
the Society. It was apparent from the start that the olive could not be
grown. The history of the vineyards on the Tombigbee, as he tells it, is
but a record of misfortune. All efforts to cultivate the foreign vines
resulted only in failure. The few vines that the vintners made grow
yielded a scant crop of miserable quality which could not be made into
wine because of ripening in the heat of summer. The land was not adapted
to growing grapes. The Society, meeting failure at every turn, finally
disbanded and the colonists were scattered. For a half century after,
there were records in the southern agricultural literature of the
attempts of stragglers or descendants of this colony to grow European
grapes in the South. Yet these grapes are not now cultivated in this
region, which seemingly has the climate and the soil of France.

The history of these French settlers on the Tombigbee is a most pathetic
one.[30] Many of the leaders had been officers of high rank in
Napoleon's armies unaccustomed to field work and the hardships of a new
country. Here, in a rough and hardly explored country, part of which was
overflowed half of the year, visited by all the sicknesses inherent to
such a location, they passed several years in their attempts to grow
European grapes. Failure was predestined because of natural obstacles
which by this time were apparent, and was foreshadowed by so many
previous unsuccessful attempts that it would seem that this culminating
tragedy in growing European grapes could have been prevented. The
certain failure of the attempt makes all the more pathetic the story of
the Vine and Olive Colony on the Tombigbee.[31]

In closing the record of the Old World grape in America a few of the
later individual attempts to grow this grape must be recounted.

Three generations of Princes experimented with European grapes at the
famous Linnaean Botanic Garden, Flushing, Long Island. Wm. R. Prince[32]
author of _A Treatise on the Vine_, devoted his life to promoting the
culture of the grape in America. He tried all of the European sorts
obtainable, "reared" as he tells us, "from plants imported _direct_ from
the most celebrated collections in France, Germany, Italy, the Crimea,
Madeira, etc.; and above two hundred varieties are the identical kinds
which were cultivated at the Royal Garden of the Luxembourg at Paris, an
establishment formed by royal patronage for the purpose of concentrating
all the most valuable fruits of France, and testing their respective
merits."[33] After nearly a half century of experimentation he gave up
the culture of foreign grapes and largely devoted the last years of his
life to growing and disseminating native varieties, exercising,
probably, a greater influence on the culture of American grapes than any
other of the many men who have helped improve the grapes of this
country.

Nicholas Longworth,[34] of Cincinnati, Ohio, experimented with the
European grapes for thirty years. His experience is best told in his own
words written in 1846: "I have tried the foreign grapes extensively for
wine at great expense for many years, and have abandoned them as unfit
for our climate. In the acclimation of plants I do not believe. The
white, Sweetwater grape is not more hardy with me than it was thirty
years since, and does not bear as well. I have tried them in all soils
and with all exposures.

"I obtained 5,000 plants from Madeira, 10,000 from France; and one-half
of them, consisting of twenty varieties of the most celebrated wine
grapes from the mountains of Jura, in the extreme northern[35] part of
France, where the vine region ends; I also obtained them from the
vicinity of Paris, Bordeaux, and from Germany. I went to the expense of
trenching one hundred feet square on a side hill, placing a layer of
stone and gravel at the bottom, with a drain to carry off the water, and
to put in a compost of rich soil and sand three feet deep, and planted
on it a great variety of foreign wine grapes. All failed; and not a
single plant is left in my vineyards. I would advise the cultivation of
native grapes alone, and the raising of new varieties from their
seed."[36]

The French Revolution drove a wealthy and educated Frenchman, M.
Parmentier, to New York at the beginning of the nineteenth century. He
planted about his place in Brooklyn a large garden in which there were
many grapes. This garden afterward became a commercial nursery from
which was distributed a considerable number of European grapes. Mr.
Robert Underhill at Croton Point on the Hudson was induced to plant a
vineyard of these but they soon went the way of all their kind, leaving
Mr. Underhill only a consuming desire to plant grapes. This desire bore
fruit, as we shall see. When the reign of terror had ceased, Parmentier
returned to France from whence he sent many grapes to friends in
America. He left a lasting impress on the horticulture and viticulture
of America, through his experimental efforts with plants and his
contribution to American horticultural literature. The Underhills (the
father had been joined by his sons R. T. and W. A. Underhill) planted a
vineyard of Catawbas and Isabellas in 1827. These vineyards grew until
they covered seventy-five acres, the product of which was marketed in
the metropolis and nearby cities. The grapes from this vineyard often
sold for twenty-five cents a pound and supplied the whole market of the
region. The grape industry of the Hudson River Valley began with
Parmentier and the Underhills.

Another Frenchman, Alphonse Loubat, planted a vineyard of forty acres at
Utrecht, Long Island, containing about 150,000 plants of foreign
varieties. Here, we are told, "he strove against mildew and sun-scald
for several years, but had to yield at last, as the elements were too
much for human exertions to overcome."[37] Loubat attempted to protect
his grapes from mildew by covering them with paper bags and was probably
the originator of the practice of bagging grapes.

Not infrequently one may still find some varieties of the Old World
grape grown out of doors with a fair degree of success in favored
locations but always by the amateur and never in a commercial vineyard.
These few pages rehearsing repeated failures without a single success,
serve to show the uselessness of attempting to grow foreign grapes in
eastern America. Their culture has been tried by thousands on a small
scale and by many individuals with experience, knowledge and capital on
a large scale. With all, the results have been the same; a year or two
of promise, then disease, dead vines and an abandoned vineyard.

The causes for these failures have been indicated. As Dufour says, "a
sickness takes hold of the vines." Phylloxera, mildew, rot--native
parasites to which native grapes are comparatively immune--"take hold"
of the foreign sorts and they die.

It is probable, too, that our climate, at the North at least, is not
well suited to the production of the Old World grape. As a species, the
Vinifera grapes thrive best in climates equable in both temperature and
humidity. The climate of eastern America is not equable; it alternates
between hot and cold, wet and dry. The range in both temperature and
humidity is far greater than in the grape-growing regions of Europe,
California, South Africa or Australia. The fleshy roots of _Vitis
vinifera_ are more tender to cold than are those of the species of
northern United States and this would prevent its culture becoming very
general in many regions where native grapes can be grown.

It is only in the regions west of the Rocky Mountains, and more
particularly in California, that the varieties of Vinifera are
successfully grown in America. The great viticultural interests of the
far West are founded upon the success of this one species. The native
grapes can be grown but they cannot compete in California with _Vitis
vinifera_ for any purpose. Nevertheless American species are
indispensable in this western region for stocks upon which to graft the
Vinifera varieties, and it is probable that the time is not far distant
when all California vines will be upon American roots. Within the
boundaries of latitude in which Vinifera varieties are grown west of the
Rocky Mountains the grape shows wonderful adaptability; it is found at
all elevations permitting fruit culture; it grows on practically all
soils; it thrives under irrigation or under dry farming; it is given
various kinds of treatment, including total neglect, and still thrives;
the number of varieties grown for wine, raisin and table grapes runs
into hundreds. The truly wonderful success met with in the cultivation
of this species west of the great continental divide makes all the more
remarkable the fact that in no place east of the divide will varieties
of it thrive.

We now pass to a consideration of the American grapes, their characters,
the early notices of them, their rise, their success, and their
future--a more pleasing task than to record disaster after disaster in
growing the grape of the Old World.




CHAPTER II

AMERICAN GRAPES


The grape is preeminently a North American plant. The genus Vitis is a
large one, from thirty to fifty species being distinguished for the
world; more than half of these are found on this continent. But few
other plants in America, or in the world, inhabit such varied and such
extended areas. In North America wild grapes abound on the warm, dry
soils of New Brunswick and New England, about the Great Lakes in Canada
and in the United States, and on the fertile river banks and in the
valleys, rich woodlands and thickets of the eastern and southern States.
They thrive in the dry woods, sandy sea-plains, and reef-keys of the
Carolinas, Georgia and Florida where the vines of the Scuppernong often
run more than a hundred feet over trees and shrubs, rioting in natural
luxuriance. They flourish in the mountains and limestone hills of the
Virginias, Tennessee and Kentucky. They are not so common in the West,
yet found in almost all parts of Missouri and Arkansas, and from North
Dakota through Kansas to southern Texas. Some wild grape is found in
each of the Rocky Mountain States on plain or mountain, or in river
chasm or dry canon. Several species are found in New Mexico, Arizona and
California, where if they did not furnish the Spanish _padres_ of Santa
Fe and San Diego with fruit for wine, they suggested to them the
planting of the first successful vineyards in the United States.

How did the grape spread from the Carolinas to California and from
subtropical Mexico to the barren plains of Central Canada? Why divide
into its manifold forms in the distribution? These questions are of
practical import to the grape-grower and breeder who seeks to improve
this fruit. The knowledge of the distribution and evolution of plants
obtained in the last half century is so complete that these questions
present few difficulties to the naturalist of today. In answering them
no one would now hold that the numerous species and their sub-divisions
were created separately for the regions in which they grow. All would
take the ground that the different wild forms come from one ancestral
species. We can waive the question as to what the original species was
and as to where it first grew.

It is certain that grapes have not been distributed over North America
by the hand of man. Probably they have been growing in the regions where
they are now found since before the migration of the first savages. The
agents of distribution have been natural ones, such as animals, birds,
and lake and river currents. These have widened the area of a species to
limits imposed by the hostile action of other plants and of animals and
by geographical and physical conditions. As a species has encroached
upon a new region, climate, soil, all of the conditions of environment,
and the contest with other living things, have gradually modified its
characters until in time it became so changed that it constituted a new
species.

This descent from an original species with plants changed by environment
has given us, in America, types of the wild grape as widely diverse as
the regions they inhabit. The species found in the forests have
developed long slender trunks and branches in their struggle to attain
sunlight and air. At least two species are dwarf and shrubby, or
infrequently climbing, two to six feet high, growing in dry sands, on
rocky hills and mountains where roots must cling to rocks and penetrate
into interstices. Still another form runs on the ground and over low
bushes and is nearly evergreen, but in the herbarium can hardly be
distinguished from a grape whose habit of growth is strikingly
different. Some are long-lived, growing and bearing fruit for two or
more centuries, while others reach no greater age than the ordinary
shrub. Some have enormous stems, a foot or more in diameter, gnarled and
picturesque and supporting a great canopy of branch and foliage,[38]
while others are slender in stem and graceful, almost delicate, in
character of vine. Not less remarkable than the differences in structure
is the adaptability of the genus and some of the species to varied
climatic conditions. Several of the wild grapes develop full size and
display natural luxuriance and fruit-bearing qualities only in the
Middle States, but may be found on dry, gravelly, wind-swept hills far
to the north or in some hot and humid atmosphere of the South, as if to
show indifference to wet or dry, heat or cold.

On the other hand there are many strong points of resemblance between
the score or more of species. The organs and characters that do not bear
the strain of changed environment, nor suffer in the perpetual warfare
of nature, are much the same in all of the species of Vitis. Thus the
structure of flowers, fruits and seeds is practically identical; all
have naked-tipped tendrils; leaves and leaf-buds are very similar; and
the various species usually hybridize freely. They are alike in the
unlikeness of individual plants in any of the species; that is, all of
the individuals of the genus are most variable and seeds taken from the
same vine may produce plants quite unlike one another and quite unlike
the parent.

These few facts regarding the evolution and distribution of American
grapes lead to two important conclusions:

First, the species are so distributed throughout the United States, and
individuals of the species grow in such abundance and luxuriance, as to
suggest that we shall be able to improve and domesticate some one or
more of them for all of the agricultural regions of the country. For it
is proved that nearly all of the wild grapes have horticultural
possibilities; and experience with many plants teaches that the
boundaries of areas inhabited by the wild species of a given region
coincide with those suited to the production of the domesticated plant
in that region. It is not possible to tell where the grape-growing
regions of the future are to be located; for species and individuals of
this fruit are so common that no one can say where the grape is most at
home in America.

Second, grapes are so variable and plastic in nature that, were it not
known from experience, it could be assumed that they would yield readily
to improvement. Besides being variable they hybridize freely and thus
the plant-breeder can obtain desirable starting points. There are
indications that some of the characters of grapes, at least, follow
Mendel's Law, and when once these have been determined, and the more
important unit characters segregated and defined, it ought to be
possible to combine and rearrange the characters of this fruit with some
system and surely with more certainty than in the past.

This brief introduction leads us to the consideration of American grapes
as cultivated plants. We have seen that it is an absolute impossibility
to grow the Old World grape in eastern America. The fruit-growers in
this great region are forced to plant the native grapes if any. It
required two hundred years to establish this fact and it is less than a
hundred years since grape-growers have generally acknowledged it as a
fact. What was known of American grapes during the two hundred years
wasted in attempting to grow the foreign Vinifera? And what has been
accomplished in a century in ameliorating the native grapes?

The earliest European visitors to the Atlantic seaboard delighted in the
wild grapes which they found everywhere and which reminded them of the
Old World vineyards. Had they never seen such a fruit, the wild grapes
could not long have escaped their attention; for the Indians knew and
used them as they did potatoes, corn, and tobacco. In the narratives of
the early voyages the grape is often in the lists of the resources and
treasures of the new-found continent. Unfortunately it was not
considered of great intrinsic value but only suggested to the explorers
that the grape of the old home might be grown in the new home. Could a
part of the exaggerated esteem given by the early European travelers and
home-seekers to sassafras, ginseng and other such plants, have been
bestowed upon the wild grapes which over-run the country, viticulture
would have taken rank with the tobacco, lumber and the fish industries
of the early settlers.

In the history of Vinland, or more properly Wineland, we find the first
record of American grapes.[39] Biarni Heriulfsson, a Norseman, while
making a voyage from Iceland to Greenland, 986 A. D., was driven by a
storm to the coast of New England but did not touch land. Leif the
Lucky, son of Eric the Red, about 1000 A. D., visited the country
discovered by Biarni. One of Leif's men, Tyrker, a German who "was born
where there is no lack of either grapes or vines," discovered grapes,
whereupon Leif named the country "Wineland." Other Norsemen in at least
two expeditions visited Wineland, supposed to be a part of Rhode Island
or Massachusetts, and for centuries after, the land discovered by Leif
the Lucky was known in Icelandic literature as "Wineland the Good." The
first European to touch the New World christened it after its grapes.

The next record we have of American grapes comes from an Englishman, one
Captain John Hawkins, who visited the Spanish settlements in Florida in
1565.[40] In his account of the colony he speaks of the wild grapes,
comparing them, as did all the early explorers, with those of Europe. He
indicates further that the Spaniards had discovered the value of the
wild grape for domestic purposes and says that they had made twenty
hogsheads of wine in a single season. It is almost certain that this
grape was _Vitis rotundifolia_, best represented by the Scuppernong,
which is commonly found on the Atlantic sea-coast from Maryland to
Florida.

The first English colonists, like the Norsemen, declared the new-found
world to be a natural vineyard. Amadas and Barlowe, sent out by Raleigh
in 1584, described the land[41] "so full of grapes as the very beating
and surge of the sea overflowed them, of which we found such plenty, as
well there as in all places else, both on the sand and on the green
soil, on the hills as on the plains, as well as on every little shrub
as also climbing towards the top of high cedars, that I think in all the
world the like abundance is not to be found."

Ralph Lane, in a subsequent expedition of Raleigh's, in a letter to
Hakluyt, pronounced the grapes of Virginia to be larger than those of
France, Spain or Italy.[42]

The region described by Amadas and Barlowe is that of the two great
sounds, Albemarle and Pamlico, on the coast of North Carolina and more
specifically Roanoke Island. It was to this place that Raleigh sent his
expeditions, with one of which Amadas and Barlowe were connected, and
established the earliest colony of Englishmen in the New World. The
first home of Europeans in America was in Vinland, named for its grapes.
The first home of Englishmen was on Roanoke Island, "so full of grapes
that the very sea overflowed them."

A few years later, Thomas Hariot, in a description of Virginia which
must have done much to decide the English as to the advisability of
establishing colonies in America, gave a detailed account of the
merchantable commodities the new countries afforded. Among these he
mentions grapes which he describes as being of two kinds that the soil
yields naturally and abundantly, of which one was small and sour and of
the bigness of the European grape while the other was of greater size
and more sweet and luscious. Hariot concludes his description with the
statement that "when they are planted and husbanded as they ought, a
principal commodity of wine may be raised."[43]

Of the later accounts given of grapes in Virginia and the Carolinas by
the colonizers and adventurers of the seventeenth century there are so
many that it is impossible to present all and difficult to sort out
those most apt. A few more may be given:

Captain John Smith, soldier, colonizer and Virginian planter, writing in
1606 describes two sorts of wild grapes. He says:[44] "Of vines great
abundance in many parts that climbe the toppes of highest trees in some
places, but these beare but few grapes. Except by the rivers and savage
habitations, where they are not overshadowed from the sunne, they are
covered with fruit, though never pruined nor manured. Of those hedge
grapes we made neere twentie gallons of wine, which was like our French
Brittish wine, but certainely they would prove good were they well
manured. There is another sort of grape neere as great as a Cherry, this
they [Indians] call _Messamins_, they be fatte, and the juyce thicke.
Neither doth the taste so well please when they are made in wine."

It is worthy of remark that the first English colonist in the New World
noticed that the vines in the vicinity of the Indian habitations and
along the edges of creeks, rivers and swamps, where not overshadowed
from the sun, were covered with fruit. The statement of this fact,
coupled with the one following, "but certainely they would prove good
were they well manured," indicates that the possibility of successful
cultivation of the wild grapes was considered at this early time. In
fact, as we have seen, Lord Delaware at once sought to test the virtues
of the native grapes by bringing over a number of French vine-dressers,
who not only planted cuttings imported from Europe but proceeded at once
to transplant the vine of the country.[45] A few years later, according
to Bruce, Sir Thomas Dale "established a vineyard at Henrico not long
after the foundation of that settlement, covering an area of three
acres, in which he planted the vines of the native grape for the purpose
of testing their adaptability to the production of wines that could be
substituted for those of France and Spain."[46]

Francis Maguel, who visited Virginia in 1609, stated that the wine made
in the colony reminded him of the Alicante which he had drunk in
Spain.[47]

The first Secretary of the Colony, William Strachey, was somewhat
fulsome in his praise of the new found fruit. Writing[48] in 1610, he
says that the vines burden every bush, climb to the top of the highest
trees and are always full of clusters of grapes though never pruned or
manured. He declares that the grapes are as good as those to be found
between Paris and Amiens and that the wine made by the settlers from the
wild grapes was equal to French or British wine, "being strong and
headdy." In closing his description he states that by art and industry
skillful vignerons could bring viticulture unto such perfection as will
enable the colony to export wine to the mother country.

An anonymous writer in 1649, who sets out to give a "full and true
relation of the present state of the plantations, their health, peace
and plenty," etc., etc., thought that the colony needed only some one to
set an example to the ordinary settlers to induce them to grow grapes.
This writer says: "Vines in abundance and variety, do grow naturally
over all the land, but by the birds and beasts, most devoured before
they come to perfection and ripenesse; but this testifies and declares,
That the Ground, and the Climate is most proper, and the Commodity of
Wine is not a contemptible Merchandize; but some men of worth and estate
must give in these things example to the inferior inhabitants and
ordinary sort of men, to shew them the gain and Commodity by it, which
they will not believe but by experience before their faces:"[49]

A hundred years later, according to Beverly, the grape was scarcely
cultivated, the masses of the people being content with the fruit of the
wild vines which grew everywhere in the forest. So far as is known there
were in Beverly's time, 1722, no named varieties and there had been no
efforts to improve the wild grapes in any way. There are no indications
from the early writings to show that the Virginian settlers even knew
how to propagate grapes. The reason for this neglect is largely to be
sought for in the last sentence in the subjoined footnote from
Beverly.[50] This neglect was in spite of the fact that from the first
the settlers had noted that when the vines were open to the sun the crop
was improved.

In the northern colonies, as in Virginia, about the first object to
attract the attention of the early settlers was the wild grape. The
grape, possibly more than any other natural product of the soil, is
mentioned in the preliminary surveys of the Atlantic Coast as offering
reasonable ground for the expectation that American soils would furnish
all of the supplies necessary for the sustenance and comfort of
settlers. A few statements from the early explorers and visitors in the
Middle and New England States will serve to show how plentiful wild
grapes were in these regions and the estimation in which they were held.

In Delaware, Beauchamp Plantagenet, describing a "Uvedale under
Websneck," in his account of New Albion, says that it contains "four
sorts of excellent great vines running on mulberry and sassafras trees;
there are four sorts of grapes, the first is the Thoulouse Muscat, sweet
scented, the second the great fox and thick grape, after five months
reaped being boiled and salted, and well fined, it is a strong red
Xeres; the third a light Claret, the fourth a white grape creeps on the
land, maketh a pure gold color white wine; Tenis Pale, the Frenchman, of
these four made eight sorts of excellent wine, and of the Muscat acute
boiled that the second draught will fox[51] a reasonable pate four
months old: and here may be gathered and made two hundred ton in the
vintage month, and replanted will mend."

In New England the seventeenth century notices of the wild grape are
even more numerous than similar records to the south but they are
briefer and the northern observer did not recognize the possibilities of
their domestic use and of bringing them under cultivation. This seeming
neglect of the Puritans was not because the northern wild grapes are
inferior to those of Virginia and the Carolinas, but more likely because
of the social and industrial conditions of the colonists. The richer
planters in the South had time for wine-making, the only purpose for
which grapes were then grown, and for growing the grapes. The New
Englanders had to struggle for the necessities of life.

It is significant, too, that the Southerners were fond of wine, and
imported Madeira in large quantities. In New England, rum seems to have
been preferred to wine, and as its manufacture from molasses is very
simple and the latter was to be had from the West Indies at small cost,
wine-making and grape-growing received small attention.

Yet nearly all of the writers on the resources of the New England
Colonies mentioned grapes. Thus Governor Edward Winslow writing in 1621
of the country in which the Puritans had found a home says: "here are
grapes, white and red, and very sweet and strong also." We have seen
that Winthrop was so impressed with the possibility of grape-growing in
the new colony that he secured a grant of Governor's Island in Boston
Harbor upon which to plant a vineyard. In Thomas Morton's _New English
Canaan_ is found the best account of the wild grapes of New England as
the Puritan found them. He says:[52] "Vines, of this kinde of trees,
there are that beare grapes of three colours, that is to say: white,
black, and red.

"The Country is so apt for vines, that (but for the fire at the spring
of the yeare) the vines would so over spreade the land, that one should
not be able to passe for them, the fruit is as bigg of some as a musket
bullet, and is excellent in taste."

John Josselyn in _New England's Rarities_, speaks of a grape having "a
taste of gunpowder," a short but vivid description of _Vitis
labrusca_.[53] William Wood in _New England's Prospect_ gives still
another account of the grapes of New England.[54]

The references given are sufficient to show that the value of the native
grapes as a source of food and for wine was recognized by the first
settlers in practically all of the colonies and that their possibilities
as cultivated plants were considered by some of the colonizers. Yet for
two hundred years there were no zealous efforts made to cultivate
American grapes. Indeed, there are far fewer references to the wild
grapes of the country in the eighteenth century than in the seventeenth.
The reasons for this neglect of a plant which could so easily have been
improved by cultivation, and this must have been apparent, are several.
During all of this period the European grape was being tried and all
hopes for viticulture were centered about it. Again, fruit of any kind
was not a common article of diet with Americans until even so recently
as a generation ago, and native grapes are dessert fruits, not wine
fruits, and wine was the purpose for which all grapes were grown until
the Catawba, the Concord and the Delaware whetted the appetites of fruit
eaters for a dessert grape.

In the history of the amelioration of the American grapes we can skip
the period from the early settlement of the country, a period
represented by the above quotations, to the first years of the United
States as a lapse of time in which there were no steps forward and in
which even information concerning grapes was scarcely increased. The
evolution of American grapes began with the opening of the nineteenth
century, about the only accounts of grapes during the eighteenth century
worthy of note being those of John Lawson, 1714; Robert Beverly, 1722;
Col. Robert Bolling, 1765; Edward Antill, 1769; and Peter Legaux, 1800.
All of these writers excepting Lawson were concerned with European
grapes, and their relations to grape-growing were therefore discussed in
the chapter on the Old World grape. It remains, however, to call
attention to such statements as were made by them of American grapes.

John Lawson, a Scotch engineer, spent eight years, beginning in 1700,
exploring and surveying North Carolina. A part of this time he was
Surveyor General for the State and through natural desire and vocation
he became familiar with the flora of North Carolina. In his history of
that State, written in 1714, he gives an account of its natural
resources in which the grapes of the region are several times described.
He distinguishes six kinds, three of which he mentions as having been
removed to the gardens. His fullest account runs as follows:[55]

"Among the natural fruits, the vine takes first place, of which I find
six sorts, very well known. The first is the black bunch grapes which
yield a crimson juice. These grow common and bear plentifully, they are
of a good relish, though not large, yet well knit in the clusters. They
have a thickish skin and large stone, which makes them not yield much
juice. There is another sort of black grapes like the former in all
respects, save that their juice is of a light flesh color, inclining to
a white. I once saw a spontaneous white bunch grape in Carolina; but the
cattle browzing on the sprouts thereof in the spring, it died. Of those
which we call fox grapes, we have four sorts; two whereof are called
summer grapes, because ripe in July; the other two winter fruits,
because not ripe till September or October. The summer fox grapes grow
not in clusters or great bunches, but are about five or six in a bunch,
about the bigness of a damson or larger. The black sort are frequent,
the white not so commonly found. They always grow in swamps and low,
moist lands, running sometimes very high and being shady, and therefore
proper for arbours. They afford the largest leaf I ever saw to my
remembrance, the back of which is of a white horse flesh color. This
fruit always ripens in the shade. I have transplanted them into my
orchard and find they thrive well, if manured. A neighbor of mine has
done the same; mine were by slips, his from the roots, which thrive to
admiration, and bear fruit, though not so juicy as the European grape,
but of a glutinous nature. However it is pleasant enough to eat.

"The other winter fox grapes are much of the same bigness. These refuse
no ground, swampy or dry, but grow plentifully on the sand hills along
the sea coast and elsewhere, and are great bearers. I have seen near
twelve bushels upon one vine of the black sort. Some of these, when
thoroughly ripe, have a very pretty vinous taste and eat very well, yet
are glutinous. The white sort are clear and transparent, and indifferent
small stones. Being removed by the slip or root, they thrive well in our
gardens, and make pleasant shades."

In another part of his history, Lawson says that in 1708 the French
Huguenots on Trent River, North Carolina, were cultivating European
grapes for wine-making.[56] Again he devotes several pages to the
subject of grape-growing in North Carolina.[57] He held that this "noble
vegetable" could be brought to the same perfection as in similar
latitudes in Europe. He states that Nathaniel Johnson had rejected all
exotic vines and was cultivating native sorts from which he was making
excellent wine. Lawson admonishes his readers that in a new country the
settlers are under the necessity of making use of the natural products
of the soil of which, in Carolina, the wild grape is most worthy of
notice. He calls attention to the fact that conditions are so different
in America that European methods of cultivation and care cannot be
followed. Lastly he states that he had planted seeds from the white
grapes of Madeira from which he hoped to raise a vineyard. Lawson is
deserving of esteem as an energetic pioneer, an accurate historian, as
one of the first American naturalists, and as an early vineyardist and
horticulturist, for he experimented with other fruits than the grape.
Poor Lawson was burned to death by the Indians in the prime of his
career, cutting short experiments which might have materially hastened
the establishment of viticulture in America.

The best account of the grapes of Virginia given in the later colonial
times is that of the historian Robert Beverly who is very explicit in
his description of the sorts growing wild in that State. He describes
them as follows:[58] "Grapes grow there [Virginia] in an incredible
plenty, and variety; some of which are very sweet and pleasant to the
taste, others rough and harsh, and perhaps fitter for wine or brandy. I
have seen great trees covered with single vines, and those vines almost
hid with the grapes. Of these wild grapes, besides those large ones in
the mountains, mentioned by Batt in his discovery, I have observed four
very different kinds, viz:

"One of the sorts grows among the sand banks, upon the edges of the low
grounds, and islands next the bay, and sea, and also in the swamps and
breaches of the uplands. They grow thin in small bunches, and upon very
low vines. These are noble grapes; and though they are wild in the
woods, are as large as the Dutch gooseberry. One species of them is
white, others purple, blue and black, but all much alike in flavor; and
some long, some round.

"A second kind is produced throughout the whole country, in the swamps
and sides of hills. These also grow upon small vines, and in small
bunches; but are themselves the largest grapes as big as the English
bullace, and of a rank taste when ripe, resembling the smell of a fox,
from whence they are called fox grapes. Both these sorts make admirable
tarts, being of a fleshly substance, and perhaps, if rightly managed,
might make good raisins.

"There are two species more, that are common to the whole country, some
of which are black, and some blue on the outside, and some white. They
grow upon vast, large vines, and bear very plentifully. The nice
observer might, perhaps, distinguish them into several kinds, because
they differ in color, size and relish; but I shall divide them only into
two, viz: the early, and the late ripe. The early ripe common grape is
much larger, sweeter, and better than the other. Of these some are quite
black, and others blue, and some white or yellow; some also ripen three
weeks, or a month before the other. The distance of their ripening, is
from the latter end of August, to the latter end of October. The late
ripe common grapes are less than any other, neither are they so pleasant
to the taste. They hang commonly to the latter end of November, or till
Christmas; all that I have seen of these are black. Of the former of
these two sorts, the French refugees at the Monacan Town made a sort of
claret, though they were gathered off of the wild vines in the woods. I
was told by a very good judge who tasted it, that it was a pleasant,
strong, and full-bodied wine. From which we may conclude, that if the
wine was but tolerably good, when made of the wild grape, which is
shaded by the woods from the sun, it would be much better, if produced
of the same grape cultivated in a regular vineyard."

Beverly could write with some authority on grapes for he was at that
time much interested in the general question of grape-growing. Besides
he was of an inquiring mind and seems to have been an untiring
experimenter with the agricultural plants of his own and other lands.
Charles Campbell in his introduction to the reprint of _Beverly's
Virginia_ in 1855, gives the following account of a vineyard planted by
the historian: "John Fontaine, son of a Huguenot refugee, having come
over from England to Virginia, visited Robert Beverly, the author of
this work, in the year 1715, at his residence, near the head of the
Mattapony. Here he cultivated several varieties of the grape, native and
French, in a vineyard of about three acres, situated upon the side of a
hill, from which he made in that year four hundred gallons of wine. He
went to very considerable expense in this enterprise, having constructed
vaults of a wine-cellar. But Fontaine comparing his method with that
used in Spain, deemed it erroneous, and that his vineyard was not
rightly managed. The home-made wine Fontaine drank heartily of, and
found it good, but he was satisfied by the flavor of it that Beverly did
not understand how to make it properly. * * * He had laid a sort of
wager with some of the neighboring planters, he giving them one guinea
in hand, and they promising to pay him each ten guineas, if in seven
years he should cultivate a vineyard that would yield at one vintage
seven hundred gallons of wine. Beverly thereupon paid them down one
hundred pounds, and Fontaine entertained no doubt but that in the next
year he would win the thousand guineas." And Beverly won the guineas.

Bolling in his _Sketch of Vine Culture_, 1765, mentions native grapes
only as they indicate to him the adaptability of the country for the
European sorts. Yet he suggests, and was probably the first to do so,
the possibility of hybridization between American and the European
species. He says: "Would it not be well for us to attempt the raising of
new varieties, by marrying our native with foreign vines?" He then gives
a plan whereby the vines may be planted as to "so interlock their
branches as that they shall be completely blended together." He says,
"they will then feed from the blossoms of each other, and when the fruit
is ripe, and if seeds are saved from it and sown in nurseries, * * * it
is probable that we shall obtain other varieties better adapted to our
climates and better for wine and table, than either of those kinds from
which they sprung." Beyond these brief mentions Bolling does not discuss
native grapes, though he tells of the origin of the Bland grape, which
we now know to be a native, and wrongly says that it grew from the seed
of a European raisin.

Antill, in his _Essay on the Cultivation of the Vine_, a treatise
discussed in the previous chapter, gives no varieties of native grapes,
though he says that he had just entered upon a trial of them. His brief
discussion of American vines is well worth quoting in full as showing
the status of the species known to Antill just previous to the
Revolutionary War:[59]

"The reason for my being silent about vines that are natives of America,
is, that I know but little of them, having but just entered upon a trial
of them, when my very ill state of health forbade me to proceed: From
what little observation I have been able to make, I look upon them to be
much more untractable than those of Europe, they will undergo a hard
struggle indeed, before they will submit to a low and humble state, a
state of abject slavery. They are very hardy and will stand a frame, for
they brave the severest storms and winter blasts, they shrink not at
snow, ice, hail or rain; the wine they will make, I imagine from the
austerity of their taste, will be strong and masculine.

"The Fox-Grape, whose berries are large and round, is divided into three
sorts, the white, the dark red and the black; the berries grow but thin
upon the bunches, which are plain without shoulders. They delight most
in a rich sandy lome, here they grow very large and the berries are
sweetest, but they will grow in any grounds, wet or dry; those that grow
on high dry grounds generally become white, and the colour alters to a
dark red or black, according to the lowness and wetness of the ground;
the situation I think must greatly affect the Wine, in strength,
goodness and colour; the berries are generally ripe the beginning of
September, and when fully ripe they soon fall away; thus much I have
observed as they grow wild. What alteration they may undergo, or how
much they may be improved by proper soils and due cultivation I cannot
say.

"There is a small black Grape, a size bigger than the winter Grape, that
is ripe in September; it is pleasant to eat, and makes a very pretty
Wine, which I have drank of, it was four years old, and seemed to be the
better for its age; the colour was amber, owing to the want of knowing
how to extract the tincture; this Grape is seldom to be found; there is
a Vine of them near John Taylor, Esq; at Middletown, Monmouth, and there
are some of them in Mr. Livingston's Vineyard at Piscataqua in
New-Jersey. I think they are well worth propagating.

"The frost or winter Grape is known to every body, both the bunches and
berries are small, and yield but little juice, but the richness of the
Wine may make up for the smallness of the quantity; the taste of the
Grape is austere till pretty hard frosts come, and then it takes a
favourable turn and becomes very sweet and agreeable; this Vine shoots
forth great numbers of slender branches, and might do very well for the
south and southeast sides of a summer-house or close walk, if all the
useless and barren branches were cut away.

"The Vines of America are fit for strong high espaliers, but if I
mistake not, he must watch them narrowly, must take away every
unnecessary and unprofitable branch, and trim them sharp and close, that
means to keep them within bounds."

Peter Legaux, in his patriotic address "To the People of the American
States,"[60] wherein he admonishes them the culture of the vine is a
national duty, was intent, as we have seen, on making the Old World
grape grow in America--even if it were necessary to palm off an American
sort as an Old World kind. He dismisses American grapes with even less
attention than Antill gave them, his sole notice of them being embodied
in the remarks that "with skillful management many of them would make
good and wholesome wines" and that "if the native grapes of America are
not the most eligible for vineyards, others are now within the reach of
its inhabitants." Indirectly he was, however, of great service in
distributing the first native varieties, for as Rafinesque says, "by
calling our Bland and Alexander grapes _Madeira_ and _Cape_, he was
instrumental in diffusing them among those who would not have noticed
nor bought them if known as native vines."

Following Legaux's address of 1800 several treatises were written within
a few years which give us a very clear idea of the status of the
American grapes at the beginning of the nineteenth century. Chief of
these, and probably in chronological order, is a paper in _The Domestic
Encyclopedia_ on the vine, written by James Mease, M. D.[61] It appears
that Dr. Mease wrote in 1802 but the Encyclopedia did not appear until
1804.[62] Embodied in the article is an "interesting paper on the vines
of the United States drawn up by William Bartram at the request of the
editor." Bartram's paper was written in the spring of 1802. Mease's
discussion of the vine merits especial attention. While the best of
Antill's and Legaux's observations are made use of, yet much is added to
them and the paper is far more reasonable in every respect than those of
either of the two previous writers, and is wholly lacking in the
ostentatious modesty and circumlocution of Antill and the grandiloquence
and self esteem of Legaux. It may justly be considered the first
rational discussion of the culture of the grape in America.

Mease's paper deserves attention for another reason. It contains the
first public utterance condemning the culture of the Old World grape and
recommending the cultivation of native grapes. He says: "From the
experience, however, of the editor and his friends who have found much
difficulty in naturalizing foreign vines, he recommends the cultivation
of the native grapes of the United States, particularly the _Vitis
sylvestris_, [_Vitis aestivalis_] or small blue or bunch grape; Bland's,
Tasker's or Alexander's, and the bull-grape of Carolina and Georgia." It
appears from the whole discussion by Mease and Bartram in this treatise
that the only varieties of native grapes cultivated in 1804 were
Alexander's or Tasker's grape, Bland's grape, the Bull grape[63] of
Carolina and Georgia, and the Raccoon grape.

Two years later, 1806, S. W. Johnson[64] and Bernard McMahon[65]
published accounts of the cultivation of the vine. Johnson mentions
three American varieties, the "Bull or Bullet grape, Bland's grape and
the Alexander's or Tasker's grape." Johnson has nothing to say of the
desirability of cultivating the above or other native sorts and confines
his discussion largely to Legaux's work with European grapes. McMahon
advocates the introduction of foreign grapes and says almost nothing
about the native species. As American varieties he mentions those given
by Johnson, omitting the Bull grape.

One of the first, if not the first, extensive centers of native
grape-growing in America was about York, Pennsylvania. In 1818, Mr.
Thomas Eichelberger, an enterprising German vine-grower, set out four
acres of grapes at this place and demonstrated that grapes could be
grown successfully. The original vineyard was increased to about twenty
acres and other plantations were made until in 1826 there were in the
immediate neighborhood of the borough of York one hundred and fifty
acres of vineyards. The account of these vineyards states further:[66]
"In Adam and Westmoreland the culture of the vine is also attended to
and one gentleman in Chester has a vineyard of thirty acres." The grape
most commonly grown in this region was known to the growers as "Black or
York Madeira" and was supposed to have been introduced from the Island
of Madeira. Prince pronounced the grape to be a native and the then
commonly grown Alexander. Other popular sorts in this region were the
York Claret, a native resembling Alexander; and York Lisbon, described
as "having considerable affinity to Alexander but having a larger and
more acid fruit." Beside these there were several less well known sorts
none of which is heard of now. Before the industry began to wane about
York the Catawba and Isabella had taken the place of the first named
sorts and these eventually succumbed for most part to grape diseases. In
looking up the history of varieties of grapes for this work, a
surprisingly large number have been traced back to this early center of
the industry, so many that York and Lancaster Counties, Pennsylvania,
must be counted among the starting places of American viticulture.

We have seen that for some years previous to Johnson and McMahon there
had been efforts to grow _Vitis vinifera_ in many widely separated
regions. The futility of attempting to grow the Old World grape became
apparent, so far as we may judge from written accounts, to but few men,
however. To Dr. James Mease must be accorded the honor of first
perceiving and setting forth in print the fact that American viticulture
must rise from native grapes. Possibly the second man to voice the same
sentiment was Thomas Jefferson, ever alert for the agricultural welfare
of the country, who wrote to John Adlum in 1809, speaking of the
Alexander grape:[67] "I think it will be well to push the culture of
that grape without losing time and efforts in search of foreign vines,
which it will take centuries to adapt to our soil and climate." It is
probable that Jefferson, who it appears was a frequent correspondent of
Adlum's, stimulated the latter to the publication of a book on grape
culture. This appeared in 1823, "for the purpose", as the author says in
his preface, "of diffusing some practical and useful information
throughout the country on the best method of cultivating the native
grape and of making Wine".

Thus Adlum's[68] _Cultivation of the Vine_ was the first American book
on American grapes. The author's intentions, as indicated in his
preface, quoted above, were good; but his book, as an exposition on
native grape culture, is a failure. The work is concerned for most part
with wine-making and his cultural directions are taken almost wholly,
such as they are, from European books. In the last four pages of the
treatise he describes twenty-two varieties of grapes of which perhaps a
dozen are native sorts. In this edition the Catawba is described as the
Tokay but in a second edition, published in 1828, the name is changed
from Tokay to Catawba. Adlum was one of the first to call attention to
the Catawba and was at the time its chief distributor. He advocated in
his book, and in the papers of the time, the establishment of an
experimental farm[69] upon which could be grown "cuttings of the
different species of the native Vine to be found in the United States,
to ascertain their growth, soil, and produce, and to exhibit to the
Nation, a new source of wealth, which has been too long neglected."

Adlum did not write from theory alone for he was the owner and
cultivator of vineyards near Georgetown, in the District of Columbia,
where he grew both native and foreign grapes. The latter he finally
discarded with the statement that the way to success in America "is to
drop most kinds of foreign vines at once (except a few for the table)
and seek for the best kinds of our largest native Grapes". The best
information from Adlum's pen regarding native grapes and their culture
is to be found in the _American Farmer_, published in Baltimore. He
wrote mainly during the years 1824 to 1830. He was neither a clear nor
an accurate writer and his imagination and enthusiasm had full sway at
all times; yet, notwithstanding these faults, he must be counted as one
of the geniuses of his day, as devoted to the welfare of the country, as
having almost a prophetic vision, and as actuated by the best of
motives. His struggle for a national experimental vineyard, the work of
his pen, his dissemination of the Catawba and other grapes, and his
vineyard experiments, give Adlum a high place among the improvers of
American grapes.

John James Dufour gives the next glimpse of the beginnings of American
viticulture in his _Vine Dresser's Guide_ published in Cincinnati in
1826. It is but a glimpse, however, for Dufour was a foreigner, and, as
we have seen, came to America to grow the Old World grape. His efforts
at grape-growing furnished the climax to the two centuries of failures
in growing _Vitis vinifera_ in America but did not benefit the new
viticulture of the country greatly.[70] His only contribution of note
was one made in spite of himself, namely the introduction of the
Alexander, which he incorrectly called Cape, an American grape, as a
commercial variety, Legaux having first brought it prominently to
notice. Dufour would never admit that this variety, the only one to
succeed in his vineyards in Kentucky and Indiana, was a native grape and
says of it in the preface of his book: "I will also try to save the
character of our Cape grapes from being made merely wild grapes, because
some are now found in the woods; and, to put any one in the way to
distinguish wild from tame grapes, I will give the description of the
botanical characters of the blossom of both sorts." In his text he
fulfills the promise in the preface and devotes some pages to "save the
character of our Cape grapes."

Dufour's visit of inspection of the vineyards of the country in 1799 has
been noted in discussing the Old World grape. In this trip only foreign
grapes interested him and he mentioned the wild species but to condemn
them for cultivation. In his book published twenty-seven years later he
shows no change of opinion and though at this time there were a number
of meritorious native sorts he describes only European varieties. Dufour
was a true foreigner and could find little of value in the New World
that did not come from the Old World.

Rafinesque, writing in 1830, in his _American Manual of the Grape
Vines_, gives an account of forty-one species of native grapes.
Unfortunately his "species" are founded upon the slightest differences
in vine or fruit and his observations were so poorly made that his
botanical studies of the grape are now wholly discredited by botanists.
He gives an account of the acreage in vineyards existing in the United
States in 1825 and 1830. This is the earliest estimate of the vineyard
acreage of the country and is therefore a landmark in American
viticulture. It is as follows:[71] "In 1825 I collected an account of
our principal vineyards and nurseries of vines. They were then only 60
of 1 to 20 acres each, altogether 600 acres. While now, in 1830, they
amount to 200 of 3 to 40 acres, or nearly 5000 acres of vineyards. Thus
having increased tenfold within 5 years, at which rate they promise to
become a permanent and increasing cultivation."

Viticulture took its place in the literature of American pomology with
the advent of William Robert Prince's _A Treatise on the Vine_. This
work, magnificent compared with similar books of the time, introduces
native grapes to the fruit-growers of America. Prince was the fourth
proprietor of the same name of the Prince nurseries at Flushing, Long
Island, and he with his predecessors had assiduously cultivated European
varieties of grapes hoping to acclimatize them to American conditions.
It is not a matter of wonder therefore, that much of his book is devoted
to foreign grapes. His collection at Flushing consisted of over four
hundred and fifty sorts and many of these he describes. In spite of his
attraction to the foreign varieties, some of which had been tested in
his nursery for two or three generations, Prince admitted the
impossibility of growing them successfully and recommends to his readers
and patrons the cultivation of native varieties. In the latter regard he
says: "* * * after all my own experiments I have come to this
conclusion, that to establish vineyards of the most profitable
description, with a certainty of regular crops in localities north of
the highlands in this state, _native varieties alone should be
selected_; and the whole of the eastern states will of course be
comprised in this remark."

In his treatise, Prince described about seventy varieties of native
grapes and several of the native species. Prince's descriptions of these
grapes are comprehensive and judging from the sorts described by him
which we now have they are accurate. He grew seedlings from many of
them. He showed a knowledge of the possibilities of hybridization of
American species with _Vitis vinifera_. He solicited and obtained seeds
and vines from all the settled portions of the Union. His grape
correspondents in different parts of America and of the world must have
numbered hundreds. Prince's enthusiasm and perseverance in grape culture
attached to him votaries in all fruit regions and to him more than to
any other man was due that friendly interchange of knowledge and
sentiment regarding grapes which characterized the half century after
the appearance of his book. Such co-operation as was manifested in
grape-growing in the second and third quarters of the nineteenth century
has never been known in the culture of any other species of plant in
this country and to it is largely due the progress of viticulture in
leaps and bounds dating from Prince's time.

With the close of the year 1830, we may consider viticulture a firmly
established industry in America with the native grapes as a basis.
Rafinesque's estimate of the acreage at this time is given on a
preceding page (47). It is worth while considering, very briefly, the
types of grapes under cultivation at this stage of the industry, with
some discussion of the origin of the leading varieties.

The first grape to become generally distributed as a commercial variety,
was, as has been remarked before, the Alexander, or Cape. It came into
prominence, through the deception of Legaux and the credulity of Dufour,
as one of the Viniferas commonly grown at the Cape of Good Hope. It
proved, however, to be an offshoot of the fox grape of the woods, _Vitis
labrusca_, and had been grown, long before Legaux palmed it off as the
Cape, under the names Alexander and Tasker's, Alexander because of its
having been grown by a gardener of this name and Tasker's through its
cultivation on a somewhat extensive scale by a Mr. Tasker in Maryland.
Its history dates back to the years before the Revolutionary War and its
origin was probably on the banks of the Schuylkill in Pennsylvania,
hence another of its many synonyms, Schuylkill Muscadell.

Of the several other native varieties of the Labrusca type cultivated in
1830, two deserve attention for their intrinsic and historical value.
The Catawba, of uncertain origin, as we shall see in its history, and
the Isabella, a native of South Carolina, are both classed by most
viticulturists as of the fox or Labrusca type. The two varieties were
distributed among vine-growers at about the same time but the Catawba,
because of its superior merits, soon took the lead and at the time of
which we write was by far the most popular native grape. These, with the
Alexander, may certainly be considered the forerunners of the cultivated
grapes of the species to which they belong. The Catawba is still in
several great grape regions of the country the standard commercial
variety.

While varieties of _Vitis labrusca_ were first cultivated in the North,
it is probable that _Vitis rotundifolia_ furnished the first
domesticated varieties for the South, and likely, too, before the
northern kinds were cultivated. Among these are the white and black
Scuppernongs, or bullet grapes. _Vitis rotundifolia_, while it refuses
to grow out of its habitat, runs riot from Maryland to Florida from
seashore to mountains and in many diverse soils. The Scuppernongs[72]
are natural offshoots of this species and are known in the South in
legend, tradition and history. Undoubtedly they were cultivated for
their fruit or as ornamentals in garden or vineyards from the earliest
colonial times. It is certain that wine was made from the different wild
types of _Vitis rotundifolia_ from the settlement of Jamestown and if
not brought under cultivation at an early day it was because the
bountifulness of the wild vines obviated the necessity of domesticating
them. It was of this grape that Amadas and Barlowe wrote in 1584 "in all
the world the like abundance is not to be found."

The word Scuppernong[73] is often used to designate a group of grapes
rather than as a varietal name; for, there are the black Scuppernong,
the white or green Scuppernong and the red Scuppernong, all much alike
except in color of fruit and in a few minor characters of vine. Indeed,
where _Vitis rotundifolia_ grows wild, all of the forms are often
included in the term Scuppernong. The species is often known, too, as
the Muscadine or Southern Muscadine.

While the Labruscas were becoming established in the North and the
Scuppernongs in the South, two other species, one northern and one
southern, came into prominence with varieties which for wine-making at
least were far superior to any other native sorts. The southern species
is _Vitis aestivalis_, best represented then and now by Norton while the
northern species is _Vitis riparia_ and its variety under cultivation
was the Clinton, which still remains one of the best representatives of
the species.[74] It is strange that these four species were brought
under cultivation only when wild forms of them, so striking in value
that they still remain a hundred years later standard cultivated
varieties, had been found. _Vitis labrusca_ represented by Catawba,
_Vitis rotundifolia_, by Scuppernong, _Vitis aestivalis_, by Norton, and
_Vitis riparia_, by Clinton, are, after a century of improvement, with
several hundred varieties, scarcely excelled by others of their
species. Yet it is not so much the wonder that grape-breeders have so
little improved upon these first varieties, as that our forefathers
could allow them to grow comparatively neglected at their doors for two
centuries while they wasted time in the attempt to grow a foreign grape
that had been a failure from the very start.

Other species had also been tried at this time. Those indefatigable
botanists and horticulturists, the Princes, had grown plants of what we
now know as _Vitis aestivalis lincecumii_ Munson, _Vitis longii_ Prince,
and _Vitis cordifolia_ Michx., but without finding them of value. It is
interesting to note that the first named species, the Post-oak grape,
now promises to furnish valuable varieties for the South and that it has
some characters desirable for the North if they can be combined with
those of our northern species.

We have followed the grape through the settlement, colonization and
first statehood days of the United States. We have seen that it had its
part, and no mean one, in these dramatic periods. We have found that the
wild grapes of the country, valued but uncultivated for two hundred
years, became through mere transplanting from the woods into the
vineyards, without the slow modifications which nearly all other plants
have had to undergo, one of our most important fruits. The domestication
of four species of American grapes has been briefly traced. The
beginning of American viticulture has been set, somewhat arbitrarily, at
1830, the date of the publication of William Prince's _Treatise on the
Vine_. It remains now to discuss the economic progress of the industry
we have seen launched.

The twenty years following 1830 comprise a period of expansion in
grape-growing unmarked by the introduction of new types or of any new
varieties of particular note. During this time a grape and wine industry
of considerable magnitude was developed about Cincinnati, and the Ohio
River became known as the Rhine of America--a title long since lost and
now applied to the Keuka Lake region in New York. According to
Buchanan,[75] there were 1550 acres of grapes in the Ohio Valley within
twenty miles of Cincinnati; between forty and fifty acres near Hermann,
Missouri; a few vineyards at Belleville, Illinois; and wine was being
made from the Scuppernong grape in North and South Carolina. The
inference from Buchanan is that the above plantations were for the
production of wine; for he specifies that a few vineyards were in
cultivation about New York, Philadelphia and Burlington, New Jersey,
"but more with a view to supply the market with grapes, than to make
wine."

The last statement is significant for it indicates a change in the grape
industry which really gave life to the viticulture of eastern America.
Until about 1850, grapes were considered valuable and were cultivated
only for wine-making. Previous to this time the literature on the grape
was concerned more with wine-making than with cultivation, varieties or
any other phase of the industry. The American grapes, with few
exceptions, do not make good wines; there were few men in the country
until within recent years who understood wine-making; and the American
people do not take kindly to wines. It was not, therefore, possible to
establish viticulture as an industry of any magnitude in eastern America
when grapes were used for wine alone. It was only when the demand for
table grapes was created and when transportation and market facilities
permitted the supply of the demand that the industry took form and
substance. It is a significant fact that in those regions in the eastern
United States in which grape-growing has been founded and which are
chiefly dependent on wine-making, the industry has not prospered or has
flourished but temporarily.

We have had Rafinesque's survey of the grape industry of the country in
1830 and Buchanan's in 1850. The next record, and a far more complete
one than either of the above, is found in a consular report made by E.
M. Erskine, Secretary of the British Legation at Washington, to the
British government in 1859. Mr. Erskine reported the acreage as
follows:[76] "The banks of the River Ohio are studded with vineyards,
between 1,500 and 2,000 acres being planted in the immediate vicinity of
Cincinnati, with every prospect of a vast increase. At Cleveland, Ohio,
on the southern shore of Lake Erie, there are 100 acres under vine
culture; at Hermann, on the Missouri, 80 miles west of St. Louis, 150 or
200 acres are cultivated almost entirely by Germans; at Booneville,
higher up the same river; at Belleville, on the 'rolling prairies' of
Illinois; at Reading, in Pennsylvania; in Kentucky, Indiana, Tennessee,
Arkansas, and generally, in at least twenty-two out of the thirty-two
States now constituting the Union, vineyards of more or less promise and
extent have been planted. * * *

"About 3,000 acres are cultivated as vineyards in the state of Ohio; 500
in Kentucky; 1,000 in Indiana; 500 in Missouri; 500 in Illinois; 100 in
Georgia; 300 in North Carolina; 200 in South Carolina, with every
prospect of a rapid increase in all. It is calculated that at least
2,000,000 gallons of wine are now raised in the United States, the
average value of which may be taken at a dollar and a half the gallon."

Grape-growing in New York was not considered worthy of mention by
Erskine; and Buchanan nine years before reported only a few vineyards
about New York City. In the regions of this State now almost wholly
devoted to grape-growing a start had hardly been made in 1850. Yet there
were some commercial vineyards at this time. Deacon Elijah Fay, the
pioneer grape-grower in what is now the great Chautauqua region, planted
the first vines in that district in 1818 and though grape-growing did
not become of importance until three or four decades later yet this
planting was the foundation upon which Deacon Fay built until, largely
through his efforts and example and those of his children, grapes were
grown everywhere about his home. It is doubtful, however, if there were
a hundred acres of commercial vineyards in this region when Erskine made
his report in 1859.

The first plantings made about Keuka Lake, now called the "Rhine of
America", were made by the Rev. William Bostwick at Hammondsport about
1830. He grew the Catawba and Isabella in a small way in his garden and
for years was the only grape-grower in this part of New York. The
commercial industry in this region was not started until 1853 when
Andrew Reisinger, a German vintner, planted two acres of Isabellas and
Catawbas at Harmonyville in the town of Pulteney. From this start
viticulture in the Keuka region grew apace and there must have been four
or five hundred acres of grapes planted when Erskine's report was made
in 1859. The fact that the region was not mentioned in this report may
be accounted for by assuming that Erskine's figures came from men
engaged in making wine and at this time wine was not made in large
quantities in the Keuka district.

There had been experimental vineyards about New York City and along the
Hudson for a century before the time of which we are writing, but these,
as we have seen, being largely of foreign grapes, came to naught.
Probably native grapes were first planted there in a commercial way by
the French Huguenots who settled in Ulster and Orange Counties. At any
rate there is record of a vineyard planted by a Frenchman, John Jacques,
near Washingtonville in 1837. The varieties were Isabella and Catawba
and there were, all told, about half an acre. It is interesting to note
that this vineyard is still producing grapes and that some of the vines
are as vigorous as in their first maturity. Wine-making as an industry
has existed in this region since the vineyard of 1837 came into bearing
but it was not until several years later that table grapes were grown
for the market. In 1859 there must have been two or three hundred acres
of grapes in commercial vineyards in the country adjacent to the Hudson.

Adding five hundred acres from New York to the 6500 reported for the
United States by Erskine in 1859 we have 7000 acres for the whole
country--a small estimate, for several other states known to have
considerable acreages of commercial vineyards were not taken into
account in Erskine's survey.

Before passing to a further consideration of grape statistics we must
note two important events for American viticulture which took place just
previous to the survey which we have been discussing. One of these
brought about a revolution,--almost brought into existence commercial
grape-growing; the other stimulated and laid the foundation of
grape-breeding in this country. The first was the introduction of the
Concord grape; the second was the production of hybrids between the
European and the native grapes.

The history of the Concord will be found in the discussion of that
variety in the chapter on _Varieties of American Grapes_. Its advent is
noted here that it may be set as a landmark in the development of
American grape-culture. It is first recorded in 1852 by the
Massachusetts Horticultural Society as a seedling exhibited by E. W.
Bull. The qualities that have made the Concord so important in
commercial grape-growing are: Adaptability to varying sets of cultural
conditions; fair shipping qualities; hardiness, productiveness and
comparative immunity to fungi and insects. Its influence on the
grape-growing of the country has been great, too, because from it have
come a considerable number of the most valuable varieties of American
grapes; as Worden, Moore Early, Pocklington, Martha and Cottage, all
pure-bred seedlings and many cross-breds.

At a meeting of the American Pomological Society in Philadelphia in
1852, Dr. William W. Valk of Flushing, Long Island, exhibited several
bunches of fruit from a seedling grape which he had grown from seeds of
Black Hamburg produced from blossoms fertilized by Isabella.[77] The
cross had been made in 1845, the first fruit was borne in 1850, and in
1851 specimens of it were examined by Downing who wrote, "There can be
no doubt that this is the first genuine cross between the foreign grapes
and our natives."[78] The name of the variety, given by the originator,
is Ada. Dr. Valk gave full accounts of his hybrid seedlings in the
_Horticulturist_ in 1851,[79] and in the _Proceedings of the American
Pomological Society_ in 1852.[80] He had previously written on the
subject of hybridization, an interesting paper having been contributed
to Hovey's _Magazine_ as early as 1845.[81] All available information
shows that Valk's is the first recorded hybrid between a native and the
foreign grape. Yet the honor of such a production has usually been given
to John Fisk Allen and to the grape, Allen's Hybrid. For the conception
of hybridity between species we can go back to the beginning of the
cultivation of native grapes. Nearly thirty years before, Nuttall, the
then famous botanist of Harvard University, had recommended such
hybridization to American grape-growers.[82] Dufour mentions its
possibilities in his _Vine Dresser's Guide_.[83] In 1830, Prince
discussed the whole matter and gave specific directions for
hybridizing.[84] Indeed it is not unlikely that Prince, who says he grew
ten thousand seedling plants "from an admixture under every variety of
circumstance" grew the first such hybrid but we have nothing more
definite as to this than the above statement.

In 1854, two years following its report of E. W. Bull's "new seedling,"
the Concord, the Massachusetts Horticultural Society showed in its
exhibits another grape scarcely less worthy of note than the Concord. It
was a hybrid between the Golden Chasselas and the Isabella produced by
John Fisk Allen of Salem, Massachusetts. The new variety, the Allen's
Hybrid, mentioned in a preceding paragraph, had some intrinsic value
but, of more importance, was the first introduction of its kind and
started similar work which gave us many interesting and some valuable
grapes.

Soon after the production of Allen's Hybrid, E. S. Rogers of Salem,
Massachusetts, and J. H. Ricketts of Newburgh, New York, began to give
grape-growers varieties, the results of hybrids between _Vitis vinifera_
and _Vitis labrusca_, so promising that for a time enthusiasm and
speculation ran riot. Possibly at no other period has the interest in
grape-growing been so keen as during the decade succeeding the
introduction of these hybrids. It was the "golden era" for the grape
propagators. One old nurseryman tells of carrying, during this boom,
over a thousand dollars worth of rooted grape cuttings on his back from
the nursery to the express office.

Though there was no panic among grape-growers as the result of
speculation in hybrids, lovers of grapes the country over were greatly
disappointed in the hybrid varieties. The fruit of many of the hybrids
produced at this time is of superior quality and many of them are still
grown by amateurs. But the vines of all first generation hybrids with
Vinifera produced so far, lack hardiness, vigor and usually
productiveness; they are susceptible to fungi and the phylloxera and
many of them must be cross-pollinated to secure fruit. It is only when
the blood of the native species greatly predominates, as in Delaware,
Brighton and Diamond, that we have obtained sorts of commercial value
through the admixture of foreign blood. But the interest aroused by
Allen's Hybrid still continues and in every part of the country may be
found some man who hybridizes grapes with the hope that through well
planned crosses or a lucky chance he may obtain the grape of grapes for
America. Such attempts, stimulated by the hybrids of the fifties, have
produced most of our American varieties.

The time between 1853, the date of the introduction of the Concord, and
1880 can be singled out as the period in which viticulture made its
great growth in eastern America. The first limit is set because the
Concord gave commercial grape-growing its initial impulse; the second
limit is put at 1880, because at about that time grapes and wine from
California began to compete with the eastern product to such an extent
that prices fell and plantings were curtailed. Curtailment did not begin
so early as this in New York but for the country at large the period of
great expansion ended at about 1880. Fortunately we have an accurate
statistical report of the condition of grape culture in the United
States at this time. It is found in a work entitled, _A Report Upon the
Statistics of Grape Culture and Wine Production in the United States for
1880_.[85] The report was compiled by Dr. William McMurtrie under the
direction of the Commissioner of Agriculture.

Statistics are given for all of the states of the Union but a glance at
the tables shows that by this time viticulture had become a specialized
industry and that the areas devoted to it are more or less localized.
The main areas, with their acreage for 1880, may be set forth as
follows:

The Eastern region, comprising the States of New York and Pennsylvania,
14,590 acres.

The Middle region, Ohio, Indiana and Illinois, 17,634 acres.

The Western region, Kansas and Missouri, 10,918 acres.

The Southern region, Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginia, North Carolina and
Georgia, 10,707 acres.

The Pacific region, California, Arizona and New Mexico, 35,518 acres.

Outside of these five regions there were in the United States, according
to McMurtrie's report, 12,316 acres. The total acreage for the United
States in 1880 was 101,683 acres; the production of wine was 23,453,827
gallons. Unfortunately the total production of grapes is not given.

The following data are taken from the agricultural statistics of 1890
and show well the growth of viticulture in ten years though it is
probable that the figures for 1880 were far too low. For the Eastern
region, 51,000 acres; the Middle region, 42,633 acres; Western region,
17,306 acres; Southern region, 17,092 acres; Pacific region, 213,230
acres; for the territory outside of these divisions, 60,000 acres. Total
area, 401,261 acres. Excluding the acreage of the Pacific division we
have 188,031 acres for American grapes, assuming that all of the grapes
grown on the Pacific Coast belong to _Vitis vinifera_.

It is interesting to note that in 1890 four-fifths of the grapes grown
in the Eastern region, New York and Pennsylvania, were for table use and
that in round numbers the production for this purpose amounted to 60,687
tons, requiring 5000 cars for transportation. Of grapes sold to wineries
there were 15,172 tons. The varieties most largely grown were, in order
named, Concord, Catawba, Delaware, and Niagara.

In the Middle region, Ohio, Indiana and Illinois, about half the grapes
grown were for table use and half for wine. By far the largest part of
the grapes grown in this region was in Ohio, only about one-fourth of
the total area being in the other two states. Between 1880 and 1890,
viticulture scarcely held its own in this division. The decrease in the
value of the product, competition with California, and, more
particularly, ravages of insects and fungi were the causes of the
falling off in planting. In some localities many vineyards were
destroyed. The grapes sold for table use in this region amounted to
50,337 tons; to wineries, 14,456 tons.

So, too, in the Western region, Missouri and Kansas, but little progress
was made during this ten years and for the same reasons, though the
devastation in Missouri was caused chiefly by black-rot, which begun to
be troublesome about 1875. The plantings in Missouri were largely for
wine-making but in Kansas, which contained 5542 of the 17,306 acres for
this region, about half of the crop was sold for table use. The grapes
for table use in this region amounted to 30,794 tons, for wineries, 8290
tons.

The crop in the Southern region was about equally divided between wine
and table grapes, the production in 1889 amounting to 1,165,832 gallons
of wine and 14,539 tons of table grapes. The new plantings about
equalled the acreage destroyed so that in total area the region was
about holding its own. The chief market for the table grapes was in the
North where they were sold early in the season at prices ranging from
fifteen to twenty-five cents a pound.

We are concerned with the Pacific region in that its grape products,
especially its wines, compete with those of eastern America. The growth
of viticulture in the Pacific region in the decade we are discussing was
little short of marvelous. In 1880 the acreage was 35,518 acres and in
1890, 213,230 acres--much greater than that of all the eastern regions,
and the production of grapes being more than proportionately greater
because of the greater productiveness of the vines. In this region
43,414 tons were sold for table grapes; 173,037 tons for wine; 41,166
tons were made into raisins and 23,252 tons used for dried grapes and
other purposes than table grapes. The grand total for the region was
280,869 tons against 201,270 for all of eastern America. These figures
give an idea of how formidable a competitor to eastern America
California had become by 1890.

The census of 1900 shows but little increase in the total production of
American grapes. A few figures will show the relative status of
viticulture in the several regions in 1890 and 1900.

                           1890           1900
                         Tons of        Tons of
                       grapes grown   grapes grown

  Eastern region          75,859        147,411
  Middle region           64,793         58,917
  Western region          39,084         14,784
  Southern region         21,534         16,886
  California region      280,869        362,323

All of the regions we have been discussing, in which native grapes are
grown, show a considerable falling off in production excepting the
eastern one where the increase more than counterbalances the decrease in
the other regions. The census report for 1900 shows three new states in
the list of those producing grapes in commercial quantities. In the
decade preceding, Michigan came up from an insignificant commercial
production in 1890 to fifth rank in 1900 with 20,765 tons. Iowa and
Oklahoma, states from which grapes were not reported in commercial
quantities in 1890, produced 3701 and 3055 tons in 1900.

The shifting of grape areas indicated in the above paragraph was caused
for most part by the grape diseases. The mildew and rot had ruined the
grape industry in some of the older regions. The newer regions, as in
Michigan, either enjoy comparative immunity from these troubles or the
vineyards had not yet been attacked by them. In the case of the eastern
region, New York and Pennsylvania, in the Chautauqua district, along the
shores of Lake Erie in both states, where the production increased
greatly during this decade, the vineyards are almost wholly immune to
black-rot and are comparatively free from the mildew. In the other grape
districts of this region these troubles are kept well in check by
spraying.

The statistics given in the last few paragraphs show how greatly the
grape-growing of eastern America has increased in the last half century.
When one considers that at the time Erskine made his survey in 1859
there were but 6100 acres of grapes in the whole of this great region
and that the culture of the European varieties was impossible, the total
acreage grown in 1900, namely, 237,998 acres, makes an astounding
figure. The results achieved seem all the greater when one considers
that many of the best varieties now grown are the first and scarcely any
are further removed than the second generation from wild plants. It is
doubtful if any other cultivated plants have attained such importance as
our native grapes in so short a time from the wild state. Yet their
domestication has scarcely begun and few who grow them realize their
possibilities.


THE WINE[86] AND GRAPE JUICE INDUSTRIES.

For over 200 years the grapes grown on this continent were almost
wholly for wine-making. Yet the production of grapes was not sufficient
to sustain a wine industry until the middle of the nineteenth century.
When, with the introduction of new varieties of grapes and of better
methods of growing them, the crop became sufficient in volume to support
wine-making as an industry, its progress was checked by the enormous
demand for table grapes, a demand not known in other countries, and by
the cheapness of California wines. Furthermore the grapes most commonly
cultivated, as the Concord, Worden and Niagara, do not make good wines;
and knowledge and facilities for wine-making have not been such that the
best wines could be made with varieties adapted for the purpose. All of
these obstacles, to which we may add the fact that Americans are not a
wine-drinking people, have prevented the building up of a wine industry
as it exists in other grape-growing countries.

Although the United States stands second or third in the list of
grape-producing countries it took lowest rank in wine production in
1900, falling below the small countries of Greece and Switzerland and
such comparatively undeveloped countries as Chili and Argentine. Since
by far the greater proportion of American wines come from the European
grapes of the Pacific coast, it can be seen that wine made from American
grapes is but a drop in the bucket in the world's production. Reliable
statistics of viticulture in the United States were not taken until
1890, but careful estimates, as we have seen, had been made by several
men at different periods. These with the last two census reports show
the output of wine in this country to be, in round numbers, as follows:

               Gallons
  1850          250,000
  1860          500,000
  1870        5,000,000
  1880       15,000,000
  1890       24,000,000
  1900       30,000,000
            ============

According to the _American Wine Press_,[87] the leading authority on
wines in this country, the vintage of 1907 shows the following figures:

                             Gallons
  Southern States          1,000,000
  New Jersey                 250,000
  New York                 4,000,000
  Ohio                     2,500,000
  Missouri                 1,500,000
  California, dry         30,000,000
  California, sweet       10,000,000
  Western States             500,000
  All other States           500,000
                         ------------
    Total wine yield      50,250,000
                         ============

Subtracting the product of California from the total we have
approximately the yield of wine from native grapes.

The manufacture of champagne[88] from native grapes is beginning to be
an important adjunct to grape-growing and is of especial importance in
New York which is the chief seat of the new industry. According to
statistics from the Bureau of Statistics of the Department of Commerce
and Labor,[89] more than two million bottles of genuine champagne wine
are now produced annually in the United States. The figures compiled by
the Bureau of Statistics show that the manufacture of champagne has
quadrupled in ten years and that New York is by far the largest producer
in this class of wines. It is held by the writers of the circular quoted
above, and a careful study seems to have been made of the subject, that
the American product compares favorably with that produced in other
countries and that native champagnes are steadily improving with the
increased experience of the American producer.

The largest manufacturers of champagne are located about Keuka Lake,
Steuben County, New York. About 75 per ct. of the total output of the
country is manufactured here. The process used is the French one of
fermentation in the bottle and a number of distinct brands are made
which in color, taste, sparkle and purity are rapidly approaching the
high quality of the celebrated French champagnes. Considerable champagne
is also made in Orange County in the southeastern part of New York, in
Northern Ohio, in Missouri, and a small amount from European grapes in
California.

The manufacture of unfermented grape juice[90] is becoming an industry
in New York and promises to substantially increase the production of
grapes. Grape juice is what its name purports, the juice of the grape
undiluted, unsweetened and unfermented. A good grade of grape juice
contains no preservatives, the necessity for such being removed in the
process of making, the chief operation of which is sterilization by heat
whereby the germs of fermentation are killed. The product is an ancient
one, as the Greeks, Hebrews and Assyrians used it as new wine; but the
process of making an unfermented grape juice that could be kept for an
indefinite length of time is quite modern, and is the outcome of the
discoveries of the last half century regarding the control of the agents
of fermentation.

The grape juice industry of the country is largely confined to New York
and to the Chautauqua grape belt in the western part of the State. About
one-fifth of the grape crop of this region was turned into grape juice
in 1907. The output of the Chautauqua region is as follows: 1904,
400,000 gallons; 1905, 600,000 gallons; 1906, 1,000,000 gallons; 1907,
1,500,000 gallons. The Concord is used almost entirely in the
manufacture of grape juice though a few other dark-colored grapes make a
very good product. There is but little demand for a light-colored grape
juice but some is made. Since the European grape does not make a good
unfermented juice there is no fear among growers of native grapes of
competition from California or Europe. The rapid growth which this
industry has made is most encouraging to grape-growers for it promises
to furnish a permanent and profitable demand for good grapes.

Raisins[91] are not made from American grapes.[92] So far no varieties
of the native species have been developed with sufficient sugar and
solid contents to make a raisin acceptable to the markets. Even were
there varieties from which raisins could be made, it is very doubtful if
the climate of eastern America during picking and curing time is such
that raisins could be made in competition with the product of
California, now the greatest of the world's raisin producing regions,
where the climate is almost perfectly adapted to the industry.




CHAPTER III

THE VITICULTURE OF NEW YORK


The history of the viticulture of eastern United States shows that the
regions in which grapes have been most largely grown in the past have
come into prominence, had their day, and then suffered a decline. The
reasons for the more or less temporary character of grape regions are
becoming more and more apparent as our knowledge of grape-growing
increases. The grape, more than most other domesticated plants, is
profoundly influenced by climate, soil, cultural treatment, and insect
and fungus pests. In any region in which the grape succeeds at all well,
conditions are more favorable at the start of the industry than later;
this is especially true as regards soils, and the insect and fungus
pests. In a discussion of any phase of grape culture, in a broad sense,
the conditions under which the fruit is grown must receive careful
consideration. We therefore include in this chapter a discussion of the
characters which most strongly influence grapes in vine, fruit and
general adaptability; also a brief discussion of the regions in which
native grapes have been successfully grown in America; and, more
particularly, an account of the viticulture and the grape regions of New
York.

In their wild state the various species of native grapes seem adapted to
a great diversity of soils and conditions. But under successful
cultivation varieties of the several species are confined to somewhat
restricted regions and even localities. Often a grape variety will
succeed on one shore of a lake or river and not on the other; on one
slope of a hill but not another. It is difficult to point out the
determinants of successful grape culture. Adaptability can be known
positively in many cases only by trial; for neither conditions of soil,
nor climate, nor lay of land determines with certainty the adaptability
of a given locality. Oftentimes one variety of a species may not be
successful while another is completely so. Many varieties reach
perfection in one region or locality but not in another though the
conditions may seem very similar. So great is the influence of local
environment, oftentimes, that a variety grown in one locality might not
be recognized as the same grape when produced under other conditions.

The chief natural factors which govern the distribution of varieties of
grapes are: Latitude and altitude; temperature of air and soil; water
supply; the chemical and physical properties of the soil; air currents;
and insects and fungi.

Latitude and altitude very largely determine the annual temperature, the
amount and intensity of sunlight, and the length of the growing
season--all very important factors in growing grapes. Species and
varieties of grapes are usually adapted to regions having about the same
latitude; northern types do not succeed in the South nor the reverse.
Length of season has more to do with the adaptation of grapes than the
degree of heat or cold, for some southern sorts are hardy in vine in the
North but the seasons in the northern latitude are not sufficiently long
for the fruit to mature. On the other hand, northern varieties mature
too quickly in the South and pass through maturity to decay with too
great rapidity. The metes and bounds of latitude are often set aside in
grape-growing by local modifications. Thus it often happens that valleys
in regions not generally adapted to viticulture are so protected from
cold winds, so open to sunshine, or are so free from fogs or frosts as
to furnish ideal conditions for grape-growing.

Probably the chief factor in determining the adaptability of a region to
grape culture is temperature. Each of the different species and
varieties of grapes requires a certain amount of warmth for its best
development and can endure but a certain degree of cold. The temperature
of a region is chiefly determined by latitude, altitude and proximity to
large bodies of water, though variations in the surface of the country
are often important modifying agents of temperature and especially
influence spring and fall frosts.

The grape does best in an equable temperature and does not thrive in
regions where there is a great daily range. Regions and seasons in which
the temperature is comparatively low in the growing months of May, June
and July and high, with much sunshine, in the maturing months of August,
September and October, produce the best grapes in the latitude of New
York. An average of from 55 deg. to 65 deg. for the first named period and of
from 65 deg. to 75 deg. for the second are ideal temperature conditions for the
grape.

This fruit is very sensitive to moisture conditions. Not only must the
total rainfall for the year be taken into consideration but its
distribution throughout the seasons must be considered. The grape does
best with comparatively little rainfall. When the rainfall is the least
possible amount for a good growth of vine the grape crop will be the
largest, of best quality and most free from fungi. Wet seasons, and
especially wetness during the months of maturing, are disastrous to both
quantity and quality of grapes. Thus, in New York it is not possible,
with most varieties, to produce good grapes if the average is above six
inches each for the three growing months and five inches each for the
maturing months. It is far better for the crop that it be as low as four
inches for the first named period and two inches for the second period.

Superfluous moisture in the soil favors too great a growth of vine,
checks and weakens the root system, prevents proper setting of fruit,
and favors fungi, but hinders the multiplication of phylloxera. In
particular, a comparatively dry soil is desirable for grapes because of
its influence on the development of the root system. In dry soils large
root systems are developed in the search for the water that the plant
must have. When intense droughts occur plants that have stood in damp
soils have not sufficient roots to supply the necessary water to the
aerial parts and the vines suffer in consequence. Some species and
varieties are better fitted for withstanding an excess of moisture than
others.

The soil exercises a great influence in determining the suitability of a
region for viticulture. Several factors act as soil determinants: (1)
Fertility; (2) physical characters; (3) soil heat. It is necessary to
study each species, and even their varieties, to discover their powers
of adaptation to different soils and it is possible to indicate here the
good and bad qualities of soils only in the most general way. In the
discussion of species and varieties the soil preferences of the
different botanical and horticultural groups will be stated more fully.

Great fertility, as a natural characteristic, is not necessary in grape
regions. Fertilizers, and especially the use of stable manures and cover
crops, can be made to supply very largely a lack of fertility. Soils
naturally too rich produce an overdevelopment of vine. Some species, as
_Vitis rupestris_, grow naturally in very poor soils, the habitat of the
latter being dry ravines and stony places having comparatively little
organic matter. The varieties of _Vitis rupestris_ promise well for
stocks upon which to grow other varieties in certain soils. In Europe
calcareous or limy soils are not considered well adapted to
grape-growing, but in America we often find very good vineyards on such
soils.

The physical character of a soil has more to do with the welfare of the
grape than fertility. Sand and clay are the two distinct types of soils
usually found in general agricultural regions. As one or the other
predominates soils take their character. So far as growth alone is
concerned these two types of soil do not influence the vines much
differently, but the fruit in quantity and quality is greatly influenced
by them. According as to whether sand or clay is in excess a soil is
loose or compact, retains or gives up water, and is warm or cool. A
compact soil is made so by an excess of clay or of very fine sand.
Grapes require a light friable soil and compactness is often a serious
defect. Usually species and varieties with large, thick roots are better
adapted to compact soils than those with small root systems, probably
because the strong roots have greater penetrating power than the weak
ones. Lightness and permeability of the soil may be influenced by
subsoiling and through the use of stable manure and cover crops, but a
hard soil is generally so ill adapted to grape-growing that this fruit
should not be planted on it.

The heat-retaining properties of a soil must always be taken into
account in growing grapes. The great preference which many varieties of
grapes show for sands, loams, shales and gravels, depends largely upon
the greater amount of heat found in such soils. In northern regions it
is especially needful that the soil furnish an abundance of bottom heat
for the grape. The removal of an excess of moisture is helpful in
regulating soil heat; and, other things being equal, a well-drained soil
is warmest.

Grapes grow more or less well in any soil adapted to fruit-growing. It
is not true, even, that the grape is more particular as to soils than
other fruits. But the necessity of having great quantity and high
quality of fruit in profitable viticulture makes it very necessary to
take their preferences as to soil into strict account.

Air currents are of minor importance compared with the other factors
discussed yet are worthy of attention. They are chiefly of importance in
grape-growing in the suppression of fungi. It has long been noticed
that in regions where there are strong currents of air the dreaded
black-rot and the mildew are not nearly so harmful. Winds may be
beneficial, too, when they bring warm air, when moisture laden, when
they keep frosty air in motion, and possibly they have an effect on some
small insects as the leaf-hopper. On the contrary they may be
detrimental when too dry, strong or cold. Natural or artificial
windbreaks may greatly modify the effects of wind currents though their
value is usually overestimated as their benefits are often offset by the
undesirable conditions caused.

Lastly, the prevalence or lack of insects and fungi in a region may
decide its value for viticulture. In several instances flourishing
viticultural industries have been destroyed in this country by insects
or fungi, or both. In other regions the present supremacy of commercial
grape-growing is almost wholly due to the fact that neither insects nor
fungi are seriously troublesome. The advent of spraying and a better
knowledge of the life histories of insects and fungi are lessening the
importance of the parasite factor in determining the value of a region
for grape-growing, but it is still of high importance.

We are now prepared to take up a discussion of the grape regions of New
York.

The states in which the growing of American grapes takes the rank of an
industry are, according to the census of 1900, in order of production:
New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Michigan, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas,
Missouri, Georgia and Oklahoma. The value of the product in the leading
state was $2,763,711; in the last named state, $128,500. American
viticulture, so far as native grapes are concerned, is almost wholly
confined to twelve states. But viticultural interests are still further
localized. In New York the industry is divided into four great regions,
the Chautauqua district, the Central Lakes district, the Hudson
district, and the Niagara district. In Pennsylvania and Ohio
grape-growing is largely confined to the shores of Lake Erie; in
Michigan to a small district about the towns of Lawton and Paw Paw; in
Missouri, Hermann is the representative point for grape culture.


THE CHAUTAUQUA DISTRICT.

Of the four grape regions of New York the Chautauqua district is by far
the most important though, excepting the Niagara, the most recent in
development. The Chautauqua grape belt lies along the southeastern shore
of Lake Erie. It averages about three miles in width and is about fifty
miles long. Its northeastern boundary is in Erie County but not far from
the line dividing Erie and Chautauqua Counties; its western boundary, in
New York, is the Pennsylvania line, an arbitrary division, for the
district passes into Pennsylvania. This narrow belt passes through the
towns of Hanover, Sheridan, Dunkirk, Pomfret, Portland, Westfield and
Ripley in Chautauqua County. Not all, but much, of the land is suitable
for grape-growing.

The topography, geology, and soils of this grape-belt have been
carefully mapped and studied.[93][94]

The grape land is, as we have seen, a narrow strip of comparatively low
land which borders the shore of Lake Erie. On the southern boundary of
this low plain is a high hill or escarpment parallel to the lake and
surmounting the grape belt throughout its entire length. This
escarpment, the "Hill", ranges from 500 to 700 feet above the plain and
from 500 to 1000 feet above the lake. The plain is gently rolling and
ascends from the bluff of the lake to the escarpment with a grade of
from one to two hundred feet to the mile, forming in some places
well-marked foot-hills to the escarpment proper.

The bed rock, according to Tarr[95] is upper Devonian shales and sand
stones in both plain and escarpment. On the face of the escarpment and
on the table lands of some of the foot-hills the soil is so thin that
the plough frequently touches bed rock. This seldom comes to the surface
on the plain except in stream beds and in shale ridges, but is to be
found in fragments of greater or less size and in more or less abundance
throughout the soils of the entire district. Everywhere on the plain may
be seen ancient beach lines. These rise usually in two well-defined
terraces but not infrequently there are from two to five distinct
terraces between the lake and the escarpment. All conditions point to
the theory that these ridges are wave built and therefore of lake
origin. The plain, the gravel ridges, the foot-hills and the high
escarpment are the chief topographical features of the grape belt.

The grape soils of the district, as mapped by the Bureau of Soils of the
United States Department of Agriculture,[96] are Dunkirk clay, Dunkirk
gravel, Dunkirk gravelly loam, Dunkirk sandy loam and Dunkirk shale
loam. The grapes grown upon the several soils vary somewhat as to
quantity per acre, as to flavor and sugar content and as to shipping
quality.

The largest areas of Dunkirk clay are found running back from the lake
east and west from Barcelona, in the neighborhood of Van Buren Point and
about Dunkirk. In these regions the soil is a clay loam from several
inches to a foot deep resting upon a stiffer and more tenacious clay.
Vineyards located on this soil are very productive but the quality is
not as high as in the fruit grown on the shale loam, though for most
part superior to that produced on the gravel and sandy loams.

Dunkirk gravel soils are found on the ridges at the foot of the
escarpment on the southern boundary of the district from Pennsylvania to
the eastern boundary of the grape district. Throughout most of this
distance there are from one to three parallel ridges varying from a few
rods to a half mile in breadth; at many places the ridges run into each
other or have been brought together by cultivation. It was upon this
gravel that vines were first successfully grown. Grapes upon this soil
ripen a week or more earlier than upon other soils and these lands are
therefore largely planted with vineyards to supply the early market and
they have a larger proportion of early varieties than vineyards on other
soils. The Niagara is thought to do especially well on Dunkirk gravel.

Dunkirk gravelly loam is found running through practically the whole
grape belt at the base or on the top of the gravel ridges; if at the
base, to lakeward of the ridges. It is a sandy loam with much fine
gravel and is underlaid at a depth of three feet with sand and shale
fragments. On the surface it much resembles the gravel soils having had
considerable top gravel brought there by washing and by cultivation. The
grapes grown on these soils are very similar to those produced on the
gravels though there are some minor differences. Some varieties produce
larger berries on this soil, and some sorts, it is claimed, a greater
amount of wood.

The Dunkirk sandy loams occur in large irregular areas bordering the
lake or running from the lake bluff back to the escarpment. By far the
largest of these areas is found about Fredonia and Dunkirk and running
east and west of these towns. A second area is found in the neighborhood
of Brocton and Portland and especially to the north and west. There are
smaller areas east of Barcelona and northwest of Ripley. Nearly all of
the sandy loam soils are found on undulating or rolling land. The soil
is a brownish-yellow loam from a half foot to a foot in depth. There are
some deviations from the type and yet the true sandy loams can be very
easily recognized. The soil is of rather heavy texture making good
farming land and producing large crops of grapes of slightly inferior
quality.

The Dunkirk shale loams are found upon the hill or escarpment. These
form the grape lands farthest removed from the lake. This soil is
comparatively thin, not averaging more than a half-foot in depth and is
hardly ever found a foot deep. It is brown in color with much coarse
fragmentary shale on the surface and underlaid with a considerable body
of heavy clay. Part of the shale loam land lies on slopes too steep and
rough for cultivation but the hillside table lands of this soil are
especially well adapted to grape-growing. The grapes grown here contain
much sugar, therefore keep and ship well, have a high flavor, and are
especially sought for in wine-making; grapes on these soils mature
early, have tough skins, but are only medium-sized berries. The yields
are much more variable on this soil than on the others because of the
great variation in the depth of soil. On deep soils of this loam the
yield is all that could be desired. Because of the lay of the land, and
the nature of the soil, there is much washing and cultivation must be
done judiciously.

The climate is exceptionally favorable for the grape-grower in the
Chautauqua district. It is, if anything, of more importance than the
land; for grape soils are not uncommon, but a grape climate as near
perfection as that of this region is indeed rare. The influence of the
lake in modifying the temperature of the region is the chief climatic
factor. This influence need not be dwelt upon here for it is common
knowledge that large bodies of water temper cold winter weather, hold
back vegetation in spring, equalize night and day temperatures of
summer, lengthen the growing season and ward off autumn frosts. Each of
these influences is highly favorable to the growth of the grape. The
escarpment on the southeastern boundary of the belt has a most decided
influence on the climate chiefly because it confines the influence of
the lake to a narrow belt. When the escarpment becomes low, as at the
two extremities of the belt, grape-growing ceases to be profitable. When
the distance between the lake and the escarpment is great, the climatic
conditions are not so favorable.

The air currents and rainfall of the region are especially favorable.
The in-shore breeze of the day and the off-shore breeze at night keep
the air in constant motion, thus preventing frosts in spring and autumn,
and probably cause in part the great degree of immunity to black-rot and
mildew. Unfortunately, data to determine accurately the rainfall of the
district cannot be had but such as have been taken indicate that the
rainfall is comparatively light for the maturing months of August,
September and October and not heavy for the three preceding growing
months. Residents of the grape belt claim that most of the heavy showers
pass over the hills or down the lake. The whole region is proverbially
free from heavy dews. Rain and dew are favorable to black-rot and other
fungi and the lack of them still further accounts for the immunity to
these pests in the region.

The history of the rise of grape-growing in Chautauqua County forms an
interesting chapter in the economic development of New York. The first
vines in the Chautauqua district were planted by Elijah Fay[97] in 1818,
near the present town of Brocton. These were wild vines of _Vitis
labrusca_ from Deacon Fay's boyhood home in New England. The vines grew
luxuriantly but the fruit was not satisfactory and in 1822 this worthy
pioneer obtained at great trouble roots of Miller's Burgundy,
Sweetwater and Black Hamburg. But the second experiment was even more
disastrous than the first as he got no fruit. The real start was made in
1824 when Mr. Fay obtained vines of Catawba and Isabella from Prince of
Flushing, Long Island. The vines were trained on trellises. The vineyard
covered a plot two by eight rods in extent. From a rise of land near
this spot one now sees grapes everywhere, probably a greater acreage of
them than can be seen from any other spot east of the Rocky Mountains.

In 1830 Deacon Fay made ten gallons of wine, the first for the region.
In 1834, Lincoln Fay, a nephew of Elijah Fay, started the sale of grape
vines but not many vines were sold for commercial plantings until as
late as 1850. In 1859 there were in the town of Portland but twenty
acres of bearing grape vines where now are thousands. During the decade
that followed, the Concord was generally introduced giving the
viticulture of the region a great impetus. Grapes were not yet grown for
table use to any great extent and a large acreage could not be used for
wine-making. In 1859 a wine-cellar was built by Fay, Ryckman[98] and
Haywood at Brocton and for a long while this company used almost the
total crop of the region. It was not until the early seventies that the
grape-growers sought other markets than the wine-cellars. In 1870 there
were about 600 acres of vineyards in Chautauqua County.

The first table-grapes of the region were packed in twenty-pound splint
baskets. Dunkirk was the primary marketing place and the fruit was
shipped from here to various large cities by through freight. The
transportation facilities were not satisfactory and in 1880 Jonas Martin
of Brocton tried the experiment of shipping a carload of grapes to
Philadelphia. This was the first carload of grapes sent from Chautauqua
County. In 1906, 4690 carloads were shipped and 844 were converted into
wine and grape juice, representing all told $2,482,822.[99] Until 1883
the markets were confined to nearby cities but in this year a carload
was safely sent to Spokane, after which time markets were found from the
Atlantic to the Pacific and from the Gulf to Upper Canada. The first
grape-growers' union was formed in 1886 as the Chautauqua Grape Growers'
Shipping Association and its organization marked a new epoch in the
grape industry of the district. Smaller and larger organizations have
since been formed and at the present time about 80 per ct. of the entire
crop is handled by a growers' union known as the Chautauqua and Erie
Grape Company.

According to Mr. G. E. Ryckman, in the early days of the grape industry
in this region the fruit was shipped in round paper baskets holding from
three to five pounds; later these were made of wood. Sometime in the
early seventies twenty-pound splint baskets, which were supposed to be
returned to the owners, were introduced. These were superseded by the
twelve-pound climax basket; the size of this basket was soon reduced to
ten pounds, then to nine, then to eight. Meanwhile a small five-pound
basket made on the same lines as the larger one came into use but soon
shrunk into a four-pound receptacle. The eight and the four-pound climax
baskets are now generally used throughout the region. Increasing
quantities are now being shipped to large cities in trays with slatted
tops holding about forty pounds each; these grapes are used by the
purchaser for wine-making. The wine and grape juice industries of the
region have been touched upon in the general discussion of these
industries.

An actual canvass made by this Station in the winter of 1906-7 shows
there are in the Chautauqua grape belt at this time 30,000 acres of
grapes. The census report of 1900 gave the number of vines for the
county as 11,914,706, which at the usual number of vines per acre gives
about 20,000 acres for the district. This figure was probably low,
though that of the Station for 1907 may be somewhat high. The acreage is
distributed in towns approximately as follows: Portland 9500; Westfield
5700; Ripley 5700; Pomfret 4600; Hanover 1950; Sheridan 1950; Dunkirk
600. A correspondent writes that the grape shipments for 1907 indicate a
considerably larger acreage for the towns of Hanover and Sheridan than
are here given. The average yield of grapes is a little less than two
tons per acre for the region. The value of vineyards varies from $100 to
$400 per acre.

The crop for the past seven years calculated by _The Grape Belt_[100]
from figures secured from the railroads are as follows:

  "Season of 1900          8000 carloads
  "Season of 1901          6669 carloads
  "Season of 1902          5062 carloads
  "Season of 1903          2952 carloads
  "Season of 1904          7479 carloads
  "Season of 1905          5362 carloads
  "Season of 1906          5634 carloads"

The seeming decrease in carloads shipped as the years progress is far
more than made up by the greater use of the fruit in local wineries and
grape juice factories.

According to figures gathered in the preparation of this work about 90
per ct. of the grape acreage of the region is set to Concord followed by
3 per ct. of Niagara, 2 per ct. of Worden and 1 per ct. each for Moore
Early and Catawba with the remaining 3 per ct. made up of a dozen or
more sorts among which Delaware leads.

The shipping season in this district begins early in September and lasts
well into November though late varieties, as Catawba, and small lots of
Concord are held some weeks longer. Improved storage facilities are
yearly lengthening the season.

Several systems of pruning and training are in vogue in the district but
the majority of the vineyards are pruned and trained in a system
peculiar to Chautauqua County. The posts are from six to eight feet in
height, one to each three vines; two wires complete the trellis. The
lower wire is from 28 to 32 inches from the ground and the second from
22 to 36 inches above the first, the distance being changed as the vine
comes to maturity. The grapes are trained according to the upright
system and the vines are renewed to short horizontal arms and but few
canes are taken out each year; the trunk reaches only to the lower wire.
The arms are loosely tied to the lower wire and the canes and bearing
shoots to the wire above. Cultivation varies greatly but the best
growers practice close cultivation and make use of fertilizers; the
cover crop is growing in favor. Spraying is not very general as the
region has been remarkably free from pests. The chief insects now
encountered are the grape-vine fidia,[101] the flea-beetle,[102] the
grape leaf-hopper[103] and the grape berry moth.[104] The several fungal
diseases found in this region are, about in order of importance,
black-rot, downy mildew, or "brown-rot," powdery mildew, and
anthracnose, or "bird's-eye rot."


THE CENTRAL LAKES DISTRICT

Several important areas of vineyards are grouped about the central lakes
in western New York. While there are at least three distinct localities
in this district, namely, the areas about the three lakes, Keuka,
Canandaigua, and Seneca, yet the soils, climate, varieties and methods
of caring for vineyards and product are so nearly alike that all may be
treated as one district. The vineyards are in five counties, Ontario,
Yates, Schuyler, Steuben and Seneca. The Keuka area, in Yates and
Steuben Counties, is by far the largest; and the region is often called
the Keuka grape district. Vineyards surround Keuka Lake and all but the
northern end of Canandaigua Lake, but only on the banks of the southern
half of Seneca Lake are grapes grown. The somewhat extensive vineyards
about Naples, south of Canandaigua Lake; Bath, south of Keuka Lake; and
of Romulus between Seneca and Cayuga Lakes, belong in the Central Lakes
district.

The geology of the Central or Finger Lakes has been studied by many
workers and the geological history of these remarkable bodies of water
is now well known.[105] It is very generally agreed that these lakes
fill, in part, preglacial valleys and that the valleys were transformed
into lakes by glacial action. The basins of the lakes may have been and
probably were deepened by the erosive action of glaciers but it is
fairly certain that there were pre-existing valleys which were dammed by
glacial deposit.

The topography is more or less rough and broken. The steep hillsides of
the lakes were formed not only by erosion but by the tilting of the
land. Beside these hillsides of the lakes to give character to the
topography of the region, there are ranges of hills and the remains of
some moraines, so that in general the land is very uneven. This is
especially true of the parts of it devoted to grape-growing though in
some grape sections there are many stretches of smooth and regular
vineyards.

The soils of this great region vary much, as is always the case when
land is made by glacial erosion and deposit of glacial drifts. On a
single farm the soil may be thick and fertile in one part and thin and
poor in another; it may consist largely of clay in one part and of sand
and gravel in others. The grape soils in the Central Lakes region are,
in particular, of miscellaneous types, embracing, in one place or
another, nearly all of the soils in the Dunkirk series described in the
discussion of the Chautauqua district. Probably the Dunkirk clay loam,
often very shaly and stony, is the most common of the several soils of
the region. There are also considerable areas of a shaly soil which
possibly do not belong to the Dunkirk types, not having been influenced
by water action as are true Dunkirk soils. On the slopes and hillsides
the land is sometimes rough and stony with but a thin covering of soil
and with out-croppings of bed rock. The influence of the various soils
on the grape has not been studied as in the Chautauqua district but, as
noted, the soils in the two districts are in many cases similar so that
the discussion of the influence of the several types given for the
Chautauqua district will apply in large part to the Central Lakes
district.

The Central Lakes have a very perceptible influence on the climate of
the region. The lakes are deep and conserve warmth. The water of Seneca
Lake is so deep, and consequently warm, that it has been known to freeze
over only a few times in the past hundred years. The winter climate in
this region is much less severe than in adjacent territories. Not only
does the water modify the severity of the winter climate but the
enclosing highlands materially assist in keeping in the warmth of the
valleys. Since the lakes run, generally speaking, north and south, the
winds are deflected to these directions very largely. In the summer,
both days and nights are cooler and the climate more equable near the
lakes. These modifications of climate are all favorable to
grape-growing.

The first grapes grown in this district, so far as records show, were
set by the Rev. William Bostwick at Hammondsport in 1830. The varieties
were Isabella and Catawba and these he succeeded in raising to
perfection. From this time onward scattering vines were planted in
gardens about the three lakes. About 1836 Mr. J. W. Prentiss, originator
of the Prentiss grape, planted a small vineyard at Pulteney from which
considerable fruit was sent to market from time to time and the vineyard
was constantly enlarged. In 1853 a commercial vineyard was set out by
Andrew Reisinger, a German vine-dresser, consisting of two acres of
Isabella and Catawba at Harmonyville in the town of Pulteney. Reisinger
trained, pruned and tilled his vines, operations unheard of before in
the district, and was rewarded with crops and profits which stimulated
grape culture in his and nearby neighborhoods.

In 1855 the Hon. Jacob Larrowe and Mr. Orlando Shephard planted small
vineyards of Isabella and Catawba in Pleasant Valley near Hammondsport
and were so successful that in 1858 their vineyards were greatly
increased and others in the valley embarked in the business of
vine-culture. Viticulture was now fairly started and the industry grew
apace from 1858 onward. In 1860 two hundred acres of grapes were set in
Pleasant Valley alone and elsewhere on Keuka Lake large plantings were
made. Grapes brought from fifteen to thirty cents per pound and a
bearing vineyard at this time was as good as a gold mine.

Plantings were begun in the Yates County portion of the Keuka district
in 1855 when Mr. W. W. Shirland set a small vineyard of Isabella in
Benton township.

There seem to be no records as to the first plantings about Seneca and
Canandaigua Lakes but all available information indicates that plantings
about these two lakes came in the spreading of the industry from Keuka
Lake. E. A. McKay of Naples seems to have had a vineyard of some extent
as early as 1848 from which he sold fruit. There must have been
vineyards of considerable size about Avon in Livingston County in the
early fifties; for Larrowe, Shephard and others obtained cuttings at
this place in 1855 for their vineyards in Pleasant Valley. Who owned
these Avon vineyards, and what their extent was, does not appear.

The first commercial shipment of any considerable amount beyond the
towns nearby was made in 1854 when Mr. J. W. Prentiss shipped a ton of
Isabella packed in tubs to New York City. The tubs were made by cutting
apple barrels in half and were packed half full when a thin board
partition was put in after which the tub was filled and covered. The
consignment reached the city in fair condition and brought fifteen cents
per pound but a second ton shipped in the same way "broke" the market.

John Mead of the town of Benton introduced the Concord in this region in
1861 and the same year Henry Rose of Penn Yan set the first Delaware to
be planted commercially in the district. The Concord soon took the place
of the Isabella but could not displace the Catawba as it did in the
Chautauqua district. The Delaware grew in favor and rapidly assumed
third place in the list of varieties about the three lakes, a position
which it still maintains, though it is closely followed by the Niagara.

By 1860 grape-growing had become so general that the need of further
outlets for the fruit was felt and the Pleasant Valley Wine Company was
formed for the manufacture of wine and brandy. For several years
following, this company used about one-third of the output of Pleasant
Valley, helping very materially to steady the market for the whole
district. A few years later another large company, the Urbana Wine
Company, was formed; and when still later it was discovered that the
champagne made about Keuka Lake was superior to that made in any other
part of America and that, with experience in making, it rivalled the
champagne in France, wine-making became an important adjunct to
grape-growing in this district. Now there are about twenty-five
companies making wine and champagne on or near the shores of the three
lakes, the industry having its center on Keuka Lake. Wine-making is
still in its infancy and because of the demand it creates for grapes,
and the high prices paid by the wineries, will continue to exert a most
favorable influence on the viticulture of the district. There is but
little unfermented grape juice made about the Central Lakes.

A valuable asset of this district is its long range of season. Grapes
ripen from one to two weeks earlier about these lakes than they do in
the Chautauqua belt. Thus the Concords grown here are well out of the
way of those grown in the Chautauqua district. The Catawba, which ripens
late and is a "good keeper", can be kept in fine condition until
midwinter or later. The range of season in this district, then, is from
the first part of September until February or even March.

Though there have been grape-growers' unions for marketing the fruit of
this district at various times, most of it now goes through the hands of
individual buyers. An exception is the product of the large vineyards of
Niagaras in Seneca County, the fruit of which is marketed with that of
the product of other Niagara vineyards of the Niagara district of
western New York through a union of growers.

The grapes in this district are variously trained but the high renewal
system is used chiefly. In this system the head of the trunk is from
twenty to thirty inches from the ground. Usually the trellis has three
wires, the lowest about twenty inches from the ground and the others at
distances of eighteen inches apart. New canes are brought out from
renewal stubs and once in two or three years an attempt is made to bring
them directly from the head of the main trunk. This system is
particularly well adapted to the Catawba and Delaware so generally grown
in the lake region. Thorough cultivation is practiced and the fall cover
crop of oats, barley or clover is coming into favor.

It is difficult to ascertain the acreage in this district. Taking the
figures of the census of 1900 and those of a canvass made by this
Station in the winter of 1906-7 the acreage in the several counties is
about as follows: Yates, 7940; Steuben, 5570; Ontario, 2630; Schuyler,
1014; Seneca, 1540; total 18,694. These figures are slightly larger than
the estimates of grape-growers and buyers but chiefly so because they
take in scattered plantations throughout the several counties. Thus in
all of these counties there are a surprisingly large number of Niagara
vineyards in out-of-the-way places, set during the Niagara boom of the
eighties. To this Central Lakes district might also be added 500 acres
of commercial vineyards in Livingston County; 250 in Cayuga and 250 in
Tompkins Counties. The total valuation of the crop in this district in
1900 was $943,964.

Insects are not as troublesome in the Central Lakes district as in the
Chautauqua district. The grape-vine fidia, or root-worm, one of the
worst of the insect pests of the grape, is not yet destructive in this
region. The grape leaf-hopper and the grape-vine flea-beetle are
possibly the worst of the insects infesting the grapes about these
lakes.

But fungi are more troublesome than in the Chautauqua district; probably
because the climatic conditions are more favorable to the development of
these pests about these smaller lakes than near Lake Erie. The five most
troublesome diseases, named about in order of importance are
black-rot,[106] downy mildew,[107] or "brown-rot", powdery mildew,[108]
anthracnose,[109] or "bird's-eye rot" and chlorosis,[110] or
"yellow-leaf". Vineyards are very generally sprayed in this district and
usually with satisfactory results. Grape-growers have learned that
certain varieties are much more susceptible to some of the diseases than
others and plant accordingly.


HUDSON RIVER DISTRICT.

The region along the Hudson River forms the third largest grape district
in New York. According to the census of 1890 there were 13,000 acres of
grapes in this district but in 1900 the returns gave less than half that
acreage. The great falling off was due to the taking out of a
considerable number of old vineyards which had been planted with too
many varieties, or with worthless varieties, or in some other respect
were poorly set plantations. It is doubtful whether the acreage in 1907
is greater than in 1900 but the industry is in a more healthful and
prosperous condition now than then.

An estimate of the present acreage, and its distribution, made in the
preparation of this work, gives the standing of the district as follows
by counties: Columbia, 865 acres; Dutchess, 448 acres; Orange, 865
acres; Ulster, 4021 acres; total, 6199 acres. Beside the above there
are, of course, some scattering vineyards. There are only two or three
wine-cellars in the district and probably 95 per ct. of the product of
the vineyards is sold for table grapes or to those who make wine in
small quantities.

The grape lands of the Hudson River Valley are found very largely in the
geological division known as the Taconic Province.[111] This province is
a broad valley which extends from Pennsylvania across New Jersey, taking
in Orange and parts of Ulster and Dutchess and Columbia Counties, then
passing out of the State. The rocks in this geological division are
shales, slates, schists, and limestones; and the soil is derived from
these rocks. The grape lands, for most part, are those in which there is
much shale or slate and in more or less coarse fragments, the finer
particles being clay or gravelly loams. The district is more or less
hilly, some of the vineyards being in valleys of a few acres extent,
others in broad, gently undulating plains and still others on
comparatively steep hillsides.

The climate of the Hudson Valley changes rapidly as one goes up the
River because of the diversity of its physical features and the wide
variety of atmospheric influences to which it is subject. In the part of
the Valley in which grapes are grown the summer temperature is high
owing to the position between ranges of mountains and to the southerly
winds which prevail at this season. In the winter the winds are
northerly and the temperature is often low making the culture of tender
grapes hazardous. The influence of the river, really a broad estuary in
the grape regions, at all seasons is most favorable for fruit-growing.

The lowlands of the Hudson Valley receive a somewhat small amount of
rainfall as compared with the rest of New York because when moisture is
being carried inland from the Atlantic it is largely precipitated by the
mountains and highlands of New England. This is favorable to
grape-growing. Another desirable feature of the rainfall of this Valley
is that the maximum summer downfall is in July whereas in many parts of
the State it is in September or October. This relatively light rainfall
in the maturing months is more marked in this than in any other of the
grape districts of the State.

The recorded history of commercial viticulture dates back to 1827 when
Mr. Robert Underhill and his two sons, R. T. and W. A. Underhill,
planted a vineyard of Catawba and Isabella at Croton Point which
eventually covered seventy-five acres. For some years this vineyard
practically supplied the large markets of the region with grapes. In
1829, Rufus Barrett of New Paltz, began shipping Isabella grapes in
small quantities to the New York market. Barrett lived in a settlement
of French Huguenots, who after having experimented more or less with
European sorts, early in the nineteenth century began planting native
varieties. It is probable that Barrett obtained his inspiration for
planting and knowledge of vine-growing from these Frenchmen.

In 1837 a French vintner, John Jacques, set out a vineyard for
wine-making at Washingtonville, Orange County. The varieties set were
Catawba and Isabella, purchased from Prince of Long Island. Some of
these vines are still living, vigorous and thrifty at three score years
and ten. The original plantation consisted of but a half acre but in
1838 this was increased to ten acres. This is probably the oldest
vineyard of native grapes in New York. The third year from the planting
of this vineyard wine was made, and has been made at Washingtonville
ever since, so that this community may claim the oldest winery as well
as the oldest vineyard in the State.[112]

William T. Cornell planted a vineyard of Isabellas near Clintonville,
Ulster County, in the year 1845. Mrs. Cornell and Mrs. William A.
Underhill were sisters, so that Cornell's vines came from Croton Point.
A. J. Caywood, of Marlboro, was a brother-in-law of Mr. Cornell. Thus
the inspiration of this noted viticulturist to plant grapes, and to
originate new sorts, may be traced directly back to the Frenchman,
Parmentier, who, as we have seen, furnished the Underhills with their
vines and gave them instructions for their care. The Catawba and
Isabella were grown almost entirely until the introduction of the
Delaware and Concord, after which the first named sorts dropped out
entirely, being subject to mildew and ripening late in the season.

The Valley of the Hudson has more reason to be called the birthplace of
American viticulture than any other of the grape-growing districts of
the country. The grape and wine industries, as we have seen, were early
started here. Prince's Linnaean Garden at the mouth of the Valley was the
first distributing agency for American grapes. Its owners did more than
distribute grapes, they distributed knowledge and trained men. A. J.
Caywood of Marlboro, J. H. Ricketts of Newburgh, Stephen Underhill at
Croton Point, Dr. A. K. Underhill at Charlton, Dr. C. W. Grant at Iona,
W. D. Barns of Middlehope, Dr. William M. Culburt of Newburgh, were
notable early originators and experimenters with grapes and from their
vineyards have come some of the best of our native varieties. Kniffin,
the Downings, and Buel are other familiar names in viticulture and
horticulture of those who lived on the Hudson and who have helped to
invest the region with sentiment and with interest for the grape grower.

The number of varieties grown in this region is far greater than in
other parts of the State; as would be expected from its having been the
birthplace of so many and from its nearness to large markets where fancy
sorts can be disposed of to advantage. The Concord leads in acreage
followed in order of acreage by Delaware, Niagara, Worden, Moore Early,
Bacchus, Pocklington, Campbell Early, Hartford and Vergennes after which
come a great number of less well-known sorts grown in acre or less
quantities. The value of the crop in this district in 1900 was $298,350.

During the early years of grape-growing along the Hudson the methods of
training were essentially those used in Europe. The vines were kept well
headed back and were trained to stakes of varying heights. It did not
take long to discover that for our native grapes the vines must be so
trained as to give the fruit and foliage the greatest possible amount of
sunshine; to regulate the bearing wood; to permit them to bear just so
much and no more fruit; and to control the height of the main trunk.
Soon distinctive systems for native grapes arose and one of the earliest
of these originated with William Kniffin of Ulster County. This system
still bears his name and is most generally used either as it was first
practiced or in some of its modifications. In the Kniffin system, and
its modifications, the trunk is carried to the top wire and the bearing
shoots are allowed to droop; for this reason this method of training is
often called the _drooping_ system in contra-distinction to the upright
systems hitherto mentioned in which the bearing shoots are tied to wires
above the canes from which they grow. The Hudson Valley growers claim
that the Kniffin system is especially desirable for the strong growing
sorts like Concord, Worden, and Niagara but admit that for the slender
shorter growing kinds like Delaware and Catawba the upright system is
best.

As is always the case when fruit is grown near to the market in which it
is sold, there is little uniformity in the packages in which it is
shipped and the manner in which the fruit is packed. Most of the fruit
from the vineyards along the Hudson goes to market in climax baskets of
the two standard sizes. Some of the growers pack two, or even three
varieties, in one package for the purpose of giving a range in color and
quality. The shipping facilities along the river are unexcelled. Most of
the grapes go by boat down the Hudson to New York City. In this case the
fruit is loaded late in the evening and reaches its destination early
the next morning. The rail connections to New England cities are good
and large shipments go eastward by rail while smaller quantities go
inland and south. The fruit is not marketed through unions nor has
co-operative selling been tried, the nearness to market obviating the
necessity of co-operation.

The insect pests in this district are neither numerous nor particularly
destructive, the grape leaf-hopper and the grape-vine flea-beetle being
most common. Spraying for insects is not generally practiced. On the
other hand the fungus troubles are serious, the black-rot having been
especially destructive in some sections. The other diseases are much the
same as in the districts discussed. While all of the fungi of the
district are amenable to treatment yet spraying has not been generally
practiced nor have the vines been kept as vigorous and healthy through
cultivation and fertilization as to withstand the attacks of the several
fungi. The decreased acreage of grapes along the Hudson during the past
decade or two is due in some measure to the fact that the grape diseases
have not been controlled. With better knowledge of the life-habits of
the insects and fungi which attack vineyards, and means of combatting
these pests, viticulture should regain the prestige it once held in the
Hudson Valley.


THE NIAGARA DISTRICT.

The Niagara district, the smallest of the several grape areas of the
State, lies along the Niagara river and the southern shore of Lake
Ontario. In it are about 4700 acres distributed in counties as follows:
Erie, 2100; Niagara, 1250; Orleans, 375; Monroe, 700; Wayne, 380. In the
southern part of Erie County the vineyards are grown under conditions
very similar to those we have described in the Chautauqua district; the
treatment given is much the same; the grapes are marketed as are those
in the district to the south and west; and the Concord, as in the larger
district, is the variety most largely grown. But conditions in the
northern and eastern part of the county more nearly approach those along
Niagara river and the Ontario shore so that the county is included in
the Niagara district.

In Niagara, Orleans, Monroe, and Wayne Counties the grape lands are in
what is known as the Ontario plain. This plain has for its western
boundary in the United States, Niagara River; for its northern boundary
Lake Ontario; to the south there is a high escarpment, the Niagara
escarpment, or "the mountain", separating the Ontario plain from the
Erie plain which is an eastward extension of the low plain on the south
shore of Lake Erie. The Niagara escarpment may be seen well at Lewiston
from which point it stretches eastward toward Lockport and westward into
Ontario. The escarpment may be traced to the eastern end of Lake Ontario
where it disappears and the Erie and Ontario plains merge into one. In
the grape-growing counties the Ontario plain varies from four to nine
miles in width.

The plain is more or less rolling throughout its entire length; but in
few places are the hills too steep for fruit-growing. The soils are
sandy, gravelly, or clay loams varying greatly in fertility and in
adaptability for the grape. In parts of the district the soils are stony
and shaly. They belong, so far as they have been studied, to the Dunkirk
series and are therefore quite similar to those of the Chautauqua
district.

The climate, too, is much like that of the Chautauqua district. The
average midwinter temperature is comparatively high; the summer
temperature is equable; and the precipitation of rain and dew light as
compared with inland areas. The influence of the escarpment is not so
marked in the Niagara district as in the Chautauqua belt. A remarkable
feature of the climate of this district is that killing frosts rarely
occur before the close of October, giving a long maturing and harvesting
season for the grape. In the winter the daily range of temperature is
small owing not only to the influence of the water but to the fact as
well that this season is a period of great cloudiness for the region.

In Erie County much of the product of the southern part is marketed with
that of Chautauqua County but to the north, Buffalo makes a splendid
local market. Several varieties are grown for the home market but
chiefly the Concord and the Niagara. These are packed in the various
styles of climax baskets and in slatted crates--the latter for the home
making of wine. The fruit is carted to the market by the grower, or
purchased in the field, in the case of wine-making, by the consumer.

Niagara County is the home of the Niagara grape and this variety is
grown here almost exclusively. The product is sold very largely by the
grower in the open markets of Buffalo and Niagara Falls and is packed in
the several sizes of climax baskets. In the counties to the east of
Niagara the product, almost exclusively Niagaras, is sold at Rochester
or neighboring towns or shipped to the large eastern cities. Much of
this fruit is sold through the Niagara Grape Market Company, a
co-operative union, with headquarters at Lockport, New York.

The Niagara region is the newest of the grape districts of the State.
There were few plantings along the shore of Ontario until 1886 when the
Niagara grape was introduced and vineyards were put out in considerable
numbers throughout the whole extent of the district followed by still
heavier plantings during the succeeding several years. It was soon
demonstrated that the region was well adapted to grape-growing and
especially for the Niagara grape but that there were many soils and
locations wholly unsuitable for vineyards. Consequently during the years
that followed the bearing of the first grapes, many vineyards have been
abandoned so that there are now scarcely as many acres as at the close
of the first period of expansion about 1900. The insect and fungus pests
are much the same as in the Chautauqua district though the dreaded
grape-vine fidia is not yet nearly so common, but, on the other hand,
the black-rot is far more destructive, probably because the Niagara
grape is very susceptible to this fungus.




CHAPTER IV

SPECIES OF AMERICAN GRAPES.


THE GENUS VITIS.

The genus Vitis was formed and named by Tournefort,[113] a French
botanist, more than two hundred years ago. In his work, _Institutiones
Rei Herbariae_, published in Paris in 1700, he gives the following
description of this genus:

"The Vitis is a genus of plant with a (A) flower shaped like a rose,
with many petals placed uniformly in a circle, out of the middle of
which arises the pistil (B), with stamens pressed together (C), the
flower (D,E,F) folds upward; the pistil develops into an edible berry
(E), fleshy, full of juice, and usually with four seeds (H,I), the seeds
are pear-shaped (K)."

The capital letters in the parentheses refer to illustrations. These
indicate that Tournefort had a very clear conception of the flowering
parts of a grape. He gives twenty-one species under this genus of which
nine are American, one, however, being our Virginia creeper.
Tournefort's work is all very indefinite; others of the species than
those credited to America may be American, and it is quite possible that
of the nine some would not be classed among the grapes to-day. Each
species is credited to some previous botanist and it is evident that
Tournefort was a compiler rather than an original worker with grapes.

The next botanist who contributed to our knowledge of this genus was
Linnaeus, the great Swedish systematist, who, in his _Genera Plantarum_,
1754, gives the following description of the flower (Like Tournefort's,
Linnaeus' book is written in Latin and the extracts here given are free
translations):

"Calyx. Five-toothed, small.

"Corolla. Petals five, rudimentary, small, caducous.

"Stamens. Filaments five, subulate, erect, spreading, caducous, anthers
simple.

"Pistil. Ovary egg-shaped, style none, stigma obtuse headed.

"Pericarp. Berry nearly round, large, one cell.

"Seeds. Five, plump, terminate cordate, base contracted, partially
divided into two cells."

Linnaeus in his _Species Plantarum_ of 1753, gives seven species as
belonging to this genus, three of which are credited to America. One,
however, _Vitis arborea_, is not classed among the grapes by present-day
botanists.

Marshall,[114] the first American botanist we have to consider, for
neither Tournefort nor Linnaeus had ever been on this continent, in his
_Arbustrum Americanum_, 1785, describes the genus Vitis in terms so
nearly identical with those of Linnaeus as to lead one to suspect that
it is merely a translation from the _Genera Plantarum_. Marshall gives
five species. One of these is certainly not a grape and one other is
indeterminate.

Thomas Walter,[115] in his _Flora Caroliniana_, 1788, gives a brief
description of the genus very similar to the foregoing but he also
speaks of the masculine and feminine forms of the flowers, a point that
does not seem to have been noticed by any botanist of an earlier date.
He speaks of the corolla adhering at the top and coming off as a cap,
one of the distinguishing characters of Vitis. This latter point had,
however, been noted by Tournefort, and his figures show that this is
what he means when he speaks of the flower as folding upward.
Tournefort, however, seems to have been under the mistaken impression
that Ampelopsis (_Ampelopsis quinquifolia_ Michx. is our common American
form) opens its flowers in the same way, as he includes this under
Vitis. Walter gives only three species and his descriptions of these are
very brief.

The first European botanist who made an extensive study of American
plants in their habitats was Andre Michaux, a French botanist who
traveled extensively in North America at about the close of the
eighteenth century. In his _Flora Boreali-Americana_, which was
published in 1803, he gives a brief generic description of Vitis which
includes all of the essential characters given by Walter. He also
questions the male and female characters mentioned by Walter.[116]
Michaux mentions five species of the American grapes. His descriptions
are clear and every species described can readily be recognized so that
there is no question among botanists as to what species was meant in any
instance.

An interesting contribution to our knowledge of the grapes of North
America is that of William Bartram.[117] Bartram's opportunities for
becoming familiar with these plants were probably greater than those of
any other person of his day, he being a resident of America, and his
father having been a botanist, so that he was trained from childhood to
observe plants. The following is an extract from an article of Bartram's
in the _Domestic Encyclopedia_, 1804:

"The most obvious characters which distinguish the grape vines of
America from those of the old continent are: 1. The berries of all the
American species and varieties that I have seen, approach the figure of
an oblate spheroid; that is, the poles are flattened, and the transverse
diameter is longer than the polar: however, I have observed that
Alexander's grape, and some of the _bul_ or bullet grapes, approach
nearer to an oval or ellipsis which is the figure of all foreign or
European grapes that I have seen; viz. a prolate spheroid. 2. Most of
the American species and varieties have a glaucous and yellowish
pubescence on the under surface of their leaves. 3. All that I have
observed in the northern and eastern districts of the United States are
_polygamous_; i. e. those vines which bear fruit (female) have
hermaphrodite flowers (pentandria monogynia); but the males have only
five stamina, without any female organ, and are always barren. One
should suppose, from WALTER so strongly marking this character as to
induce him to place the Vitis in the class _Dioecia_, when Linnaeus and
the other European botanists had placed it in Pentandria (he himself
being an European), that all the grape vines of the old continent are
hermaphroditous and Pentandrian. I know not from my own observation,
whether the bull-grape of Carolina is hermaphroditous or dioecious, and
therefore rest satisfied with WALTER'S assertion." Bartram gives four
species.

Nuttall,[118] in his _Genera of North American Plants and Catalogue of
the Species_, gives a rather stereotyped description of the genus but in
addition in fine type he gives the following:

"Leaf simple and cordate, angularly or sinuately lobed, rarely digitate
or pinnate (Cissus?), flowers numerous, in compound racemes, not
uncommonly producing 4, 6 and 7 petals, with a corresponding number of
stamens, calix mostly entire, or obsoletely crenate, a glandulous disk
surrounding the germ; tendril dichotomous, sometimes producing flowers,
therefore analogous to a sterile raceme."

It is evident that Nuttall was in doubt as to the distinguishing
characters between Vitis and the allied genus, Cissus. While he has the
species of the two genera in the same position they would now be placed,
his reference to pinnate-leaved species is somewhat misleading as no
pinnate-leaved species are known to-day in either Europe or America. He
uses, however, the distinguishing character between these two genera
that we now accept, that is, Vitis has petals that adhere at the tops
and come off in the form of a cap or calyptrum, while in Cissus the
corolla does not fall off as a cap. Nuttall mentions six species as
belonging to this genus: _Vitis labrusca_, _V. aestivalis_, _V.
cordifolia_, _V. riparia_, _V. rotundifolia_, and _V. palmata_, with a
question mark after the last species. None is described. His work is
apparently a discriminating compilation of the work of earlier
botanists.

Many other botanical workers wrote on this genus during the period
covered and some of them did very valuable work in describing the
various species but their work has not been referred to because it did
not add to the knowledge of the genus as a whole.

The first man to write a monograph on American grapes was
Rafinesque,[119] who published in 1830 a paper bound volume entitled
_American Manual of the Grape Vine_, etc. Rafinesque, who was long a
resident of the United States, had an opportunity to acquire knowledge
on the subject upon which he wrote second to none other. His description
of the genus is similar to that of his predecessors and very good; but
here all similarity ends and practically all value. After having made
forty-one species, the greater portion of which have names given by
himself, he says: "By the above enumeration of our Grapes I have done
for this genus what Michaux did for our Oaks. Owing to the great
confusion of former authors, and the difficulty of comparing the leaves
and fruits of all the species, it is hardly as perfect as I should wish.
Rigid botanists may perhaps wish to reduce this species to a minor
number or consider some as hybrids: if they can find good permanent
collective characters, let them reduce our Grapes and Oaks to a dozen
species. But the angular or striated branches, the long or short
petioles, the oval, cordate or reniform leaves, etc., must always be
deemed essential specific characters, and several of my new species,
such as V. bracteata, V. angulata, V. peltata, V. canina, V. blanda, V.
longifolia, V. acerifolia, V. amara, V. prolifera, etc., must be deemed
very distinct." None of those of which he says "must be deemed essential
specific characters" is now so considered and the species which must be
"deemed very distinct" are many of them unrecognized and none of them
known by the name which he gave.

Le Conte, about the middle of the last century, did much work in the
botany of grapes, publishing several papers in the _Proceedings of the
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia_. These were in the nature
of monographs although they were not, so far as known, published
separately. He gives twelve species generally taken from other authors.

A little later than Le Conte, Engelmann of St. Louis, gave his attention
to the genus Vitis, clearing up a number of disputed points. His work
was published in various reports and later in the _Bushberg Catalogue
and Grape Manual_. Engelmann's studies are particularly valuable in that
he was the first botanist working with grapes who lived in the middle
west and the territory over which he ranged in his botanical expeditions
was comparatively virgin. This was about the time of the reconstitution
of the French vineyards by the use of American roots as stocks on which
to graft their French vines to enable them to resist phylloxera. Many
thousand cuttings and rooted vines of American grapes were sent to
France annually for this purpose. The value of grafting on resistant
stocks had stimulated an interest among French scientists in grapes
generally and particularly in the American species. While their aid in
separating species was but slight, owing to their distance from the
field where the plants were growing, yet the investigations of Planchon,
Millardet, and others as to the comparative value of various characters
in separating species, were of great importance. These investigations
were utilized by Engelmann to a considerable extent. Owing to its
simplicity, and somewhat perhaps to the place of publication, his work
obtained favor among grape-growers to a greater extent than that of any
of his predecessors. In his earlier writings he gives six species but in
the last edition of the _Bushberg Catalogue_ thirteen are enumerated.

[Illustration:

  1. V. bicolor
  2. V. cordifolia
  3. V. rotundifolia
  4. V. doaniana
  5. V. longii
  6. V. labrusca
  7. V. rupestris
  8. V. riparia
  9. V. vinifera
  10. V. aestivalis

CANES OF SPECIES OF VITIS]

Shortly after and partly coincident with Engelmann, Munson, of Texas,
made valuable contributions to our knowledge of American grapes. Munson
is, what none of his predecessors had been, a cultivator of grapes and a
breeder of new varieties as well as a botanical student of the subject.
The region in which he lived was comparatively new to botanists, and it
was partly, perhaps, on this account that he raised the number of
species from the thirteen given by Engelmann to twenty-five. At the
present time it appears doubtful if all of these will ultimately be
given specific rank. Many of them undoubtedly will, and others of them
will be recognized at least as varieties. Munson is regarded to-day as
the chief authority on grapes of the semi-arid and mountainous districts
of the West and is one of the leading authorities on American
viticulture.

The last man who has paid special attention to the grapes of North
America is Bailey, of Cornell. In his latest classification he gives
twenty-three species of American grapes. Bailey is the only American
botanist of experience and recognized standing in general botany who has
paid special attention to the grape. His monograph of the genus Vitis
which, with some changes, has appeared successively in _Gray's
Synoptical Flora_, _The Evolution of Our Native Fruits_, and the
_Cyclopedia of American Horticulture_, is the most complete work we have
on this subject. With his permission we have followed his arrangement of
species in _The Grapes of New York_.

With this brief history of the formation of the genus Vitis as it now
stands we pass to a consideration of the botanical characters of Vitis.

From the time when botanists first commenced to work on the grape there
has been a constant search for taxonomic characters for separating the
various species clearly and distinctly. Many of the earlier
descriptions, while they are correct so far as they go, do not mention
enough characters to enable one to distinguish between similar species.
It has been found that dependence upon the shape of the leaf, size of
berry, size of plant, date of ripening, and similar characters, is very
uncertain and unsatisfactory and that, while these characters are always
mentioned in descriptions as indicating the intrinsic value of a
species, they are of little value from a systematic standpoint. There
are, however, several characters of Vitis which have great taxonomic
importance.

One of the fundamental characters which determine a species is
continuous or intermittent tendrils, first noticed by Professor A.
Braun[120] of Berlin. _Vitis labrusca_, the common Fox grape, is
peculiar in that there are tendrils, or an inflorescence, opposite
nearly every leaf; this arrangement is known as _continuous tendrils_.
All other species have two leaves with a tendril opposite each and a
third leaf without a tendril; such species are said to have
_intermittent tendrils_. Continuity of tendrils is a variable character
and to ascertain which of the two forms is present it is necessary to
have vigorous, healthy, typical canes. The lowest leaves of canes
usually have no opposite tendrils. This character is shown in the
color-plates of the several species.

A closely related character is that of the number of inflorescences
borne by a species. All species excepting _Vitis labrusca_ average two
inflorescences to the cane but the last named species, at least in some
of its subdivisions, may bear from three to six inflorescences, each of
course in the place of a tendril opposite a leaf.

Professor Millardet of Bordeaux first called attention to the value of
that part of the cane known as the diaphragm as a means of
distinguishing species. The cane of the grape vine contains a large
pith, and in most species this pith is interrupted by woody tissue at
the joints; this woody tissue is the _diaphragm_. The presence or
absence of the diaphragm and its thickness are of taxonomic value. In
Rotundifolia, the southern Fox grape, the diaphragm is absent; in
Riparia, the Riverbank grape, it is very thin; in Rupestris it is
slightly thicker; while Cordifolia, Aestivalis, and Labrusca have thick
diaphragms. This character is studied best in the year-old canes of
the grape. The color-plate of canes shows the range in thickness of
diaphragms as they occur in several species.

[Illustration: V. RUPESTRIS

V. RIPARIA

V. LONGII

V. CHAMPINI

V. LABRUSCA

V. VINIFERA

V. AESTIVALIS BOURQUINIANA

V. AESTIVALIS LINCECUMII

V. BICOLOR

V. AESTIVALIS

V. BERLANDIERI

V. ROTUNDIFOLIA

V. DOANIANA

V. LABR. x V. VIN.

V. LABR. X V. RIP.


SEEDS OF SPECIES OF VITIS

[NATURAL SIZE AND ENLARGED]]

The time of flowering is of considerable value in distinguishing
species. Unfortunately it requires live plants and a certain time of
year in order that this character be noted. The first American species
to flower is Riparia. Rupestris flowers shortly after; next, Labrusca;
Aestivalis a little later, although the Lincecumii variety of Aestivalis
blooms slightly before Labrusca; Cordifolia is very late in coming into
bloom, and Cinerea still later. Vinifera, the European grape, blooms
shortly after Labrusca. The cultivated offspring of all wild grapes
retain the blooming characters of the species from which they are
derived.

Other characters that have been found of great value are those connected
with the seed. The ability to use the seed characters, however, cannot
readily be acquired except by the use of an illustrated manual and some
experience in selecting the seeds, as they are quite variable on the
same plant. The weight of the seeds differs in different species, but
varies so much inside the species that it is not of much value from a
systematic standpoint. In general, it may be said that the Labruscas
have the largest and heaviest seed of our American grapes; Riparia has
the smallest seed, with Aestivalis occupying an intermediate position.
The size of the seeds in Aestivalis, however, is more noticeable on
account of the small size of the fruit. The color-plate illustrates the
different characters to be found in grape seeds and a study of this
plate with the technical descriptions of the several species will show
how important seeds become in classifying grapes.

Attention is called to the characters given by Bartram as distinguishing
the European from the American species. The first difference that he
mentions is in the shape of the fruit, that of the Vinifera being more
or less oval and that of American species roundish or oblate. Recent
technical descriptions of our American species give the fruit as
spherical where the shape is mentioned at all. On the other hand it is
known that most of the cultivated varieties of European grapes are oval.
Does this mean that all of our cultivated American varieties which show
oval berries, such as Isabella, Catawba, and others, contain Vinifera
blood? It could not be said without careful study that this is true but
it is certainly worthy of consideration. This point seems to have
escaped the attention of our later-day botanists.

The sexual status of the grape has always been a source of
misunderstanding. The earlier botanists spoke of American vines as
dioecious, that is, bearing staminate and pistillate flowers on separate
individuals. In this, as was noted on page 98, they were corrected by
Bartram, in so far as American species were concerned, he stating that
the vines of America were polygamous (showing staminate and
hermaphrodite plants). Bartram did not presume to speak as to the sex of
the flowers of the Old World grape. Later it was determined that the
cultivated varieties of Europe were always hermaphrodite and that
staminate forms were unknown. Engelmann[121] explains this so well and
with such apparent satisfaction that we cannot do better than quote him
here. "All the true Grape-vines bear fertile flowers on one stock and
sterile flowers on another separate stock, and are therefore called
_polygamous_, or, not quite correctly, _dioecious_. The sterile plants
do bear male flowers with abortive pistils, so that while they never
produce fruit themselves, they may assist in fertilizing the others; the
fertile flowers, however, are hermaphrodites containing both
organs--stamens and pistils--and are capable of ripening fruit without
the assistance of the male plants. Real female flowers without any
stamens do not seem ever to have been observed. Both forms, the male and
the hermaphrodite, or if preferred those with sterile and those with
complete flowers, are found mixed in their native localities of the wild
plants, but of course only the fertile plants have been selected for
cultivation, and thus it happens that to the cultivator only these are
known; and as the Grape-vine of the Old World has been in cultivation
for thousands of years, it has resulted that this hermaphrodite
character of its flowers has been mistaken for a botanical peculiarity,
by which it was to be distinguished, not only from our American
Grape-vines, but also from the wild grapes of the old world. But plants
raised from the seeds of this as well as any other true Grape-vine,
generally furnish as many sterile as fertile specimens, while those
propagated by layering or by cuttings, of course, only continue the
individual character of the mother-plant or stock." The accompanying
plate shows various forms of grape flowers.

[Illustration: FLOWERS OF VITIS]

He further says in a foot-note: "These fertile plants, however, are of
two kinds; some are _perfect hermaphrodites_, with long and straight
stamens around the pistil, the others bear smaller stamens, shorter than
the pistil which soon bend downward and curve under it; these may be
called _imperfect hermaphrodites_, approaching females, and they do not
seem to be as fruitful as the perfect hermaphrodites, unless otherwise
fertilized."

Beach[122] tested many of our cultivated varieties by sacking the
clusters at blooming time and thus determined their capacity to
fertilize themselves. From the data thus secured he divides them into
four classes: 1st. Those that are able to fertilize themselves so that
the clusters are perfect or varying from perfect to somewhat loose. 2d.
Those in which the clusters are marketable, varying from moderately
compact to loose. 3d. Clusters so loose as to be unmarketable. 4th.
Those which are self-sterile or showing no fruit on covered clusters. Of
169 varieties tested, he found 38 belonging to the first class, 66 to
the second class, 28 to the third, and 37 to the fourth.

Later it was found that the reason why certain varieties were
self-sterile was on account of impotent and abortive pollen, the
percentage of abortive pollen grains varying with different varieties
and this percentage determining the degree of self-sterility. The
upright or depressed stamen is not an invariable criterion of the
condition of the pollen although it is usually. There are a few
instances in which upright stamens bear impotent pollen but these are
very exceptional. Munson made similar tests of vines of twenty-two[123]
American species of vines secured from their habitats. In every case he
found that they showed only two forms, the staminate vines and the
self-sterile hermaphrodite, no perfect hermaphrodites being found. While
of some of the species the number of vines tested was a half dozen or
less, in most instances many vines were tested from different places.
This is particularly interesting in that it becomes a puzzle as to where
our perfectly hermaphrodite cultivated forms could have come from if
such forms are not present in the wild vines of our woods and prairies.

The structure of the bark is an important distinguishing character for
some species; in particular as to whether it peels off and whether in
large flakes or in narrow strips or shreds. So, too, the color of the
bark is often of taxonomic importance. The form and color of the leaves
are often considered, but these characters are variable and may be
misleading. The lobing of leaves is a fairly uniform character in most
species, some having lobed and others having entire leaves. As to color
and texture, the upper surface of the leaf in some species is smooth,
glossy and shining and in others rough and dull with varying shades of
green. The lower surfaces show similar variations with the addition of
varying conditions of pubescence and down or even of cobwebs. In young
seedlings the shape and surfaces of the leaves are apt to be quite
different from those on the old plants, a character of systematic
importance with some species. The flower, as compared with this organ in
other genera, is of little importance in distinguishing the species of
Vitis, there being an unusual similarity in the structure and appearance
of the flowers of the several species.

The number of species of Vitis is very uncertain; as, indeed, is their
habitat, except that they are generally confined to the temperate or
subtropical regions. Some writers give the number as less than fifty but
in all territories the number seems to depend on the thoroughness with
which the region has been worked over botanically, and also on the
judgment of the botanist doing the work. Gray recognized four species as
being indigenous to America. Engelmann in his latest publication
(_Bushberg Catalogue_, 1883), thirteen, while Munson gives twenty-five.
Bailey in _Gray's Synoptical Flora_, gives twenty-three species.
Planchon (in 1887) gives twenty-eight species for the world. Seventeen
of these are credited to America, ten to Asia, and one, the Vinifera, of
unknown nativity. All of these lists, however, are known to be
incomplete. Bessey[124] says that the grape is not native to the
southern hemisphere, and Planchon credits none to any section south of
the equator. Bailey credits two to Australia in a work not intended to
cover more than those of American interest. And a correspondent[125]
from that continent writes us giving a list of nineteen named and
botanically described species indigenous to Australia. The number of
species of grapes in the world depends upon the arbitrary limits set for
a species and our knowledge of the genus is yet too meager to set these
limits with certainty.


SPECIES OF AMERICAN GRAPES.

CONSPECTUS OF NORTH AMERICAN SPECIES OF VITIS.

A. Skin of mature berry separating freely from the pulp.
  B. Nodes without diaphragms; tendrils simple         =1. V. rotundifolia.=
                                                       =2. V. munsoniana.=

  B.B. Nodes with diaphragms; tendrils forked.

      C. Leaves and shoots glabrous at maturity and without bloom.
        Tendrils intermittent (_V. cinerea_ and _V. arizonica_ are partial
        exceptions and might be looked for under C.C.).

          D. Leaves thin, light, bright green, generally glabrous
            below at maturity except perhaps in the axils of the
            veins (_V. champini_ an exception) with a long or at
            least a prominent point and usually long and sharp
            teeth or the edge even jagged. (_V. bicolor_ might be
            looked for here.)

              E. Leaves broader than long; petiolar sinus usually
                wide and shallow. (_V. treleasei_ might be
                sought here.)                          =3. V. rupestris.=

              E.E. Leaves ovate in outline; petiolar sinus
                usually medium to narrow.

                  F. Diaphragms thin; young shoots not red.=4. V. monticola.=
                                                         =5. V. riparia.=
                                                         =6. V. treleasei.=
                                                         =7. V. longii.=
                                                         =8. V. champini.=
                  F.F. Diaphragms thick; young shoots
                    bright red                           =9. V. rubra.=

          D.D. Leaves thickish, dull colored or grayish green, often
            holding some close dull pubescence below at maturity,
            shoots and leaves nearly always more or less pubescent
            when young; the teeth mostly short; the point mostly
            rectangular and conspicuous.

              E. Plants strong, climbing, with stout persistent
                tendrils.

                  F. Young shoots cylindrical, glabrous or
                    very soon becoming so               =10. V. cordifolia.=

                  F.F. Young shoots angled, covered the
                    first year with tomentum or wool    =11. V. baileyana.=
                                                        =12. V. berlandieri.=
                                                        =13. V. cinerea.=

              E.E. Plants scarcely climbing, tendrils perishing
                when without support                    =14. V. arizonica.=

          D.D.D. Leaves orbicular, scallop shaped; species of the
            Pacific Coast                               =15. V. californica.=

          C.C. Leaves rusty or white tomentose or glaucous blue below,
            thick or at least firm. (_V. cinerea_, _V. arizonica_ and possibly
            _V. californica_ might be sought here.)

              D. Leaves flocculent or cobwebby or glaucous below
                when fully grown (i. e. not covered with a thick dense
                felt-like tomentum except sometimes in _V. doaniana_).

                  E. Shoots white tipped; ends of the growing
                    shoots and the under surface of the leaves
                    whitish or gray                     =16. V. girdiana.=
                                                        =17. V. doaniana.=

                  E.E. Shoots rusty tipped; the unfolding leaves
                    and (except in _V. bicolor_) the young shoots distinctly
                    ferrugineous; mature leaves either rusty
                    or bluish below or sometimes becoming green
                    in _V. bicolor_                     =18. V. aestivalis.=
                                                        =19. V. bicolor.=
                                                        =20. V. caribaea.=

              D.D. Leaves densely tomentose or felt-like beneath
                throughout the season; covering white or rusty white.

                  E. Tendrils intermittent              =21. V. candicans.=
                                                        =22. V. simpsoni.=

                  E.E. Tendrils mostly continuous       =23. V. labrusca.=

A.A. Skin and pulp of mature berry cohering. (Old World)=24. V. vinifera.=

[Illustration: =SHOOT OF= _VITIS ROTUNDIFOLIA_]


1. =VITIS ROTUNDIFOLIA= Michx.[126]

     =1.= _Trans. Am. Phil. Soc._, =1771=:339. =2.= Michaux, =2=:231.
     1803. _Muscadine grape._ =3.= Bartram, _Dom. Enc._, =5=:289, 290.
     1804. V. TAURINA; _V. vulpina_; _Bull grape_. =4.= Muhlenberg,
     =1813=:27. V. VERRUCOSA; _V. rotundifolia_; _Fox grape_; _Bull
     grape_. =5.= Pursh, =1=:169. 1814. _Bull grape; Bullet grape._ =6.=
     Nuttall, =1=:143. 1818. =7.= Elliott, =2=:687. 1824. _V. vulpina;
     Fox grape._ =8.= Rafinesque, =1830=:16. V. VULPINA; _V. muscadina_;
     _V. rotundifolia_; _V. incisa_. =9.= (?) Ib., =1830=:17. V.
     ANGULATA; _Arkansas_; _Bushy grape_; _Currant grape_; _False
     Scuppernong_. =10.= Ib., =1830=:17. V. VERRUCOSA; _Warty grape_.
     =11.= (?) Ib., =1830=:17. V. PELTATA; _V. Floridana_. =12.= Le
     Conte, _Proc. Phil. Acad. Nat. Sci._, =6=:273. 1853. _V. vulpina;
     V. acerifolia; V. angulata; V. verrucosa; Bullace grape; Bull
     grape; Muscadine; Scuppernong._ =13.= Weller, _U. S. Pat. Off.
     Rpt._, =1853=:306. SCUPPERNONG. =14.= Le Conte, _Ib._, =1857=:231.
     _V. vulpina; V. acerifolia; V. angulata; V. verrucosa; Bullace
     grape; Bull grape; Muscadine; Skuppernong._ =15.= White,
     _Horticulturist_, =12=:457. 1857. _V. vulpina._ =16.= Ravenel, _U.
     S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1859=:538. V. VULPINA; _V. rotundifolia_;
     _Mustang_; _Bullace grape_; _Bullet grape_; _Bull grape_. =17.=
     Buckley, _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1861=:484. _Muscadine; Bullace._
     =18.= Koch, _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1868=:81. V. VULPINA;
     _Muscadine_; _Southern Fox grape_. =19.= Saunders, _U. S. D. A.
     Rpt._, =1869=:83, 85. _fig._ V. VULPINA; _Bullace grape_. =20.=
     Wylie, _Jour. of Hort._, =7=:164. 1870. SCUPPERNONG; _Bullace_.
     =21.= Ib., _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1871=:116. SCUPPERNONG. =22.=
     Engelmann, _Mo. Ent. Rpt._, =1872=:62. V. VULPINA; _Southern Fox
     grape_; _Bullace grape_; _Bullit grape_; _Muscadine_. =23.= Ib.,
     _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:10, 11, 13, 14, 19. V. VULPINA; _V.
     rotundifolia_; _Southern Fox grape_; _Bullace grape_; _Bullit
     grape_; _Muscadine_. =24.= Bush, _Ib._, =1883=:26. _V. vulpina._
     =25.= Munson, _Am. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:138. _V. vulpina;
     Scuppernong; Muscadine._ =26.= Ib., _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1885=:97. _Scuppernong; Muscadine._ =27.= Ib., _Gar. Mon._,
     =28=:140. 1886. =28.= Planchon, _De Candolle's Mon. Phan._,
     =5=:362. 1887. _Fox grape; Muscadine; Bullace; Bullet grape; V.
     angulata; V. vulpina?._ =29.= Munson, _Soc. Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._,
     =1887=:59. _Muscadine._ =30.= Ib., _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._, =3=:14.
     1890. =31.= Ib., _Gar. and For._, =3=:474, 475. 1890. _Muscadine._
     =32.= Woodworth, _Ark. Sta. An. Rpt._, =3=:93. 1890. V. VULPINA.
     =33.= Munson, _Am. Gard._, =12=:661. 1891. =34.= Bailey, _Ib._,
     =14=:353. 1893. _Scuppernong._ =35.= Munson, _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:20, 22, 29. _V. vulpina; Muscadine; Southern Fox grape._
     =36.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:420. 1897. _Muscadine;
     Southern Fox grape; Bullace; Bullit; Bull grape._ =37.= Britton and
     Brown, =2=:411. 1897. _V. vulpina; Southern Fox grape; Bullace
     grape._ =38.= Munson, _Am. Gard._, =20=:688. 1899. =39.= Ib., _Tex.
     Sta. Bul._, =56=:219, 232, 234, 241, 272. 1900. _fig._ _Southern
     Muscadine._ =40.= Earle, _Ala. Sta. Bul._, =110=:74. 1900. =41.=
     Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:42, 43, 45. =42.= Newman, _S.
     C. Sta. Bul._, =132=:1. 1907. _Bullis._

     Vine variable in vigor, usually very vigorous, climbing high,
     sometimes, when without support, shrubby and only three or four
     feet high; when growing in the shade often sending down aerial
     roots. Wood hard, bark smooth, not scaling off except in old age,
     with prominent warty lenticels; shoots short-jointed, angled, with
     fine scurfy pubescence; diaphragms absent; tendrils intermittent,
     simple. Leaves below medium in size, broadly cordate or roundish;
     petiolar sinus rather wide, usually shallow; margin with obtuse,
     wide teeth; not lobed; dense in texture, rather light green color,
     glabrous above, glabrous or sometimes pubescent along veins below.
     Cluster small (6-24 berries), loose; peduncle short; pedicels
     short, rather thick. Berries large, globular or somewhat oblate,
     black or greenish-yellow; skin usually thick, tough, and with a
     musky odor; pulp rather tough; ripening unevenly and dropping as
     soon as ripe. Seeds two to four, very large to medium, shaped
     something like a coffee-berry, somewhat flattened, shallowly and
     broadly notched; beak very short; chalaza rather narrow, slightly
     depressed with radiating ridges and furrows; raphe a narrow groove.
     Leafing, flowering and ripening fruit very late. (See Plate.)

Rotundifolia, or the southern Fox grape, seems to have attracted the
attention of travelers in America from an early period. The references
made in the journals of the explorers of colonial times can frequently
be recognized as pertaining to this species. Rotundifolia seems to have
escaped the attention of botanists, however, until the time of Michaux,
who named and described it. Possibly the reason for its being overlooked
was because of the supposition that this was the species Linnaeus had
described under the name Vulpina.[127] The uncertainty as to who first
described Rotundifolia created a confusion that was not definitely
cleared up for nearly a hundred years and was responsible for the fact
that half the botanists called it _Vitis rotundifolia_ and a nearly
equal number _Vitis vulpina_. Rafinesque, in 1830, described some three
or four species within the bounds of what is now known as _Vitis
rotundifolia_. None of these, however, has been accepted by later
botanists.

The habitat of this species is southern Delaware, west through
Tennessee, southern Illinois, southeastern Missouri, Arkansas (except
the northwestern portions), to Grayson County, Texas, as a northern and
western boundary, to the Atlantic Ocean and the Gulf on the east and
south. It becomes rare as one approaches the western limit but is common
in many sections of the great region outlined above, being most abundant
on sandy, well-drained bottom lands and along river banks and in swamps,
thick woodlands and thickets.

_Vitis rotundifolia_ has for years been the favorite grape in many
sections of the South. This is largely due, no doubt, to the fact that
they have been usually compared with Labrusca or Labrusca-Vinifera
varieties of northern origin which are not well adapted to southern
conditions. With the introduction of native varieties of "bunch
grapes"[128] of merit, the southern species may lose in popularity. It
must be said, considering the fact that southern agricultural literature
has been filled with recommendations of Rotundifolia grapes for nearly a
century, that the cultivation of varieties of this species is
comparatively limited.

The climate most suitable for Rotundifolia is that in which cotton grows
and it thrives best in the lower portions of the cotton belt of the
United States. On account of the late ripening of the fruit it requires
a long season. Vines of Rotundifolia have been known to withstand a
winter temperature as low as 12 degrees below zero, but under ordinary
conditions this would undoubtedly be much too severe for most
Rotundifolias. They do not suffer from the effects of hot summers but
will not withstand drouth and are not well adapted to semi-arid
conditions. All growers of varieties of this species agree that it does
best on light sandy or alluvial soils; and while it may grow on rather
heavy clays, if all other conditions are favorable, its vigor will be
lessened.

The fruit of Rotundifolia is very characteristic. The skin is thick, has
a leathery appearance, adheres strongly to the underlying flesh, and is
marked with lenticel-like russet dots. The flesh is more or less tough
but the toughness is not localized around the seed as in the case of
Labrusca. The fruit and must of all the varieties of the species are
characterized by a strong, musky aroma and are lacking in sugar and
acid. Some varieties yield over four gallons of must per bushel.
Wine-makers are divided in opinion as to its value for wine-making, but
at present the most promising outlook for Rotundifolia varieties is as
wine grapes. Rotundifolia does not produce fruit suitable for the table
chiefly because the berries ripen unevenly and when ripe drop from the
cluster. The common method of gathering the fruit of this species is to
shake the vines at intervals so that the ripe berries will drop on
sheets spread below the vines. The juice which exudes from the point
where the stem is broken off causes the berries to become smeared and
gives them an unattractive appearance. Owing, however, to the tough
skin, the berries do not crack as badly as other grapes would under the
same conditions but still they are not adapted to long distance
shipments.

Under reasonably favorable conditions the vines attain great age and
great size, and when grown on arbors, as they usually are, and without
pruning, they cover a large area. The vines are planted from fifteen to
forty feet apart in the vineyard, and the first year or two are trained
to posts. Later the tops of these posts are connected by cross-bars and
an arbor is thus formed. Pruning usually consists of removing dead wood
but a few growers have always taken exception to the customary
non-pruning method of treating the Rotundifolia. Lately Newman, of
South Carolina, has published a bulletin[129] in which he recommends
that the vines be pruned and raised on a trellis as is customary with
other grapes. He gives figures to show that the damage to Rotundifolia
vines is due to the bleeding that follows pruning and that this bleeding
may be obviated by pruning in the fall or early winter. The success of
such a practice would undoubtedly place the culture of Rotundifolia
varieties on a better commercial footing.

Rotundifolia is remarkably resistant to the attacks of all insects and
to fungal diseases. The phylloxera do not attack its roots and it is
considered as resistant as any other, if not the most resistant of all
American species. It is grown from cuttings only with difficulty.
However, under favorable circumstances, and with skilful handling, this
is a successful method of propagation. Under unfavorable circumstances,
or where only a few vines are desired, it is better to depend on layers.
As a stock upon which to graft other vines this species has not been a
success. Wylie found great difficulty in crossing Rotundifolia with
other species, and the crosses did not thrive under cultivation. Lately
Munson has introduced several Rotundifolia hybrids.


2. =VITIS MUNSONIANA= Simpson.

     =1.= (?) Rafinesque, =1830=:17. V. PELTATA; _V. Floridana_. =2.=
     Munson, _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:97. V. FLORIDANA; _Florida
     grape_. =3.= Ib., _Gar. Mon._, =28=:140. 1886. V. FLORIDANA; _V.
     peltata_; _Florida grape_. =4.= Ib., _Soc. Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._,
     =1887=:59. _Everbearing grape._ =5.= Ib., _Gar. and For._, =3=:474,
     475. 1890. =6.= Ib., _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._, =3=:14. 1890. =7.=
     Ib., _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1893=:116. _Bird grape; Everbearing
     grape._ =8.= Ib., _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:20. _Bird grape; Mustang
     grape_ of Chapman. =9.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:421. 1897.
     _Mustang grape_ of Florida; _Bird grape_; _Everbearing grape_.
     =10.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:232, 241. 1900. _Florida Bird
     grape._ =11.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:42, 45.

Vine not very vigorous, a slender grower, usually running on the ground
or over low bushes. Canes slightly angular; internodes short; tendrils
intermittent, simple. Leaves smaller and thinner than Rotundifolia and
rather more circular in outline; not lobed; teeth rather open and
spreading; petiolar sinus V-shaped; both surfaces smooth, rather light
green. Cluster with more berries but about the same size as
Rotundifolia. Berry one-third to one-half the diameter, with thinner and
more tender skin; black, shining; pulp less solid, more acid and
without muskiness. Seeds about one-half the size of Rotundifolia,
similar in other respects. Leafing, flowering, and ripening fruit very
late.

In 1830 Rafinesque described, under the name _Vitis peltata_, or _Vitis
floridana_, "a very singular species, lately found in Florida." This
description is brief and includes many characters of no taxonomic value.
In 1885 or 1886, Mr. J.H. Simpson of Manatee, Florida, sent a specimen
of a grape growing in his locality to Munson which was taken to be
Rafinesque's _Vitis peltata_. He consequently described it under the
name _Vitis floridana_ but the species was not generally accepted. Later
Simpson gave it the name _Vitis munsoniana_.

Its habitat is central and southern Florida and the Florida Keys, and it
is said to be the only grape growing on these Keys. It extends south of
the habitat of Rotundifolia and blends into this species at their point
of meeting.

Munsoniana appears to be a variation of Rotundifolia, fitted to
subtropical conditions. It is tender, not enduring a lower temperature
than zero. In the matter of multiplication it differs from _Vitis
rotundifolia_ in that it can be propagated readily from cuttings. Like
Rotundifolia it is resistant to phylloxera. The species is of no value
horticulturally.


3. =VITIS RUPESTRIS= Scheele.

     =1.= Scheele, _Linn._, =21=:591. 1848. =2.= Ravenel, _U. S. Pat.
     Off. Rpt._, =1859=:539. _Mountain grape_ of Texas. =3.= Buckley,
     _Ib._, =1861=:485. _Rock grape._ =4.= Prince, _Gar. Mon._, =5=:73.
     1863. _Bush grape_ of Texas. =5.= Engelmann, _Mo. Ent. Rpt._,
     =1872=:61. _Sand grape; Sugar grape._ =6.= Jaeger, _Mo. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1883=:41. =7.= Engelmann, _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:10, 11, 12,
     14, 18. _Rock grape; Sand grape; Sugar grape._ =8.= Bush, _Ib._,
     =1883=:21, 26. =9.= Munson, _Am. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:132.
     _Sand-beach grape; Sugar grape._ =10.= Campbell, _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1885=:84. =11.= Munson, _Ib._, =1885=:97, 98. =12.= Ib.,
     _Soc. Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._, =1887=:59. _Sugar grape; Sand grape;
     Beach grape._ =13.= Planchon, _De Candolle's Mon. Phan._, =5=:323,
     346. 1887. _Sand grape; Sugar grape; Mountain grape._ =14.= Munson,
     _Gar. and For._, =3=:474. 1890. =15.= Ib., _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._,
     =3=:7, 9. 1890. =16.= Ib., _Am. Gard._, =12=:659. 1891. =17.= Ib.,
     _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1893=:116. _Rock grape; Sand grape._
     =18.= Munson, _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:20, 22. =19.= Husmann,
     =1895=:110, 188. =20.= Britton and Brown, =2=:411. 1897. _Sand
     grape; Sugar grape._ =21.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:421.
     1897. _Sand grape; Sugar grape; Rock grape; Bush grape; Mountain
     grape._ =22.= Beach, _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:537, 557. 1898.
     =23.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:234, 235, 239, 259. 1900.
     _Rock grape._ =24.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:42, 82.

     Small, much branched shrub or sometimes, under favorable
     circumstances, slightly climbing. Diaphragm thin but slightly
     thicker than Riparia; tendrils few, or, if present, weak, usually
     deciduous. Leaves rather small; young leaves frequently folded on
     midrib; broadly cordate or reniform, wider than long, scarcely ever
     slightly lobed, smooth, glabrous on both surfaces at maturity;
     petiolar sinus wide, shallow; margin rather coarsely toothed,
     frequently a sharp abrupt point at terminal. Cluster small. Berries
     small, usually larger than Riparia, color black or purple-black.
     Seeds small, not notched; beak short, rather blunt; raphe slightly
     distinct to indistinct, usually showing as a narrow groove; chalaza
     of medium size, pear-shaped, sometimes distinct, but usually a
     depression only. Leafing, blossoming, and ripening early
     (blossoming soon after Riparia).

Rupestris seems to have been first described and named by Scheele in
1848 in a contribution on the flora of Texas to the periodical
_Linnaea_. Ravenel, in 1859, states that this grape is found in Texas
and is there known as the Mountain grape. It was mentioned and described
by Buckley, Engelmann, and all of the later botanists. (See Plate.)

This species is an inhabitant of southwestern Texas, extending eastward
and northward into New Mexico, southern Missouri, Indiana and Tennessee
to southern Pennsylvania and the District of Columbia. Its favorite
places are gravelly banks and bars of mountain streams or the rocky beds
of dry water-courses. Rupestris is usually considered drouth-resistant
but Munson states that it is short-lived in the upland sandy soils in
northern Texas, where, owing to long droughts, the land dries out
deeply. Here, he says, it is not so successfully resistant to drouth as
Lincecumii.[130]

This species is quite variable both in type and growth. It was
introduced into France at about the same time as Riparia, and the French
vineyardists selected the most vigorous and healthy forms for grafting
stock. These pass under the various names of Rupestris Mission,
Rupestris du Lot, Rupestris Ganzin, Rupestris Martin, Rupestris St.
George, and others. In France they are stated to have given particularly
good results on bare, rocky soils with hot, dry exposures. In
California, Husmann[131] states, "It does not flourish in dry locations
here, and as it suckers profusely and does not take the graft as readily
as the two former classes [Riparia and Aestivalis], it is not largely
propagated." It has not been sufficiently cultivated in this country
east of the Rocky Mountains so that it can be said what conditions of
soil and climate best suit this species other than the general
conclusions that may be drawn from the conditions present where the
species is indigenous.

[Illustration: RUPESTRIS DU LOT]

The clusters of fruit are small, with berries about the size of a
currant and varying from sweet to sour. The berry is characterized by
much pigment under the skin. The fruit has a sprightly taste wholly free
from any disagreeable foxiness. According to Munson, it is too
unproductive to be profitable. The sugar and acid content of the must is
not known. Jaeger states that Rupestris wine sent to France was there
judged as decidedly the best American claret yet tested.

Rupestris under cultivation is said to be very resistant to rot and
mildew of the foliage. It is considered hardy by those familiar with it
in the Southwest, and Campbell states that it withstood, without injury,
32 degrees below zero at Delaware, Ohio. The attention of hybridizers
was attracted to this species over thirty years ago and various hybrids
have been produced by Jaeger, Munson, Campbell and Millardet, all of
whom considered Rupestris of great promise for grape-breeding. The root
system of Rupestris is peculiar in that the roots penetrate at once
deeply into the ground instead of extending laterally as in other
species. Like those of Riparia, the roots are slender, hard, and
resistant to the phylloxera. The species is easily propagated by
cuttings. According to Husmann[132] the vines bench-graft readily but
are difficult to handle in field grafting.


=VITIS RUPESTRIS DISSECTA= Eggert.

     =1.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:422. 1897. V. RUPESTRIS, var.
     DISSECTA.

_Vitis rupestris dissecta_ was named by H. Eggert of St. Louis, the name
being placed on herbarium specimens but apparently not published by him.
According to Bailey it differs from the typical forms of the species in
having "more ovate leaves and very long teeth, and a strong tendency
towards irregular lobing." It is found in Missouri.


4. =VITIS MONTICOLA= Buckley.[133]

     =1.= Buckley, _Proc. Phil. Acad. Nat. Sci._, =1861=:450. =2.= Ib.,
     _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1861=:485. _White grape; Mountain grape._
     =3.= Engelmann, _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:10, 12, 14, 15, 16. _Mountain
     grape_ of West Texas. =4.= Munson, _Am. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1885=:134. _Mountain grape._ =5.= Ib., _Soc. Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._,
     =1887=:59. _Mountain grape._ =6.= Ib., _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._,
     =3=:13. 1890. _V. Texana._ =7.= Ib., _Gar. and For._, =3=:474, 475.
     1890. =8.= Ib., _Am. Gard._, =12=:586. 1891. _Sweet Mountain
     grape._ =9.= Ib., _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1893=:116. =10.=
     Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:422. 1897. _Sweet Mountain grape._
     =11.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:230, 232, 234, 239, 260. 1900.
     _Sweet Mountain grape._ =12.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_,
     =1903=:42, 96.

     Vine of moderate vigor, climbing, or, in the absence of support,
     frequently shrubby. Canes very slender; shoots angled, more or less
     pubescent; diaphragms medium to rather thin; tendrils medium in
     size, intermittent, usually bifid, deciduous. Leaves with stipules
     short, broad; leaf-blade small and thin, cordate, entire, notched
     or shortly three-lobed; petiolar sinus rather deep and medium to
     narrow in width, sometimes overlapping, rounded; margin broadly and
     obtusely toothed; apex usually acuminate; upper surface smooth,
     glossy; lower surface grayish-green, more or less pubescent when
     young; pubescence confined chiefly to ribs and veins. Clusters
     short and broad, compact, with medium to short peduncle. Berries
     medium to below in size, black or gray with thin bloom. Seeds
     large, usually slightly notched; chalaza rather narrow; raphe a
     groove. Leafing, flowering, and ripening fruit very late.

_Vitis monticola_ was named and described by Buckley in 1861. There
seems to have been some misunderstanding by later botanists as to
exactly what Buckley's species of this name is, and in spite of what has
been written on the subject, it seems as though some of the botanists
are still describing different species. The seed, in Engelmann's figure,
resembles that of the Rupestris very closely, while as figured by Viala
the seeds resemble those of Cinerea or Cordifolia.

Monticola inhabits the limestone hills of central and southwestern
Texas.

The fruit of this species has a very sweet and somewhat peculiar
flavor. The vines can be propagated from cuttings only with difficulty.
The species is adapted to a hot, dry climate and limestone land. It is
found to be very resistant to phylloxera and is sometimes recommended as
a stock for Vinifera but is not generally considered as valuable in this
respect as Berlandieri. It is without value for its fruit and is of no
horticultural importance to the eastern American grape-grower.


5. =VITIS RIPARIA=[134] Michx.

     =1.= Tournefort, _Inst. Rei Herb._, =1=:613. 1700. V. CANADENSIS
     ACERIS FOLIO. =2.= (?) Linnaeus, _Sp. Pl._, =1753=:203. V. VULPINA.
     =3.= (?) Walter, =1788=:242. V. VULPINA. =4.= (?) Willdenow,
     =1=:1181. 1797. V. VULPINA. =5.= Michaux, =2=:231. 1803. =6.= (?)
     Bartram, _Dom. Enc._, =5=:291. 1804. V. SEROTINA; _Winter grape_.
     =7.= Pursh, =1=:169. 1814. _V. odoratissima._ =8.= Nuttall,
     =1818=:143. =9.= Elliott, =2=:688. 1824. _Winter grape?_ =10.=
     Torrey, _Fl. of N. & M. Sta._, =1826=:121. =11.= Rafinesque,
     =1830=:15. _River grape; Bermuda vine; Mignonette vine._ =12.= Ib.,
     =1830=:16. V. ODORATISSIMA. =13.= Prince, =1830=:193. _V.
     odoratissima; Sweet scented._ =14.= Torrey, _Fl. of N. Y._,
     =1=:147. 1843. _Winter grape._ =15.= Le Conte, _Trans. Phil. Acad.
     Nat. Sci._, =6=:273. 1853. _V. dimidiata._ =16.= Ib., =6=:272. V.
     VULPINA; _V. aestivalis_ of some; _V. cordifolia_ of many; _V.
     callosa_; _V. hyemalis_; _Winter grape_. =17.= Buckley, _U. S. Pat.
     Off. Rpt._, =1861=:483. V. CORDIFOLIA, var. RIPARIA. =18.=
     Saunders, _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1869=:82, 85, 87. V. CORDIFOLIA,
     var. RIPARIA. =19.= Engelmann, _Mo. Ent. Rpt._, =1872=:61. =20.=
     Ib., _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:10, 11, 12, 14, 18. _Riverside grape._
     =21.= Bush, _Ib._, =1883=:23. =22.= Munson, _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1885=:97, =98.= _Riverside grape._ =23.= Ib., _Am. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1885=:131. _Riverside grape._ =24.= Ib., _Soc. Prom. Ag.
     Sci. Rpt._, =1887=:59. _Riverside grape._ =25.= Planchon, _De
     Candolle's Mon. Phan._, =5=:323, 352. 1887. _V. vulpina; V. incisa;
     V. intermedia; V. odoratissima; V. Virginiana; V. Canadensis aceris
     folio._ =26.= Munson, _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._, =3=:9. 1890. =27.=
     Ib., _Gar. and For._, =3=:474. 1890. =28.= Bailey, _Am. Gard._,
     =14=:353. 1893. _fig._ V. VULPINA; _V. riparia_. =29.= Husmann,
     =1895=:175. V. CORDIFOLIA. =30.= Ib., =1895=:188. =31.= Britton and
     Brown, =2=:410. 1897. _fig._ V. VULPINA; _V. riparia_; _V.
     cordifolia_, var. _riparia_; _Riverside grape_; _Sweet scented
     grape_. =32.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:422. 1897. V. VULPINA;
     _Riverbank_; _Frost_; _V. riparia_; _V. serotina_; _V.
     odoratissima_; _V. Illinoensis?_; _V. Missouriensis?_; _V.
     tenuifolia?_; _V. cordifolia_, var. _riparia_; _V. vulpina_, var.
     _riparia_. =33.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:218, 219, 230,
     239, 260. 1900. V. VULPINA; _Riverside_; _V. riparia_. =34.= Viala
     and Ravaz. _Am. Vines_, =1903=:42, 104.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, climbing. Shoots cylindrical or
     slightly angled, usually smooth, slender; diaphragms thin; tendrils
     intermittent, slender, usually bifid. Leaves with large stipules;
     leaf-blade medium to large, thin, entire, three, or lower ones
     often five-lobed; sinuses shallow, angular; petiolar sinus broad,
     usually rather shallow; margin with incised, sharply serrate teeth
     of variable size; of a light green color, glabrous above, usually
     glabrous but sometimes slightly pubescent on ribs and veins below.
     Cluster medium to small, generally compact, shouldered; peduncle
     short. Berries small to medium, black with a heavy blue bloom.
     Seeds usually two to four, small, usually slightly notched, short,
     plump, with very short beak; chalaza narrowly oval, depressed,
     indistinct; raphe usually a groove, sometimes slightly distinct.
     Very variable in flavor and time of ripening. (See Plate.)

The first mention we have of _Vitis riparia_ is by Tournefort in 1700,
who, without further description, calls it _Vitis canadensis aceris
folio_, or Maple-leaved Canadian grape.[135] Linnaeus in 1753 described
mixed specimens of Cordifolia and Riparia under the name of _Vitis
vulpina_. His description is as follows:[136] "Leaves cordate,
dentate-serrate, glabrous on both sides." Walter and Willdenow copy the
description of Linnaeus. The first description which is clear, and the
identity of which has never been questioned, is that of Michaux in 1803,
under the name Riparia. He says: "Leaves unequally and sharply dentate,
slightly 3-lobed. Petioles, veins and margins pubescent. Called by
French residents _Vigne des battures_. Habitat along the banks and on
the islands of the Ohio and Mississippi rivers, etc." Bartram, in 1804,
under the name of _Vitis serotina_, or Winter grape, describes a vine
which may be Riparia or may be Cordifolia as it has some of the
characters of both.

[Illustration: SHOOT OF _VITIS RIPARIA_]

Linnaeus' description seems to have thoroughly confused all of the
earlier botanists. They were in doubt, first, as to what species was
intended for Vulpina; second, as to the distinguishing characters
between Riparia and Cordifolia. Gray classed Riparia as a variety of
Cordifolia. Engelmann was the first to draw attention to the specific
characters which separated these two sorts and these he gives as
follows: 1st. Riparia has thin diaphragms, Cordifolia thick. 2d. Riparia
blooms early, Cordifolia late. 3d. Riparia propagates readily from
cuttings, Cordifolia only with difficulty. 4th. Seeds of the Riparia
have indistinct or almost indistinct, depressed chalaza and raphe, while
the chalaza and raphe of the Cordifolia seeds are elevated and distinct.
To these Bush[137] added the further distinguishing character that on
the shoots the small terminal leaves of the Cordifolia open as soon as
formed, while those of Riparia remain folded for some days after they
are formed, become larger and then expand gradually.

Riparia is the most widely distributed of any American species of grape.
It has been found in parts of Canada north of Quebec and from thence
southward to the Gulf of Mexico. It is found from the Atlantic coast
westward, most botanists say to the Rocky Mountains, but Munson gives
the western limit as Salt Lake. Since Munson is more familiar with the
district lying west of the Rocky Mountains than any other botanist who
has paid attention to grapes, he is probably correct. Usually it is
found on river banks, on islands or in upland ravines.

Riparia has always been considered of great promise in the evolution of
American grapes. It can hardly be said that it has fulfilled
expectations, there probably being no pure variety of this species of
more than local importance, and the results of hybridizing it with other
species have not been wholly successful. The reason why attention was
early turned to Riparia was because of the qualities presented by the
vine rather than those of the fruit, particularly its hardiness and
vigor. However, both of these qualities are quite variable, and it is
only reasonable to suppose that in such a widely distributed species,
plants found in a certain region would have adapted themselves to the
conditions there present; thus it should be expected that the northern
plants would be more hardy than those from the South and the western
prairie forms more capable of resisting drouth than those from humid
regions; this is found to be the case. It is consequently impossible to
say what conditions best suit this species; it may be said, however,
that it is adapted to a great variety of soils and locations; Riparia
vines, or certain ones of them, have withstood a temperature of 40 to 60
degrees below zero and they show equal ability in withstanding the
injurious effects of high temperatures in the summer. On account of its
habit of early blooming, the blossoms sometimes suffer from late frosts
in the spring.

While Riparia is not a swamp grape and is not found growing under swampy
conditions, it is fond of water. In the semi-arid regions always, and in
humid regions usually, it is found growing along the banks of streams,
in ravines, on the islands of rivers, and in wet places. It is not
nearly so capable of withstanding drouth as Rupestris. Riparia likes a
rather rich soil but in France has been found to do poorly on limestone
land and calcareous marls. The French tell us, however, that this is a
characteristic of all our American grapes and that the Riparia is more
resistant to the injurious effects of an excess of lime than either
Rupestris or Aestivalis.

As was noted in the botanical description, the fruit of Riparia is
usually small, there being occasional varieties of medium size or
slightly above. The clusters are of medium size and, if judged from the
standpoint of number of berries, might frequently be called large. The
flavor is usually sharply acid but free from foxiness or any
disagreeable wild taste. If eaten in quantity, the acidity is apt to
affect the lips and end of the tongue. When the acidity is somewhat
ameliorated, as in the case of thoroughly ripe or even overripe and
shriveled fruit, the flavor is much liked by many people. The flesh is
neither pulpy nor solid and dissolves in the mouth and separates readily
from the seed. The must of Riparia is characterized by an average amount
of sugar, varying considerably in the fruit from different vines, and by
an excess of acid. There is no disagreeable aroma, or foxiness, in the
juice of this species, but the wines made from pure must of Riparia
grapes, unless kept for a long time, or otherwise treated, are too sour.
On this account many recommend adding sugar and water to the must to
reduce the percentage of acid.

Riparia is very resistant to phylloxera, the roots are small in size,
hard and numerous and branch freely. The roots feed close to the surface
and do not seem to be well adapted to forcing their way through heavy
clays or a hardpan formation; but as such soils are unfavorable for all
grapes, this character is of little economic importance. Riparia grows
readily from cuttings and makes a good stock for grafting, and its union
with other species is usually permanent. At the time when Riparias were
first sent to France to be used as a stock in reconstituting the French
vineyards, it was found that many of the vines secured from the woods
were of too weak growth to support the stronger-growing Viniferas. On
this account the French growers selected the more vigorous forms of the
Riparias sent them to which they gave varietal names, as Riparia Gloire,
Riparia Grand Glabre, Riparia Scribner, Riparia Martin and others. With
these selected Riparias the graft does not outgrow the stock. Riparia is
less resistant to rot than Aestivalis but somewhat more resistant than
Labrusca. The foliage is rarely attacked by mildew. One of the chief
failings of this species is the susceptibility of the leaves to the
attack of the leaf-hopper. This defect is quite serious in some
grape-growing regions. The Riparias are generally late in ripening and
it is found that the fruit is better in quality in long seasons and that
it should be left on the vines as late as possible. There are some early
ripening varieties of this species, however.


=VITIS RIPARIA PRAECOX= Engelmann.

     =1.= Price, =1830=:194. V. ODORATISSIMA; _June Grape._ =2.=
     Engelmann, _Mo. Ent. Rpt._, =1872=:61. =3.= Ib., _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:18. JUNE GRAPE. =4.= Bailey, _Am. Gard._, =14=:353. 1893. V.
     VULPINA, var. PRAECOX; _June Grape_; _V. riparia_, var. _praecox_.
     =5.= Ib., _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:422. 1897. V. VULPINA, var.
     PRAECOX; _June Grape_.

The first record of Riparia Praecox is a statement by Prince in 1830 that
Nuttall had told him that the June Grape growing on the Mississippi was
the true _Vitis odoratissima_ (a sweet scented Riparia which later
botanists have not recognized as a distinct species). In 1872 Engelmann
refers to it, saying that it grows on rocky river banks in the vicinity
of St. Louis and that it is brought to market in July. He says further
in the _Bushberg Catalogue_ that from the first of July on, ripe fruit
is to be found through August and September. Bailey states in the
_American Gardening_ that Engelmann in his herbarium had given this
variety the name _praecox_ but did not know whether it had been published
or not.

The variety differs from the typical form of Riparia only in the
ripening season and possibly in the berries averaging smaller. The early
ripening season might make it of horticultural importance as a breeding
stock although in other respects the fruit characters are not such as
would recommend it.


6. =VITIS TRELEASEI= Munson.[138]

     =1.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:423. 1897. =2.= Munson, _Tex.
     Sta. Bul._, =56=:230, 239. 1900. _Smooth Canyon Grape._

     Plant shrubby and much branched, climbing little, the small and
     mostly short (generally shorter than the leaves) tendrils deciduous
     the first year unless finding support, internodes short, the
     diaphragms twice thicker (about 1-16 inch) than in _V. riparia_ and
     shallow-biconcave; stipules less than one quarter as large as in
     _V. riparia_; leaves large and green, very broad-ovate or even
     reniform-ovate (often wider than long, thin, glabrous and shining
     on both surfaces, the basal sinus very broad and open making no
     distinct angle with the petiole, the margin unequally notch-toothed
     (not jagged as in _V. riparia_) and indistinctly three-lobed, the
     apex much shorter than in _V. riparia_; * * * cluster small (2 to 3
     inches long); the berries 1/3 inch or less thick, black with a thin
     bloom, ripening three weeks later than _V. riparia_ when grown in
     the same place, thin-skinned; pulp juicy and sweet; seeds small. *
     * * Little known, and possibly a dry country form of _V. riparia_.
     In habit it suggests _V. arizonica_ var. _glabra_, from which it is
     distinguished, among other things, by its decidedly earlier
     flowering and larger leaves with coarser teeth and less pointed
     apex.

According to Munson _Vitis treleasei_ inhabits "ravines and gulches of
western New Mexico, Arizona and southern Utah." This species was named
by Munson but the only description we have been able to find is that of
Bailey given above in which we have changed his "_vulpina_" to
"_riparia_." The species is of no importance horticulturally.


7. =VITIS LONGII= Prince.[139]

     =1.= Prince, =1830=:184. _Long's Arkansas._ =2.= Engelmann, _Bush.
     Cat._, =1883=:18. LONG'S; _V. Solonis_. =3.= Munson, _Am. Hort.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:132. V. NUEVO MEXICANA; _Wooly Riparia_. =4.=
     Ib., _Soc. Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._, =1887=:59. V. NOVO MEXICANA;
     _Munson's Riparia_. =5.= Ib., _Gar. and For._, =3=:474. 1890. V.
     SOLONIS. =6.= Ib., _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._, =3=:9. 1890. V.
     SOLONIS. =7.= Ib., _Am. Gard._, =12=:660. 1891. V. SOLONIS. =8.=
     Ib., _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1893=:116. V. SOLONIS; _Bush grape._
     =9.= Ib., _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:20, 22, 24. V. SOLONIS; _Sand grape;
     Beach grape; Bush grape_. =10.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:423.
     1897. _V. Solonis; V. Nuevo Mexicana; Long's._ =11.= Beach, _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:537, 557. 1898. V. SOLONIS. =12.= Munson,
     _Tex. Sta. Bul._, 56:218, 230. 1900. _V. Solonis; Gulch grape; Bush
     grape._

_Vitis longii_ is a vigorous form of the Riparia type with pubescent
young growth, differing from the typical Riparia in having more
circular, less lobed leaves and more incised teeth. Its leaves are
frequently pubescent beneath. Another form with dentate margin of leaf
has been known under the name of Nuevo Mexicana or Novo Mexicana. The
references to these two forms are inextricably confused. Engelmann
refers to this grape which he says he found growing in the botanic
garden of Berlin under the name of _Vitis solonis_. After careful
investigation he decided that this name was a corruption of _Vitis
longii_, or Long's grape, which had been brought from the headwaters of
the Arkansas river by Major Long's expedition into that then unknown
country in the early part of the last century. Many botanists consider
this a hybrid of two or more other species, Riparia, Rupestris,
Candicans and Cordifolia being offered as probable parents.

Its habitat is northern Texas "westward into New Mexico, eastward into
Oklahoma and northward into Kansas and southeastern Colorado."

_Vitis longii_ was first described by Prince in 1830. The fruit is small
and sour and it appears to be of no horticultural promise.


=VITIS LONGII MICROSPERMA= Bailey.

     =1.= Munson, _Soc. Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._, =1887=:59. V. NOVO
     MEXICANA VAR.; _Munson's Riparia_. =2.= Munson, _Rev. Vit._,
     =3=:160.--. V. SOLONIS, var. MICROSPERMA (cited by 3). =3.= Bailey,
     _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:423. 1897. V. LONGII, var. MICROSPERMA; _V.
     Solonis_, var. _microsperma_.

_Vitis longii microsperma_ is a small seeded, vigorous form of _Vitis
longii_ growing on the Red River in north Texas. It is said to be more
resistant to drought than the normal form.


8. =VITIS CHAMPINI= Planch.[140]

     =1.= Planchon, _Journ. La Vigne amer._, =6=:22. 1882 (cited by 4).
     =2.= Munson, _Am. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:137. =3.= Ib., _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:101. =4.= Planchon, _De Candolle's Mon. Phan._,
     =5=:323, 327, 328. 1887. _Champin grape._ =5.= Munson, _Gar. and
     For._, =3=:474, 475. 1890. =6.= Ib., _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._,
     =3=:11. 1890. =7.= Ib., _Am. Gard._, =12=:661. 1891. _Champin
     grape._ =8.= Ib., _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:20, 22, 25. =9.= Bailey,
     _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:423. 1897. =10.= Beach, _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =17=:536, 557. 1898. =11.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._,
     =56=:232, 234, 235, 240, 268. 1900. _fig. Adobe Land grape._ =12.=
     Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:145.

     Vine rather vigorous, climbing (sometimes semi-erect). Shoots
     thinly pubescent, somewhat angled, generally cylindrical when
     mature; diaphragms thin; tendrils intermittent, strong, bifid or
     trifid. Leaves small to rather large, slightly reniform or broadly
     cordate, usually entire but frequently shortly three-lobed;
     petiolar sinus wide to medium; dark green, glabrous above with thin
     cobwebby tomentum below, becoming more or less glabrous when
     mature. Clusters of small or medium size; peduncle medium in
     length. Berries large, black, slight if any bloom, very persistent,
     of sweet flavor and tender pulp. Seeds closely resembling
     Candicans. Blooms just before Labrusca. Variable in ripening
     season.

Champini was named and described in 1882 by Planchon. He states that it
is probably a hybrid between _Vitis candicans_ and _Vitis rupestris_ and
that it is not distinctly defined and of a uniform character, but shows
in its variable forms different combinations of the characters of these
two species. There seems to be some doubt among other botanists as to
the parentage of Champini and it is variously credited to Candicans,
Rupestris, Monticola and Berlandieri.

This species is found growing in the limestone hills of southwestern
Texas, covering about the same area as Berlandieri. According to Munson
it is less common in the bottoms and is not so plentiful as the latter
species. Associated with it in different parts of its habitat are the
four species mentioned above as possible parents.

Champini is particularly well adapted to hot dry regions and will
withstand considerable lime in the soil. The species is susceptible to
mildew and black-rot. It can be readily grown from cuttings and grafts
well in the vineyard, though the different forms are quite variable in
these respects. At one time this species was considered of great promise
as a stock for Vinifera for hot, dry regions but as it has proved
inferior to Berlandieri in its capacity to withstand limy soils and
phylloxera, and as it is not more vigorous, it has been generally
dropped. The berries are large and of pure flavor, and as the vine is
vigorous, it may prove of value as a source of cultivated varieties for
the Southwest but it is of little or no value to the eastern grower.


9. =VITIS RUBRA= Michx.

     =1.= Vahl,[141] _Symb. Bot._, =3=:42. 1794. V. PALMATA. =2.=
     Willdenow, =1=:1180. 1797. V. PALMATA. =3.= Muhlenberg, =1813=:27.
     V. PALMATA. =4.= Pursh, =1=:170. 1814. V. PALMATA. =5.= Nuttall,
     =1=:143. 1818. V. PALMATA. =6.= Rafinesque, =1830=:18. V. PALMATA;
     _Palmate grape_. =7.= Ib., =1830=:18. V. VIRGINIANA; _Virginia
     grape_. =8.= Floy-Lindley, =1833=:152. V. PALMATA; _Palmated
     leaved_. =9.= (?) Le Conte, _Proc. Phil. Acad. Nat. Sci._, =6=:274.
     1853. V. PALMATA; _V. Virginiana_; _Bland's grape_. =10.= (?) Ib.,
     _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1857=:231. V. PALMATA; _Palmate-leaved
     vine_; _Bland's grape_; _V. Virginiana_. =11.= Engelmann, _Bush.
     Cat._, =1883=:10, 11, 12, 14, 17. V. PALMATA; _V. rubra_; _Red
     grape_ of the Mississippi Valley. =12.= Munson, _Am. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1885=:133. V. PALMATA; _V. rubra_. =13.= Ib., _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:97. V. PALMATA; _Palmate-leaved grape_; _V.
     rubra_. =14.= Ib., _Soc. Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._, =1887=:59. _V.
     palmata_; _Eggert's grape_. =15.= Planchon, _De Candolle's Mon.
     Phan._, =5=:352. 1887. V. RIPARIA, var. PALMATA; _V. Virginiensis_;
     _V. Virginiana_. =16.= Ib., _Ib._, =5=:354. 1887. _V. palmata._
     =17.= Sargent, _Gar. and For._, =2=:340. 1889. _fig._ V. PALMATA;
     _V. rubra_. =18.= Munson, _Ib._, =3=:474, 475. 1890. V. PALMATA.
     =19.= Munson, _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._, =3=:13. 1890. _V. palmata._
     =20.= Ib., _Am. Gard._, =12=:586. 1891. =21.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn.
     Fl._, =1=:423. 1897. V. PALMATA; _V. monosperma_; _V. rubra_; _V.
     riparia_, var. _palmata_; _Red grape_; _Cat grape_. =22.= Britton
     and Brown, =2=:410. 1897. _fig._ V. PALMATA; _Missouri grape_.
     =23.= Bailey, _Ev. Nat. Fr._, =1898=:105. V. PALMATA; _Red grape_;
     _Cat grape_. =24.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:230, 239. 1900.
     _V. palmata_; _Cat Bird grape_. =25.= Bailey, _Cyc. Am. Hort._,
     =4=:1952. 1902. _V. monosperma_; _Red grape_. =26.= Viala and
     Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:42, 113.

     Vine slender, of only moderate vigor, climbing very high. Shoots
     smooth, angled, long-jointed, bright red; diaphragms thick to
     medium; tendrils intermittent, long, usually bifid. Leaves with
     short, broad stipules; leaf-blade broadly cordate in outline,
     rarely entire, frequently very deeply three or even five-lobed,
     lobes long, acuminate; margin with broad, shallow, serrate teeth;
     petiolar sinus rather broad and shallow; upper surface dull dark
     green, smooth; lower surface frequently somewhat pubescent on ribs
     and veins; petioles red. Clusters medium to large, loose, seldom
     compound; long peduncle. Berries small, black, without bloom, not
     juicy. Seeds one or two, large, plump, rounded, with very short
     beak, slightly notched; chalaza narrow, rather indistinct; raphe
     indistinct.

_Vitis rubra_ and Vahl's _Vitis palmata_ are badly confused. The species
was first described by Vahl in 1794, from plants cultivated in the
Jardin des Plantes in Paris and supposed to have been sent by some
missionary from the Mississippi Valley. It was so named on account of
its tendency to five-lobed leaves. Vahl erroneously gives its habitat as
Virginia. About the same time, Michaux discovered, on the banks of the
Mississippi and adjacent streams, a grape which he called _Vitis rubra_,
on account of its characteristic bright red shoots. The descriptions of
these two varieties were copied from time to time by other botanists,
but with no additional details of any importance until Engelmann, in
1883, made the claim that they were identical. There is no question as
to the identity of Michaux's Rubra, but some botanists question whether
Palmata is a synonym. We have taken Michaux's name as the one to which
there is no question, although Engelmann was so careful a worker that it
is highly probable that he is correct in considering the two species
synonymous. Munson considers the species as probably a multiple "hybrid
of Cordifolia with Riparia, with possibly a trace of Cissus blood,
indicated in the fruit, seed and leaf." There seems to be but little
evidence to support this supposition. Planchon says it is principally on
the evidence of Millardet that he admits this as a separate species and
that perhaps it would be better to consider it a variety of Riparia
closely allied to Vahl's Palmata.

_Vitis rubra_ is an inhabitant of sandy, rich, moist, alluvial river
bottoms in Missouri and Illinois, to Louisiana and Texas, in which
region it is quite restricted and apparently not plentiful.

But little is known of the horticultural characters of _Vitis rubra_. In
spite of its having been classed with Riparia, it appears to resemble
more closely _Vitis cordifolia_, having the thick diaphragms and late
blooming characters of the latter species, but the seeds resemble those
of Riparia. Rubra grows readily from cuttings and the roots are said to
be very resistant to phylloxera. It is not sufficiently vigorous,
however, to be recommended as a stock. It is sometimes cultivated as an
ornamental but is of no horticultural importance beyond this.


10. =VITIS CORDIFOLIA= Michx.

     =1.= (?) Linnaeus, _Sp. Pl._, =1753=:203. V. VULPINA. =2.= (?)
     Marshall, =1785=:165. V. LABRUSCA. =3.= (?) Walter, =1788=:242. V.
     VULPINA. =4.= (?) Willdenow, =1=:1181. 1797. V. VULPINA. =5.=
     Michaux, =2=:231. 1803. =6.= (?) Bartram, _Dom. Enc._, =5=:291.
     1804. V. SEROTINA. =7.= (?) Muhlenberg, =1813=:27. V. VULPINA; _V.
     cordifolia_; _Winter grape_. =8.= Pursh, =1=:169. 1814. _V.
     incisa_; _V. vulpina_; _Winter grape_; _Chicken grape_. =9.=
     Nuttall, =1=:143. 1818. =10.= Elliott, =2=:688. 1824. =11.=
     Rafinesque, =1830=:15. _V. vulpina_; _Frost grape_; _Winter grape_;
     _Fox grape_. =12.= Prince, =1830=:194. _Winter grape_; _Chicken
     grape_; _Frost grape_; _V. serotina_; _V. incisa_; _V. vulpina_.
     =13.= Torrey, _Fl. of N. Y._, =1=:147. 1843. _Winter grape_; _Frost
     grape_. =14.= Le Conte, _Proc. Phil. Acad. Nat. Sci._, =6=:273.
     1853. V. PULLARIA; _Chicken grape_. =15.= Darlington, _Fl. Cest._,
     =1853=:50. _Chicken grape_; _Winter grape_; _Heart-leaved Vitis_.
     =16.= Buckley, _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1861=:483. _Winter grape_;
     _Fox grape_. =17.= (?) Saunders, _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1869=:82, 85,
     87. =18.= Engelmann, _Mo. Ent. Rpt._, =1872=:60. _Winter grape_;
     _Frost grape_; _Chicken grape_. =19.= Ib., _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:10,
     11, 12, 14, 17. _Frost grape._ =20.= Bush., _Ib._, =1883=:24. =21.=
     Munson, _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:97, 98. =22.= Ib., _Am. Hort.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:133. _Frost grape_; _Sour_ or _Pungent Winter
     grape_. =23.= Planchon, _De Candolle's Mon. Phan._, =5=:323, 350.
     1887. _V. vulpina_, var. _cordifolia_; _V. vulpina_; _V.
     Virginiana_. =24.= Munson, _Gar. and For._, =3=:474. 1890. =25.=
     Ib., _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._, =3=:12. 1890. =26.= Britton and
     Brown, =2=:410. 1897. _Frost grape_; _Chicken grape_; _Possum
     grape_; _Winter grape_. =27.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:424.
     1897. _True Frost grape_; _Chicken grape_; _Raccoon grape_; _V.
     pullaria_; _V. vulpina_, var. _cordifolia_. =28.= Beach, _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:557. 1898. =29.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._,
     =56=:218, 231, 240. 1900. _Sour Winter grape_; _Frost grape_. =30.=
     Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:42, 76.

     Vine very vigorous, climbing. Shoots rather slender; internodes
     long, slightly angular, usually glabrous, sometimes slightly
     pubescent; diaphragms thick; tendrils intermittent, long, usually
     bifid. Leaves with short, broad stipules; leaf-blade medium to
     large, cordate, entire or sometimes indistinctly three-lobed;
     petiolar sinus deep, usually narrow, acute; margin with rather
     coarse angular teeth; point of leaf acuminate; upper surface rather
     light green, glossy, glabrous; glabrous or sparingly pubescent
     below. Clusters medium to large, loose, with long peduncle. Berries
     numerous and small, black, shining, little or no bloom. Seeds
     medium in size, rather broad, beak rather short; chalaza oval or
     roundish, elevated, very distinct; raphe a distinct, cord-like
     ridge. Fruit usually sour and astringent and frequently consisting
     of little besides skins and seeds. Leafing, flowering and ripening
     fruit very late.

Owing to the fact that Cordifolia and Riparia have been badly confused
in the past, the limits of the habitat of this species are difficult to
determine. Pursh gives the northern limit as Canada, and Buckley speaks
of its being found at Lake Winnipeg, but all other, and some probably
better informed, authorities give the northern limit as New York or the
Great Lakes. The eastern limit is the Atlantic Ocean and the southern
limit the Gulf of Mexico. It extends westward, according to Engelmann,
to the western limits of the wooded portion of the Mississippi Valley in
the North, and, according to Munson, to the Brazos River, Texas, in the
South. It is found along creeks and river banks sometimes mixed with
Riparia, having about the same soil adaptations as that species. It is a
very common species in the Middle States and is frequently found growing
on limestone soils but, according to Viala, is not indigenous to such
soils.

It might be said that this species was first described by Linnaeus in
1753 under the name Vulpina, as his description was from mixed specimens
of Cordifolia and Riparia. The first description, however, of which
there is no question is that of Michaux in 1803. From this time on there
are many descriptions under various names and much disagreement as to
the limits of the species and its relation to Riparia. Engelmann in 1872
states that Riparia is generally a smaller plant than Cordifolia and
that the fruit ripens earlier and is pleasanter tasting. It was still
considered by many botanists that these differences were too slight to
separate the forms as different species, but in 1883, Engelmann further
enumerated other differences which are given under the description of
_Vitis riparia_. Since this time, the specific difference of the two
forms has never been questioned.

Cordifolia makes a good stock for grafting, being vigorous and forming a
good union with most of our cultivated grapes. It is seldom used for
this purpose, however, on account of the difficulty of propagating it by
means of cuttings. For the same reason vines of it are seldom found in
cultivation. It is probably of no importance horticulturally.


=VITIS CORDIFOLIA FOETIDA= Engelm.

     =1.= Engelmann, _Am. Nat._, =2=:321. 1868. V. CORDIFOLIA, var.
     FOETIDA. =2.= Ib., _Mo. Ent. Rpt._, =1872=:60. =3.= Bailey, _Gray's
     Syn. Fl._, =1=:424. 1897. V. CORDIFOLIA, var. FOETIDA.

Apparently the first record of _Vitis cordifolia foetida_ is Engelmann's
mention of it in the _American Naturalist_ of 1868. In 1872 he speaks
as though this is the common Mississippi Valley form, for he says: "In
this valley at least the fruit has a strongly and even fetidly-aromatic
taste". The variety apparently is similar to the typical Cordifolia in
every respect excepting the aromatic fruit.


=VITIS CORDIFOLIA SEMPERVIRENS= Munson.

     =1.= Munson, _Rev. Vit._, =5=:165. f. 53. (cited by =2=). =2.=
     Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:424. 1897. V. CORDIFOLIA, var.
     SEMPERVIRENS. =3.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:78. _fig.
     of leaf._

_Vitis cordifolia sempervirens_ is a south-Florida form of Cordifolia
named and first described by Munson in the _Revue Viticole_. It differs
from typical Cordifolia in having leaves which are thicker, narrower,
more oblong, with a long lanceolate point, completely glabrous and more
or less glossy on both surfaces. These leaves remain on the vines very
late in the season. This variety is said to be very resistant to an
excess of lime in the soil.


=VITIS CORDIFOLIA HELLERI= Bailey.

     =1.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:424. 1897. V. CORDIFOLIA, var.
     HELLERI. =2.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:79. V.
     CORDIFOLIA VAR.

_Vitis cordifolia helleri_ is first mentioned by Bailey in 1897. It
differs from the ordinary forms of Cordifolia in having more circular
leaves without the lanceolate point. Viala and Ravaz state that such
forms are found in clay soils. Bailey refers to it as an upland
south-Texas form found at altitudes of from 1600 to 2000 feet.


11. =VITIS BAILEYANA= Munson.

     =1.= Munson, _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._, =3=:14. 1890. V. VIRGINIANA.
     =2.= Ib., _Gar. and For._, =3=:474, 475. 1890. V. VIRGINIANA. =3.=
     Ib., _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1893=:116. _Possum grape._ =4.= Ib.,
     _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:20. _V. Virginiana._ =5.= Britton and Brown,
     =2=:411. 1897. _V. Virginiana._ =6.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._,
     =1=:424. 1897. _Possum grape._ =7.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._,
     =56=:231, 240. 1900. _Possum grape._

     Vine climbing, but of only medium vigor (less vigorous than
     Cordifolia). Canes slender, with short internodes, and with very
     many short side shoots; shoots angular, densely whitish or rusty
     pubescent or woolly along the angles; mature canes round, nearly
     smooth; diaphragms thick; tendrils intermittent, usually trifid.
     Leaves with blade long, cordate, frequently smaller than
     Cordifolia, shortly but distinctly three-lobed (lobes mostly
     pointed and much spreading), bright green, but not shining, above,
     gray below, slightly pubescent at maturity only on veins; apex
     short, acuminate, acute or blunt; teeth comparatively small and
     notched-like, regular, not prominently acute. Clusters large;
     peduncle long; pedicel slender, short, making the bunch very
     compact. Berries very small, black with little or no bloom,
     intensely acid until very ripe or frosted. Seeds small to very
     small, slightly notched on top; chalaza depressed, oblong-oval;
     raphe broad, slightly distinct. Leafing, flowering and ripening
     fruit very late.

This species seems to have been first described by Munson in 1890 under
the name of _Vitis virginiana_. In 1893 he issued a leaflet changing the
name to _Vitis baileyana_.

It is an upland species growing in the mountain valleys (800 feet and
upward) of southwestern Virginia, West Virginia, western North Carolina,
Tennessee, northern Georgia and the uplands of western central Georgia.

Baileyana can be propagated from cuttings only with difficulty. It is of
no importance horticulturally.


12. =VITIS BERLANDIERI= Planch.

     =1.= Planchon, _Compt. Rend. Acad. Sci. Paris_, =91=:425. 1880.
     (cited by =5=). =2.= _Journ. La Vigne amer._, =1880=:318. (cited by
     =5.=) =3.= _Gar. Mon._, =23=:25. 1881. _V. aestivalis_, var.
     _monticola_; _V. monticola seedling_; _V. cordifolia coriacea_.
     =4.= (?) Engelmann, _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:15. V. MONTICOLA. =5.=
     Planchon, _De Candolle's Mon. Phan._, =5=:323, 341. 1887. _V.
     monticola._ =6.= _An. Hort._, =1889=:101. =7.= Munson, _U. S. D. A.
     Pom. Bul._, =3=:14. 1890. _V. Monticola_, Mil. =8.= Ib., _Gar. and
     For._, =3=:474, 475. 1890. =9.= Ib., _Am. Gard._, =12=:659. 1891.
     =10.= Ib., _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:20, 22, 29. _V. monticola_, Engelm.
     =11.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:425. 1897. _Mountain grape_;
     _Spanish grape_; _Fall grape_; _Winter grape_. =12.= Beach, _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:536, 557. 1898. =13.= Munson, _Tex. Sta.
     Bul._, =56=:231, 234, 235, 240, 261. 1900. _fig. Little Mountain
     grape._ =14.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:42, 61.

     Vine moderately vigorous, climbing; shoots more or less angled and
     pubescent; pubescence remaining only in patches on mature wood;
     canes mostly with short internodes; diaphragms thick; tendrils
     intermittent, long, strong, bifid or trifid. Leaves with small
     stipules; leaf-blade rather large, broadly cordate, notched or
     shortly three-lobed; petiolar sinus rather open, V- or U-shaped,
     margin with broad but rather shallow teeth, rather dark, glossy
     green above, grayish pubescence below when young; becoming glabrous
     and even glossy except on ribs and veins, when mature. Clusters
     large, compact, compound, with long peduncle. Berries small, black,
     with thin bloom, juicy, rather tart but pleasant tasting when
     thoroughly ripe. Seeds few, medium to small, short, plump, oval or
     roundish with short beak; chalaza oval or roundish, distinct; raphe
     narrow, slightly distinct to indistinct. Leafing, flowering and
     ripening fruit very late.

This species was described under the name _Vitis berlandieri_ by
Planchon in 1880. The description was made from herbarium specimens
collected by the Swiss botanist, Berlandier,[142] in Texas in 1834, and
also from living plants which had been shipped into France. Planchon
states that this is the Monticola of Engelmann, but not the Monticola of
Buckley. Buckley's description is admittedly unsatisfactory but it does
not seem that Planchon is justified in saying that Engelmann was
mistaken when the latter probably had better opportunities for
determining Buckley's meaning than Planchon.

Berlandieri is a native of the limestone hills of southwest Texas and
adjacent Mexico. According to Munson, it grows "in the same region with
_V. monticola_ but is less restricted locally, growing from the tops of
the hills all along down and along the creek bottoms of those regions."
Its great virtue is that it withstands a soil largely composed of lime.
It is superior to all other American species in this respect. This and
its moderate degree of vigor (not quite so vigorous as Cinerea,
according to Munson) has recommended it to the French growers as a stock
for their calcareous soils. The roots are strong, thick and very
resistant to phylloxera.

It is propagated by cuttings with comparative ease, but its varieties
are variable in this respect, some not rooting at all easily. While the
fruit of this species shows a large cluster, the berries are small and
sour, and Berlandieri is not regarded as having any promise for culture
in America.


13. =VITIS CINEREA= Engelm.[143]

     =1.= Engelmann, _Gray's Man._, Edition 5. =1867=:679. V.
     AESTIVALIS, var. CINEREA. =2.= (?) Ib., _Am. Nat._, =2=:321. 1868.
     V. AESTIVALIS, var. CANESCENS. =3.= Ib., _Mo. Ent. Rpt._,
     =1872=:61. V. AESTIVALIS, var. CINEREA. =4.= Ib., _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:10, 11, 12, 14, 16. _Downy grape_ of Mississippi Valley.
     =5.= Munson, _Am. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:133. =6.= Ib., _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:97, 98. _Ashy-leaved grape_; _Sweet Winter
     grape._ =7.= Ib., _Soc. Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._, =1887=:59. _Ashy
     grape_; _Sweet Winter grape._ =8.= Planchon, _De Candolle's Mon.
     Phan._, =5=:323, 343. 1887. =9.= Munson, _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._,
     =3=:14. 1890. =10.= Ib., _Gar. and For._, =3=:474, 475. 1890. =11.=
     Britton and Brown, =2=:409. 1897. _V. aestivalis_, var.
     _canescens_; _V. aestivalis_, var. _cinerea_; _Downy grape_. =12.=
     Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:425. 1897. _Sweet Winter grape._
     =13.= Beach, _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:536, 557. 1898. =14.=
     Munson _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:218, 231, 240. 1900. _Sweet Winter
     grape_; _Ashy grape._ =15.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_,
     =1903=:42, 80.

     Vine vigorous, climbing; shoots more or less angled, covered with
     grayish pubescence which persists into winter; diaphragms thick to
     very thick; internodes medium to long; tendrils intermittent, long
     and strong, bifid. Leaves large, cordate, seldom lobed but
     frequently notched; frequently resembling a linden leaf; petiolar
     sinus medium in depth and width, rounded; margin shallowly but
     sharply toothed; upper surface cobwebby when young, becoming
     glabrous and dull when mature; lower surface and petiole covered
     with grayish cobwebby pubescence. Cluster large, rather loose;
     peduncle long; pedicel slender. Berries small, black, with little
     if any bloom. Seeds small, plump, short beak; chalaza round or
     oval, distinct; raphe ridge-like, distinct to slightly distinct.
     Ripening very late, becoming sweet after frost.

Cinerea is very closely allied to Aestivalis and was for a long time
considered a part of that species. In 1867 Engelmann described it under
the name _Vitis aestivalis_, var. _cinerea_, but in 1883 he made it a
species and it has been generally regarded by botanists that the points
of difference between the two forms are such that the Cinerea deserves
specific recognition.

Its habitat is New York, west to Nebraska and Kansas with about 40
degrees as a northern limit, southward to the Gulf. Cinerea grows along
streams mostly in limy soils, and is seldom found in very dry land. It
covers about the same range as Cordifolia excepting that it grows nearer
the Gulf and extends across the Rio Grande into Mexico.

The species is very late in blooming, later even than Cordifolia. It can
be propagated from cuttings only with difficulty. It is probably of no
importance horticulturally unless it be for wet lands.


=VITIS CINEREA FLORIDANA= Munson.

     =1.= Munson, _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._, =3=:14. 1890. V. CINEREA,
     var. FLORIDANA. =2.= Munson, _Gar. and For._, =3=:474. 1890. V.
     CINEREA, var. FLORIDANA. =3.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:425.
     1897. V. CINEREA, var. FLORIDANA.

_Vitis cinerea floridana_ was named by Munson in 1890. It differs from
the regular form of Cinerea in having the growing tips and sometimes the
veins on the under side of the leaves more or less covered with rusty
tomentum. The cluster is also longer-peduncled and more compound. It is
found in Florida and Arkansas.


=VITIS CINEREA CANESCENS= Bailey.

     =1.= Engelmann, _Am. Nat._, =2=:321. 1868. V. AESTIVALIS, var.
     CANESCENS. =2.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:425. 1897. V.
     CINEREA, var. CANESCENS.

_Vitis cinerea canescens_ was first mentioned by Engelmann in 1868 under
the name _Vitis aestivalis_, var. _canescens_. He does not describe it
further than to say that it approaches Cordifolia. Bailey's
determination of its position was made from Engelmann's herbarium
specimens. He says: "A form with rounded or heart-like leaves, the upper
half of the leaf lacking the triangular and 3-lobed shape of the type."
This variety has been found in Missouri, Illinois and Texas.


14. =VITIS ARIZONICA= Engelm.

     =1.= Engelmann, _Am. Nat._, =2=:321. 1868. =2.= Parry, _U. S. D. A.
     Rpt._, =1870=:416. V. ARIZONENSIS. =3.= Engelmann, _Mo. Ent. Rpt._,
     =1872=:62. =4.= Ib., _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:10, 12, 14, 16. _Arizona
     grape._ =5.= Munson, _Am. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:132. _Arizona
     grape._ =6.= Ib., _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:97. _Arizona grape._
     =7.= Planchon, _De Candolle's Mon. Phan._, =5=:323, 342. 1887. _V.
     Californica_; _V. Arizonensis_; _V. riparia._ =8.= Munson, _Soc.
     Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._, =1887=:59. _Arizona grape._ =9.= Ib., _Gar.
     and For._, =3=:474. 1890. =10.= Ib., _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._,
     =3=:10. 1890. =11.= Ib., _Am. Gard._, =12=:660. 1891. _Canyon
     grape._ =12.= Ib., _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1893=:116. _Gulch
     grape._ =13.= Munson, _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:20. _Canon grape._ =14.=
     Husmann, =1895=:4, 189. =15.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:425.
     1897. _Canon grape._ =16.= Beach, _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:536,
     557. 1898. =17.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:230, 239. 1900.
     _Downy Canyon grape._ =18.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_,
     =1903=:102.

     Vine weak in growth, shrubby or climbing moderately, numerous
     angular branchlets; diaphragms thick. Leaves mostly small, cordate,
     with rather open rounded petiolar sinus, entire or indistinctly
     three-lobed (sometimes distinctly lobed on young plants), coarsely
     and regularly toothed; thick, rigid, slightly rugose above, when
     young, white-woolly below, becoming nearly glabrous with age.
     Clusters small, compound; peduncle slender, of medium length.
     Berries black, small to medium in size; pleasant in taste. Seeds
     two to three of medium size; chalaza oval in shape, slightly
     distinct; raphe flat, usually inconspicuous, rarely prominent.

Arizonica was named and first described by Engelmann in 1868. It was
later described by Parry, botanist of the Department of Agriculture,
from specimens sent to him by Dr. Charles Smart, an army surgeon
stationed in southern Arizona, in 1867. Parry says that Engelmann
considered it a distinct species and had provisionally named it _Vitis
arizonensis_. As to the name, this is evidently an error in quoting
Engelmann.

Its habitat is "Western Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, Chihuahua (Mexico),
and South Utah."

This grape is adapted only to the arid districts of the West. When
raised in humid climates it is subject to the attacks of mildew and
black-rot. As might be expected from its habitat, it endures intense
drouths. It grows well on limestone, pebbly, or alluvial soils. It has a
considerable degree of resistance to phylloxera, grows readily from
cuttings, and according to Munson, can withstand zero temperature
without injury. As the European grapes can be raised in its native
country, it is not there regarded as valuable, although the fruit is
said to be rich in sugar and to be of pure flavor. It has been used in
California as a stock, but is not regarded in any section very favorably
and its use has never become extensive probably owing to its lack of
vigor. It suckers less than Rupestris. Arizonica blossoms about the time
of Labrusca. It is of no value to the grape-growers of the East and
probably of none to those of the West.


=VITIS ARIZONICA GLABRA= Munson.

     =1.= Munson, _Gar. and For._, =3=:474. 1890. V. ARIZONICA, var.
     GLABRA. =2.= Ib., _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._, =3=:10. 1890. V.
     ARIZONICA, var. GLABRA. =3.= Ib., _Am. Gard._, =12=:660. 1891. V.
     ARIZONICA, var. GLABRA. =4.= Ib., _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:20. V.
     ARIZONICA, var. GLABRA. =5.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:426.
     1897. V. ARIZONICA, var. GLABRA.

_Vitis arizonica glabra_ was named by Munson in 1890. It differs from
the regular form in having glossy, glabrous leaves which are mostly
larger and thinner. The variety is found in the region from Albuquerque,
New Mexico to Truxton, Arizona, and northward into southern Utah.

15. =VITIS CALIFORNICA= Benth.[144]

     =1.= Bentham, _Bot. Sulph. Voy._, =1844=:10. =2.= Buckley, _U. S.
     Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1861=:479, 483. _California grape_. =3.=
     Engelmann, _Mo. Ent. Rpt._, =1872=:62. =4.= Ib., _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:10, 11, 12, 14, 15. _California grape_. =5.= Munson, _Am.
     Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:137. =6.= Planchon, _De Candolle's Mon.
     Phan._, =5=:323, 339. 1887. =7.= Munson, _Soc. Prom. Ag. Sci.
     Rpt._, =1887=:59. _California grape_. =8.= Hammond, _Gar. and
     For._, =2=:39. 1889. _Wild grape_. =9.= Munson, _U. S. D. A. Pom.
     Bul._, =3=:10. 1890. =10.= Ib., _Gar. and For._, =3=:474, 475.
     1890. =11.= Ib., _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1893=:116. =12.=
     Husmann, =1895=:4, 189. =13.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:426.
     1897. =14.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:230, 239. 1900. _North
     California grape_. =15.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:42,
     50.

     Vine vigorous, climbing, but shrubby if left without support;
     shoots cylindrical or slightly angled; diaphragms of medium
     thickness to rather thin; tendrils intermittent, bifid or trifid.
     Leaves with stipules medium to small; leaf broadly cordate;
     petiolar sinus variable, usually wide and open, usually entire,
     sometimes slightly tri-lobed; teeth variable in size, blunt; smooth
     above and varying below from glabrous to much whitish pubescence.
     Clusters small to medium, usually compact; peduncle mostly long and
     slender. Berries small, black with rather abundant bloom. Seeds
     small to medium, plump, slightly notched, if at all; chalaza
     oblong-oval; raphe slightly distinct or invisible.

Californica was named and described by Bentham in 1844. It was later
mentioned by Newberry, Torrey and others. As these descriptions were all
made either from herbarium specimens or by botanists traveling through
the region, they are not so definite as those made later.

The habitat of Californica is the northern half of California along
streams west of the Sierra Nevada mountains and north into Rogue River
Valley in southern Oregon, its northern limit.

This species is interesting in that it is a native of a region of North
America not originally infested with phylloxera, but in which phylloxera
has since been introduced. As might be suspected, it has little more
resistance to this insect than Vinifera and less than any other
American species. The roots are thick and fleshy, resembling Vinifera.
The fruit, while pleasant, is too small to be of cultural value. It is
too tender for planting in the open ground where the thermometer drops
much below freezing. California growers state that it does not flourish
in dry shallow soils. It is very susceptible to attacks of mildew, to
which it usually succumbs when planted east of the Rocky Mountains.
Californica grows readily from cuttings. It is sometimes used in its
native country as an ornamental on account of its highly colored autumn
foliage but is otherwise of no value.


16. =VITIS GIRDIANA= Munson.

     =1.= Munson, _Soc. Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._, =1887=:59. _California
     grape._ =2.= Ib., _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._, =3=:10. 1890. =3.= Ib.,
     _Gar. and For._, =3=:474. 1890. =4.= Ib., _Am. Gard._, =12=:660.
     1891. _Valley grape._ =5.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:426.
     1897. _Valley grape._ =6.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:230, 239.
     1900. _South California grape._ =7.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_,
     =1903=:50. V. CALIFORNICA, var. GIRDIANA.

     Vine vigorous, climbing; shoots scarcely angled, more or less
     covered with grayish pubescence; diaphragms medium to thick;
     tendrils intermittent, bifid or trifid. Leaves with medium to small
     stipules; blade broadly cordate, rather thin, entire or obscurely
     three-lobed (sometimes distinctly three-lobed on young shoots);
     petiolar sinus usually narrow, rather deep; margin with many small
     and acute teeth; under surface covered with thick grayish
     persistent pubescence. Cluster medium to large, compound, rather
     loose; peduncle of medium length, slender. Berries small, black,
     with thin bloom; skin thin but tough; medium to late in ripening.
     Sweet when ripe with a sharp pungency in the skin. Seeds similar to
     those of _Vitis californica_.

Girdiana was separated from _Vitis californica_ by Munson in 1887. It is
closely allied to, and is by many botanists still considered a variety
of Californica. Wild hybrids with _Vitis vinifera_ are frequently found
in regions where it is indigenous.

Girdiana inhabits southern California in the region west and north of
Yuma and the valleys of southern California southward into Mexico. Its
northern limit is approximately the Mojave desert. The individuals of
the species are very numerous, covering shrubs and trees in the regions
where it grows.

The species is very susceptible to mildew and black-rot, and like
Californica is not resistant to phylloxera. Girdiana is more sensitive
to cold than Vinifera. Analyses show that the fruit of the species is
deficient in sugar and acid. Girdiana is but little known but certainly
is of no value to the grape-growers of the East or North and probably
of none to those of the Southwest.


17. =VITIS DOANIANA= Munson.

     =1.= _An. Hort._, =1889=:101. =2.= Munson, _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._,
     =3=:9. 1890. =3.= Ib., _Gar. and For._, =3=:474. 1890. =4.= Ib.,
     _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1893=:116. _Doan's grape._ =5.= Ib.,
     _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:20, 22, 24. _Doan's grape._ =6.= Sears, _Gar.
     and For._, =9=:454. 1896. =7.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:427.
     1897. =8.= Beach, _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:536, 557. 1898. =9.=
     Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:232, 234, 235, 240, 268. 1900. _fig.
     Texas Panhandle Large Grape._ =10.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_,
     =1903=:154.

     Vine vigorous, climbing or shrubby if left without support; wood on
     mature canes cylindrical or slightly angled; diaphragm thin;
     tendrils intermittent, bifid, rather weak. Leaves medium in size,
     broadly cordate, notched or lobed and with a triangular apex;
     petiolar sinus medium in depth, usually narrow; margins with rather
     large, notched-like teeth; upper surface of a peculiar
     bluish-green, frequently somewhat rugose with more or less
     tomentum; lower surface usually with a dense whitish pubescence
     which shows also on shoots. Cluster medium to small. Berries
     variable in size, average medium, black with a thick bloom. Seeds
     somewhat resembling Labrusca but with shorter beak and more
     distinct chalaza; has characteristic groove extending from chalaza
     to beak.

Doaniana is quite variable, some specimens being nearly glabrous at
maturity while others are densely covered with white pubescence. Munson
has separated the species into two forms which he calls the early
Doaniana and the late Doaniana. The species was described and named by
Munson in 1890.

It is found chiefly in northwest Texas but it ranges from Oklahoma to
beyond the Pecos River in New Mexico. It is considered by Bailey and
Viala to be a probable hybrid with _Vitis candicans_ as one of the
parents. Doaniana is exceedingly hardy, withstanding great cold as well
as great heat. It apparently prefers rather light soils as it is
indigenous to sandbanks along rivers and the beds of sandy ravines.

Munson states that in cultivation it does well in any but very limy
soils. The fruit is of comparatively good quality but the skin possesses
some of the pungency of Candicans. The berries are quite persistent,
hanging to the pedicel some time after ripe. The vines are not
productive. The character of the must is apparently unknown. The roots
are hard, penetrate deeply into the soil, and are resistant to
phylloxera though somewhat variable in this respect. Doaniana grows
readily from cuttings and grafts well in the vineyard. The species
blossoms with or just before Labrusca. It is of doubtful value to the
southern grape-growers and is of no value in the North.


18. =VITIS AESTIVALIS= Michx.

     =1.= (?) Marshall, =1785=:165. V. VINIFERA AMERICANA; _American
     grape vine_. =2.= (?) Walter, =1788=:242. V. LABRUSCA. =3.=
     Michaux, =2=:230. 1803. =4.= Bartram, _Dom. Enc._, =5=:289. 1804.
     V. SYLVESTRIS; _V. occidentalis_; _Common Blue grape_; _Bunch
     grape_. =5.= Muhlenberg, =1813=:27. V. INTERMEDIA; _V. aestivalis_;
     _Summer grape_. =6.= Pursh, =1=:169. 1814. _V. vulpina_; _V.
     labrusca_; _Summer grape_. =7.= Nuttall, =1=:143. 1818. =8.=
     Elliott, =2=:688. 1824. =9.= Torrey, _Fl. of N. & M. Sta._,
     =1826=:121. =10.= Rafinesque, =1830=:9. V. BRACTEATA; _V.
     labrusca_; _V. aestivalis_; _Sour grape_. =11.= Prince, =1830=:199.
     _V. intermedia_; _V. sylvestris_; _V. occidentalis_; _Summer
     grape_; _Little grape_; _Bunch grape_; _Blue grape_. =12.= Torrey,
     _Fl. of N. Y._, =1=:146. 1843. _V. intermedia_; _Summer grape_.
     =13.= Darlington, =1853=:50. _Little grape_; _Summer grape_. =14.=
     Le Conte, _Phil. Acad. Nat. Sci._, =6=:272. 1853. V. ARANEOSUS.
     =15.= Ib., _Ib._, =6=:271. 1853. V. BRACTEATA; _V. aestivalis_;
     _Duck-shot grape_; _Swamp grape_. =16.= Buckley, _U. S. Pat. Off.
     Rpt._, =1861=:481, 482. _Frost grape_; _Chicken grape._ =17.=
     Stayman, _Gar. Mon._, =11=:37, 38, 40. 1869. _Summer grape._ =18.=
     _Grape Cult._, =1=:4, 7, 113. 1869. =19.= Engelmann, _Mo. Ent.
     Rpt._, =1872=:61. _Summer grape._ =20.= Engelmann, _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:10, 11, 12, 14, 16. _Summer grape._ =21.= Bush, _Ib._,
     =1883=:22. =22.= Munson, _Am. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:134. _Summer
     grape._ =23.= Ib., _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:97, 98. _Summer
     grape._ =24.= Planchon, _De Candolle's Mon. Phan._, =5=:323, 334.
     =1887.= _Summer grape_; _Chicken grape_; _Little grape_. =25.=
     Munson, _Gar. and For._, =3=:474. 1890. =26.= Ib., _U. S. D. A.
     Pom. Bul._, =3=:11. 1890. =27.= Ib., _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:20, 22,
     27, 28. _Summer grape._ =28.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:427.
     1897. _Summer grape_; _Bunch grape_; _Pigeon grape_; _V.
     sylvestris_; _V. occidentalis_; _V. Americana_; _V. Nortoni_; _V.
     labrusca_, var. _aestivalis_; _V. bracteata_; _V. araneosus_. =29.=
     Britton and Brown, =2=:409. 1897. _Summer grape_; _Small grape_.
     =30.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:231, 234, 266. 1900. =31.=
     Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:42, 59.

     Vine very vigorous; shoots slightly pubescent or smooth when young;
     diaphragms medium to rather thick; tendrils intermittent, usually
     bifid. Leaves with short, broad stipules; leaf-blade medium to very
     large, rather thin when young but becoming rather thick; petiolar
     sinus deep, usually narrow, frequently overlapping; margin rarely
     entire, usually three- to five-lobed; teeth dentate, shallow,
     medium wide; upper surface rather dark green; lower surface with
     more or less reddish or rusty pubescence which, in mature leaves,
     usually shows in patches on the ribs and veins; petioles frequently
     pubescent. Clusters medium to large, usually long, not much
     branched, with long peduncle. Berries small to medium, with
     moderate amount of bloom, usually somewhat astringent. Seeds two to
     three, of medium size to above, plump, usually smooth, not notched;
     chalaza oval, distinct; raphe a distinct cord-like ridge. Leafing
     and ripening fruit late to very late. (See Plate.)

_Vitis aestivalis_ is variable, particularly in its leaf characters,
such as quantity of pubescence, size, shape and thickness of leaf. Those
who are most familiar with it are of the opinion that in a general way
the leaves increase in thickness southward and that the pubescence
diminishes in quantity and becomes stiffer on dry, poor soils.

[Illustration: =SHOOT OF= _VITIS AESTIVALIS_]

Aestivalis was probably described by some of the botanists before
Michaux's day but, if so, none of the descriptions is sufficiently
definite and comprehensive to be recognized with certainty. Michaux was
the first to describe it under the name of Aestivalis. It seems to have
been generally known, as Bartram described it a short time later under
the name of _Vitis sylvestris_ with _Vitis occidentalis_ as a synonym.
He says: "This is the most common grape." Owing to the great variation
in the different forms of the species as it was then understood, many of
the later botanists gave descriptions of it which did not agree. This
uncertainty and the difficulty of giving a description which would fit
all of the forms has been relieved in a measure; first, by the new
species which have been created, such as Bicolor, Monticola and Cinerea,
from what would have once been regarded as Aestivalis; and second, by
the description and general acceptance of well-known varietal forms,
such as Lincecumii and Bourquiniana.

The division of the original species has also reduced the habitat
materially, confining it to the southeastern portion of the United
States from southern New York to Florida and westward to the Mississippi
River. Aestivalis grows in thickets and openings in the woods and shows
no such fondness for streams as Riparia or for thick timber as Labrusca,
but is generally confined to uplands. Under favorable circumstances the
vines grow to be very large.

Aestivalis is preeminently a wine grape. The fruit usually has a tart,
acrid taste, due to the presence of a high percentage of acid, but there
is also a large amount of sugar, the scale showing that juice from this
species has a much higher percentage of sugar than the sweeter tasting
Labruscas. The wine made from varieties of Aestivalis is very rich in
coloring matter, and is used by some European vintners to mix with the
must of European sorts in order to give the combined product a higher
color. The berries are destitute of pulp, have a comparatively thin,
tough skin, and a peculiar spicy flavor. The berries hang to the bunch
after becoming ripe much better than do those of Labrusca.

The species thrives in a lighter and shallower soil than Labrusca and
appears to endure drouth better, although not equaling in this respect
either Riparia or Rupestris. A southern or southeastern exposure gives
better results for Aestivalis or Aestivalis hybrid vines than a northern
one. The French growers report that Aestivalis is very liable to
chlorosis on soils which contain much lime. The leaves are never injured
by the sun, and they resist the attacks of insects, such as
leaf-hoppers, better than any other American species under cultivation.
Aestivalis is rarely injured by rot or mildew, according to American
experience, but French growers speak of its being susceptible to both.

The hard roots of Aestivalis enable it to resist phylloxera, and
varieties with any great amount of the blood of this species are seldom
seriously injured by this insect. An objection to Aestivalis, from a
horticultural standpoint, is that it does not root well from cuttings.
Many authorities speak of it as not rooting at all from cuttings, but
this is an overstatement of the facts, as many of the wild and
cultivated varieties are occasionally propagated in this manner, and
some southern nurseries, located in particularly favorable situations,
make a practice of propagating it by this method. It is doubtful,
however, if it could be successfully propagated from cuttings in New
York. Varieties of this species bear grafting well, especially in the
vineyard. Aestivalis blooms just after Labrusca. As might be inferred
from its habitat, most cultivated varieties of this species require a
longer season to mature their fruit than that of New York. On this
account it is probable that Bicolor, once known as a northern form of
Aestivalis, is more promising horticulturally for the North than the
true Aestivalis of the Southeast.


=VITIS AESTIVALIS LINCECUMII=[145] Munson.

     =1.= (?) Rafinesque, =1830=:9. V. MULTILOBA; _Dissected vine_. =2.=
     (?) Prince, =1830=:183. V. DIVERSIFOLIA. =3.= _U. S. Pat. Off.
     Rpt._, =1847=:199. POST OAK GRAPE. =4.= Buckley, _Ib._, =1861=:485.
     V. LINSECOMII; _Post-oak grape_; _Pine-wood grape_. =5.= Ib.,
     _Proc. Phil. Acad. Nat. Sci._, =1861=:450. V. LINSECOMII. =6.=
     Engelmann, _Mo. Ent. Rpt._, =1874=:74. =7.= Ib., _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:16, 23. _Post-oak grape._ =8.= Munson, _Am. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1885=:135. V. LINCECUMII; _Post-oak._ =9.= Planchon, _De
     Candolle's Mon. Phan._ =5=:323, 338. 1887. V. LINCECUMII; _Post-oak
     grape_; _Vine Wood grape_; _V. aestivalis_, var. _Lincecumii_; _V.
     incisifolia_; _V. multiloba?_ =10.= Munson, _U. S. D. A. Pom.
     Bul._, =3=:12. 1890. V. LINCECUMII. =11.= Ib., _Gar. and For._,
     =3=:474. 1890. V. LINCECUMII. =12.= Ib., _Am. Gard._, =12=:585.
     1891. V. LINCECUMII; _Post-oak grape_. =13.= Ib., _Mich. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1893=:116. V. LINCECUMII; _Post Oak grape._ =14.= McCluer,
     _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:257. 1893. V. LINCECUMII; _Post-oak grape_.
     =15.= Munson, _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:20, 22, 27. _fig._ V.
     LINCECUMII; _Texas Post-oak grape_. =16.= Husmann, =1895=:110. V.
     LINCECUMII; _Summer grape_; _Post Oak grape_. =17.= Munson, _Rural
     N. Y._, =56=:610. 1897. V. LINCECUMII; _Post-oak grape_. =18.= _Mo.
     Sta. Bul._, =46=:62. 1899. V. LINCECUMII; _Texas Post Oak grape_.
     =19.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:218, 231, 234, 235, 240, 261,
     264. 1900. _fig._ V. LINCECUMII; _Post-oak grape_. =20.= Bailey,
     _Cyc. Am. Hort._, =4=:1954. 1902. _V. diversifolia_; _Post-oak_;
     _Pine-wood_; _Turkey grape_. =21.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_,
     =1903=:42, 57. V. LINCECUMII; _Post Oak_.

     Vine vigorous, sometimes climbing high upon trees, sometimes
     forming a bushy clump from two to six feet high; canes cylindrical,
     much rusty wool on shoots; tendrils intermittent. Leaves very
     large, almost as wide as long; entire or three-, five-, or rarely
     seven-lobed; lobes frequently divided; sinuses, including petiolar
     sinus, deep; smooth above, and with more or less rusty pubescence
     below. (The north-Texas, southwestern Missouri and northern
     Arkansas form shows little or no pubescence but has fine prickly
     spines at base of shoots and shows much blue bloom on shoots, canes
     and the under side of the leaves.) Fruit small to large, usually
     larger than typical Aestivalis, usually black with heavy bloom.
     Seeds larger than Aestivalis, pear-shaped; chalaza roundish.

Lincecumii seems to have been first described by Rafinesque, in 1830
under the name _Vitis multiloba_. His description fits fairly well, and
as the source from which the vines were secured is within the habitat of
the species, there appears but little doubt as to its correctness. In
the same year Prince gives a very brief description of a grape from
Texas under the name _Vitis diversifolia_ which is probably this grape.
The first description of the variety (or species) in such detail that it
could not be mistaken was that of Buckley in 1861, as _Vitis
linsecomii_.

It inhabits the eastern half of Texas, western Louisiana, Indian
Territory, Arkansas and southern Missouri on high sandy land, frequently
climbing post-oak trees, hence the name, Post-oak grape, by which it is
locally known.

Lincecumii has attracted considerable attention through the work of H.
Jaeger and T. V. Munson in domesticating it, both of whom considered it
one of the most, if not the most, promising form from which to secure
cultivated varieties for the Southwest. The qualities which recommended
it to them are: First, its vigor; second, its capacity to withstand rot
and mildew; third, its hardiness and capacity to endure hot and dry
summers without injury; and fourth, the large cluster and berry which
were found on certain of the wild vines. It requires a longer season to
mature than that of New York and is, consequently, of but little
interest to grape-growers in this State. The fruit is characteristic
because of its dense bloom, firm, yet tender texture and the peculiar
so-called Post-oak flavor. The cultivated varieties have given
satisfaction in many sections of the central western and southern
states. Like Aestivalis, it is difficult to propagate from cuttings.

The north-Texas glaucous form of this variety mentioned in the technical
description above is the _Vitis aestivalis glauca_ of Bailey. This is
the type of Lincecumii that Munson has used in his breeding work.


=VITIS AESTIVALIS BOURQUINIANA= Bailey.[146]

     =1.= Garber, _Gar. Mon._, =1=:75. 1859. =2.= Engelmann, _Bush.
     Cat._, =1883=:16. (VARIETIES OF SOUTHERN ORIGIN). =3.= Bush, _Ib._,
     =1883=:23. SOUTHERN AESTIVALIS. =4.= _An. Hort._, =1889=:101. V.
     BOURQUINA. =5.= Munson, _Gar. and For._, =3=:474, 475. 1890. V.
     BOURQUINIANA; _Southern Aestivalis_. =6.= Ib., _U. S. D. A. Pom.
     Bul._, =3=:12. 1890. V. BOURQUINIANA. =7.= Ib., _Am. Gard._,
     =12=:584. 1891. V. BOURQUINIANA; _Southern Aestivalis_. =8.=
     Popenoe and Mason, _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =44=:117. 1893. V.
     BOURQUINIANA. =9.= Munson, _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:20, 22, 27. V.
     BOURQUINIANA; _Southern Aestivalis_. =10.= Husmann, =1895=:6, 8.
     V. BOURQUINIANA. =11.= Munson, _Tex. Farm and Ranch_, Feb. 8,
     =1896=:10. V. BOURQUINIANA; _Southern Aestivalis_. =12.= Bailey,
     _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:428. 1897. =13.= Ib., _Ev. Nat. Fr._,
     =1898=:81, 83, 114. =14.= Munson, _Am. Gard._, =20=:1688. 1899. V.
     BOURQUINIANA. =15.= Ib., _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:231, 240, 261.
     1900. V. BOURQUINIANA; _Southern Aestivalis_. =16.= Viala and
     Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:178. V. BOURQUINIANA.

Bourquiniana greatly resembles Aestivalis and differs chiefly from this
species in having thinner leaves and in that the shoots and under side
of the leaves are only slightly reddish-brown in color and the
pubescence usually disappears at maturity; this pubescence is mostly of
an ashy or dun color. The leaves on some of the vines are more deeply
lobed than is at all common in Aestivalis. The fruit is considerably
larger than that of Aestivalis, sweeter and more juicy.

The botanical variety, Bourquiniana, is known only in cultivation. It is
mentioned by Garber in 1859 and by Engelmann in 1883. Speaking of
Aestivalis the latter says: "Unfortunately the typical forms cannot be
propagated by cuttings and there are a number of varieties which,
originating from a southern home, are not quite hardy here but on the
other hand have the advantage of being readily propagated by slips in
some favorable localities. * * * Unfortunately no wild plant from which
these varieties might have sprung is yet known but must be looked for in
the mountains and hills of the Carolinas and Georgia and only when found
in a wild state can we correctly judge of their botanical status."

The name Bourquiniana was given by Munson, who ranks the group as a
species. He includes therein many southern varieties the most important
of which are: Herbemont, Bertrand, Cunningham, and Lenoir, these he
groups in the Herbemont section; and Devereaux, Louisiana and Warren, he
puts in the Devereaux section. Munson has traced the history of this
interesting group and states that it was brought from southern France to
America over 150 years ago by the Bourquin family of Savannah, Georgia.
Many botanists have been of the opinion that Bourquiniana is a hybrid.
Engelmann says: "I will only state here that a slight suspicion exists
of their being hybrids between _V. aestivalis_ and some form of
_vinifera_ though the seeds are entirely those of the former and also
the resistance to phylloxera." Millardet considers Bourquiniana to be a
mixed hybrid of Aestivalis, Cinerea and Vinifera. The hybrid supposition
is certainly corroborated to a degree at least by the characters being
more or less intermediate between the parent species and also by the
fact that up to date no wild form of Bourquiniana has been found.

Munson's derivation of the origin has not been accepted by either French
or American botanists. In this connection Bailey says: "It is
unassumable that a native grape distributed through the Mediterranean
region could have escaped for centuries the critical search of European
botanists and the knowledge of hundreds of generations of vignerons to
be discovered at last transplanted in the new world." Bush says: "This
reminds us forcibly of the '_Pedro Ximenes_' (called also White Green
Riesling), which was believed to have been brought to Spain from the
banks of the _Moselle_ by the man whose name it bears." Count Odart, a
celebrated ampelograph, wittily said: "If he (Ximenes) took any he took
ALL, for no _such_ vine grows now north of the Pyrenees.' Thus we also
think: If Mr. Bourquin took any of the above grapes he took ALL, for no
_Herbemont_ or _Lenoir_ can now be found native in Europe."

The only northern variety of grape of any importance that is supposed to
have Bourquiniana blood is the Delaware,[147] and in this case only a
fraction of Bourquiniana blood is presumably present.

Bourquiniana can be propagated from cuttings more easily than the
typical Aestivalis but not so readily as Labrusca, Riparia or Vinifera.
Many of the varieties of Bourquiniana show a marked susceptibility to
mildew and black-rot; in fact, the whole Herbemont group is much
inferior in this respect to the Norton group of Aestivalis. The roots
are somewhat hard, branch rather freely and are quite resistant to
phylloxera.


19. =VITIS BICOLOR= Le Conte.[148]

     =1.= Le Conte, _Proc. Phil. Acad. Nat. Sci._, =6=:272. 1853. _V.
     aestivalis_ (Darlington). =2.= Ib., _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._,
     =1857=:230. _Two-colored-leaved vine._ =3.= Munson, _Soc. Prom. Ag.
     Sci. Rpt._, =1887=:59. V. ARGENTIFOLIA; _Blue grape_. =4.= _An.
     Hort._, =1889=:101. =5.= Munson, _Gar. and For._, =3=:474. 1890.
     =6.= Munson, _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._, =3=:12. 1890. =7.= Ib., _Am.
     Gard._, =12=:585. 1891. _Blue grape_; _Northern Summer grape_.
     =8.= Ib., _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1893=:116. _Blue grape_;
     _Northern aestivalis_. =9.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:428.
     1897. _Blue grape_; _Northern Summer grape_. =10.= Britton and
     Brown, =2=:409. 1897. _Blue grape_; _Winter grape_; _V.
     aestivalis_, var. _bicolor_. =11.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._,
     =56=:231, 234, 240, 266. 1900. _Blue grape._ =12.= Viala and Ravaz,
     _Am. Vines_, =1903=:42, 59.

     Vine vigorous, climbing; shoots cylindrical or slightly angled,
     with rather long internodes, generally perfectly glabrous, usually
     showing much blue bloom, sometimes spiny at base; diaphragms medium
     to thick; tendrils intermittent, long, usually bifid. Leaves with
     short, broad stipules; leaf-blade medium to very large;
     roundish-cordate, usually three-, sometimes on older growth
     shallowly five-lobed, rarely entire; petiolar sinus variable in
     depth, usually rather narrow; margin irregularly dentate; teeth
     acuminate; glabrous above, usually glabrous below and showing much
     blue bloom which sometimes disappears late in the season; young
     leaves sometimes slightly pubescent; petioles very long. Cluster of
     medium size, compact, usually simple; peduncle long. Berries small
     to medium, black with much blue bloom, rather acid but pleasant
     tasting when ripe. Seeds small, plump, broadly oval, very short
     beak; chalaza oval, raised, distinct; raphe distinct, showing as a
     cord-like ridge.

Bicolor is readily distinguished from Aestivalis by the absence of the
reddish pubescence, and by the bloom on the under side of the leaves and
is distinguished from the glaucous form of Lincecumii by the smaller
fruit and seeds. The species blooms slightly later than Aestivalis and
Lincecumii. It was named and described by Le Conte in 1853 and has been
generally recognized as a distinct species by later botanists.

The habitat of Bicolor is to the north of that of Aestivalis, occupying
the northeastern, whereas Aestivalis occupies the southeastern quarter
of the United States. Like Aestivalis it is not confined to streams and
river-banks but frequently grows on higher land also. It is found in
north Missouri, Illinois, southwestern Wisconsin, Indiana, southern
Michigan, Ohio, Kentucky, Pennsylvania, New York, southwestern Ontario,
New Jersey and Maryland, and is by some botanists reported as far south
as western North Carolina and west Tennessee.

The horticultural characters of Bicolor are much the same as those of
Aestivalis. About the only points of difference are that it is much
hardier (some of the Wisconsin vines stand a temperature as low as 20
degrees below zero); it is said to be slightly less resistant to mildew
and more resistant to phylloxera. Like Aestivalis, Bicolor does not
thrive on limy soils and it is difficult to propagate from cuttings.
The horticultural possibilities of Bicolor are probably much the same as
those of Aestivalis, though many believe it to be more promising for the
North. It is as yet cultivated but little. Its chief defect for
domestication is the small size of the fruit.


20. =VITIS CARIBAEA= De Candolle.[149]

     =1.= De Candolle, _Prodr._, =1=:634. 1824 (cited by Watson). =2.=
     Chapman, _Fl. Sou. States_,--:71. (cited by Watson). =3.= Buckley,
     _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1861=:483. =4.= Engelmann, _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:10, 12, 14, 15. =5.= Munson, _Am. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1885=:136. _Caloosa._ =6.= (?) Ib., _Soc. Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._,
     =1887=:59. _Prof. Curtis' grape._ =7.= Planchon, _De Candolle's
     Mon. Phan._, =5=:323, 330. 1887. =8.= Munson, _U. S. D. A. Pom.
     Bul._, =3=:14. 1890. =9.= Ib., _Gar. and For._, =3=:474. 1890.
     =10.= Ib., _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1893=:116. =11.= Bailey,
     _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:428. 1897. =12.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am.
     Vines_, =1903=:42, 52.

     Vine slender, climbing; shoots more or less woolly, or rarely
     nearly glabrous; diaphragms medium to thick; tendrils intermittent,
     rarely continuous, bifid or frequently trifid. Leaves cordate,
     usually entire when mature, frequently acuminate pointed; teeth
     shallow, wide, mucronate, slightly rugose above, thick whitish or
     rusty pubescence below; stipules small. Clusters large, long, with
     long, slender peduncle. Berries small to very small, purple or
     black with thin bloom, intensely acid until very ripe. Seeds
     usually but one or two to the berry, small to very small (Engelmann
     states that the Florida forms give larger seeds than those from the
     West Indies), notched; chalaza more or less circular, depressed,
     usually distinct; raphe a groove or slightly distinct. Very
     variable.

Caribaea was first described by De Candolle and later by many other
botanists but the species is not yet well known owing to its habitat.
Caribaea is an inhabitant of the West Indies, middle and southern
Florida, Louisiana, eastern Mexico, Yucatan, and various portions of
tropical America. It is said to grow largely on lowlands.

The species is of no practical interest as it does not thrive and soon
dies in temperate climates. Its horticultural characters are unknown.


21. =VITIS CANDICANS= Engelm.

     =1.= Engelmann, _Gray's Pl. Lindh._, =2=:166. 1845. =2.= _U. S.
     Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1847=:198. MUSTANG GRAPE. =3.= Engelmann, _Gray's
     Pl. Wright._, =1=:32. 1852. =4.= Vanzandt, _Gar. Mon._, =1=:166.
     1859. MUSTANG GRAPE. =5.= Affleck, _Mag. Hort._, =26=:98. 1860.
     MUSTANG GRAPE. =6.= Buckley, _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1861=:482. V.
     MUSTANGENSIS; _Mustang grape_. =7.= Engelmann, _Am. Nat._, =2=:321.
     1868. _Mustang grape._ =8.= Koch, _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1868=:82. V. MUSTANGENSIS; _Mustang grape_. =9.= Engelmann, _Mo.
     Ent. Rpt._, =1874=:76. _V. Mustangensis_; _Mustang grape._ =10.=
     Ib., _Bush. Cat._, =1883=: 10, 11, 12, 14, 15. _V. Mustangensis_;
     _Mustang grape._ =11.= Munson, _Am. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=: 137.
     _V. Mustangensis._ =12.= Ib., _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:97, 98.
     _Mustang grape._ =13.= Planchon, _De Candolle's Mon. Phan._,
     =1887=:323, 326. _V. Mustangensis_; _Mustang grape._ =14.= Munson,
     _Soc. Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._, =1887=:59. _Mustang grape._ =15.= Ib.,
     _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._, =3=:10. 1890. =16.= Ib., _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:20, 22, 25. _Mustang grape._ =17.= Ib., _Rural N. Y._,
     =56=:610. 1897. MUSTANG. =18.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:428.
     1897. _Mustang grape._ =19.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:232,
     234, 240, 267. 1900. _Mustang grape._ =20.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am.
     Vines_, =1903=:42, 54.

     Vine very vigorous, climbing; shoots and petioles densely woolly,
     whitish or rusty; diaphragm thick; tendrils intermittent (according
     to Munson, rarely four continuous). Leaves with medium to large
     stipules; blade small to medium, broadly cordate to reniform ovate,
     frequently resembling those of a poplar, entire or in young shoots
     and on young vines and sprouts usually deeply from three- to five-,
     or even seven-lobed; teeth shallow, sinuate; petiolar sinus
     shallow, wide, sometimes lacking; dull, slightly rugose above,
     dense whitish pubescence below. Clusters small. Berries medium to
     large, black, purple, green, or even whitish, thin blue bloom or
     bloomless. Seeds usually three or four, large, short, plump, blunt,
     notched; chalaza oval, depressed, indistinct; raphe a broad groove.

Candicans was described and named by Engelmann in his account of certain
plants sent from Texas by Lindheimer. In 1861 it was described by
Buckley who seems to have been unaware of the species having been
previously named.

The habitat of this grape extends from southern Oklahoma, as a northern
limit, southwesterly into Mexico. The western boundary is the Pecos
River. It is found on dry, alluvial, sandy or limestone bottoms or on
limestone bluff lands and is said to be especially abundant along upland
ravines. Candicans grows well on limestone lands enduring as much as 60
per ct. of carbonate of lime in the soil. The species blooms shortly
before Labrusca and a week later than Riparia. It requires the long hot
summers of its native country and will stand extreme drouth but is not
hardy to cold, ten or fifteen degrees below zero killing the vine
outright unless protected; and a lesser degree of cold injuring it
severely. The berries, which are large for wild vines, have thin skins
under which there is a pigment which gives them, when first ripe, a
fiery, pungent taste but which partly disappears with maturity. The
berries are very persistent, clinging to the pedicel long after ripe.
Candicans is difficult to propagate from cuttings. Its roots resist
phylloxera fairly well. It makes a good stock for Vinifera vines in its
native country but owing to the difficulty of propagation is seldom used
for that purpose. In the early days of Texas it was much used for the
making of wine but as it is deficient in sugar, and as the must retains
the acrid, pungent flavor, it does not seem to be well adapted for this
purpose. It is not regarded as having great promise for southern
horticulture and certainly has none for the North.


=VITIS CANDICANS CORIACEA= Bailey.

     =1.= Shuttleworth Mss., Herb. Boiss. =2.= Chapman, _Fl. Sou.
     States_,--:71 (cited by Watson, Planchon and Bailey). V. CARIBEA,
     var. CORIACEA. =3.= Engelmann, _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:15. V.
     CANDICANS, Florida form. =4.= Munson, _Am. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1885=:136. V. CARIBEA; _Caloosa._ =5.= Planchon, _De Candolle's
     Mon. Phan._, =5=:323, 345. 1887. V. CORIACEA. =6.= Munson, _Soc.
     Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._, =1887=:59. V. CORIACEA; _Leather-Leaf grape_.
     =7.= Ib., _Gar. and For._, =3=:474. 1890. V. CORIACEA. =8.= Ib.,
     _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._, =3=:10, 11. 1890. V. CORIACEA. =9.= Ib.,
     _Am. Gard._, =12=:661. 1891. _V. coriacea; Leather-leaf grape._
     =10.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:429. 1897. _Leather-leaf
     grape; Calloosa grape._ =11.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:232,
     240. 1900. V. CORIACEA; _Leather-Leaf grape_. =12.= Viala and
     Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:42, 52. V. CORIACEA.

Coriacea is a Florida variety of Candicans, differing from the Texas
form, in having a shorter, somewhat smaller and comparatively thicker
seed; small stipules; quite variable leaves, intermediate in shape
between Labrusca and Candicans; and an absence of the fiery flavor. The
blossoming period is two or three weeks later than the Texas form.

This form of Candicans was named and described by Shuttleworth in a
manuscript now in the Herbarium Boissier at Geneva, Switzerland.
Botanists seem divided as whether to regard it as a separate species or
as a botanical variety. Its habitat is central and southern Florida.

Coriacea is more tender than the regular forms of _Vitis candicans_ and
this alone would make it worthless to the northern cultivator even were
it otherwise valuable.


22. =VITIS SIMPSONI= Munson.

     =1.= Munson, _Soc. Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._, =1887=:59. _Simpson's
     grape._ =2.= Ib., _Gar. and For._, =3=:474, =475.= 1890. =3.= Ib.,
     _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._, =3=:12. 1890. =4.= Ib., _Am. Gard._,
     =12=:586, 661. 1891. =5.= Ib., _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1893=:116. _Palmetto-leaved grape._ =6.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn.
     Fl._, =1=:429. 1897. =7.= Munson, _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:232, 234,
     240, 267. 1900. _fig. Simpson's grape._ =8.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am.
     Vines_, =1903=:167.

     Vine very vigorous, climbing; shoots cylindrical with much brownish
     pubescence; diaphragms very thick; tendrils intermittent. Leaves
     with stipules short and broad; leaf-blade rather thin, large,
     broadly cordate, usually considerably lobed; petiolar sinus of
     medium width and depth; margin coarsely toothed; upper surface
     slightly rugose and of a dark-green; lower surface with rusty white
     pubescence sometimes becoming almost a blue green; the shape of
     leaf and amount of pubescence vary widely. Clusters large, loose;
     peduncle long; pedicel thick. Berries small to medium, more tender
     in pulp and less astringent than _Vitis aestivalis_, black with
     moderate amount of bloom. Leafing, blooming, and ripening fruit
     late.

_Vitis simpsoni_ was named and briefly described by Munson in 1887. In
1891 he stated that the species is a hybrid of _Vitis coriacea_ (here
considered a variety of _Vitis candicans_) crossed with _Vitis cinerea_.
Bailey states that it is probably a hybrid of Aestivalis crossed with
Coriacea. Some forms of Simpsoni are said to be very difficult to
distinguish from _Vitis labrusca_.

Simpsoni prefers warm, sandy soils and is found in central and southern
Florida. It roots from cuttings with great difficulty; it is tender and
will not withstand cold winters. While it is very resistant to
phylloxera and also to mildew and black-rot, its leaves are said to be
much attacked by leaf-rollers. The blossoming period is just after
Aestivalis. The berries are of good flavor and might be of some value
for the country along the Gulf Coast but it is of no value for the
North.


23. =VITIS LABRUSCA=[150] Linn.[151]

     =1.= Linnaeus, _Sp. Pl._, =1=:203. 1753. _V. sylvestris
     Virginiana_; _V. vinifera sylvestris americana_. =2.= Marshall,
     =1785=:165. V. VULPINA; _Fox grape vine_. =3.= Walter, =1788=:242.
     V. TAURINA. =4.= Michaux, =2=:230. 1803. _V. taurina._ =5.=
     Bartram, _Dom. Enc._, =5=:289. 1804. V. VULPINA; _Fox grape_. =6.=
     Muhlenberg, =1813=:27. _Fox grape._ =7.= Pursh, =1=:169. 1814. _V.
     taurina._ =8.= Nuttall, =1=:143. 1818. =9.= Elliott, =2=:689. 1824.
     _V. taurina._ =10.= Torrey, _Fl. of N. & M. Sta._, =1826=:120.
     =11.= Rafinesque, =1830=:10. V. LATIFOLIA; _V. taurina_; _V.
     Labrusca_; _Fox grape_. =12.= Ib., =1830=:11. V. LUTEOLA; _Variable
     grape_. =13.= Prince, =1830=:180. V. LABRUSCA, var. NIGRA; _Black
     Fox_; _Purple Fox_; _V. taurina_; _V. vulpina_. =14.= Ib.,
     =1830=:181. V. LABRUSCA, var. ALBA; _White Fox_. =15.= Ib.,
     =1830=:182. V. LABRUSCA, var. ROSEA; _Red Fox_. =16.= Torrey, _Fl.
     of N. Y._, =1=:146. 1843. _Fox grape._ =17.= Darlington, _Fl.
     Cest._, =1853=:50. _Fox grape_ of the Northern States, not of Va.
     =18.= Le Conte, _Proc. Phil. Acad. Nat. Sci._, =1853=:270. _V.
     sylvestris_; _Fox grape_; _V. occidentalis_; _V. vulpina_; _V.
     latifolia_; _V. canina_; _V. luteola_; _V. rugosa_; _V.
     ferruginea_; _V. labruscoides_; _V. blanda_; _V. prolifera_; _V.
     obovata_. =19.= Ib., _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1857=:228. _Fox
     grape_; _V. sylvestris_; _V. occidentalis_; _V. vulpina_; _V.
     latifolia_; _V. canina_; _V. luteola_; _V. rugosa_; _V.
     ferruginea_; _V. labruscoides_; _V. prolifica_; _V. obovata_. =20.=
     Buckley, _Ib._, =1861=:481. _Frost grape._ _Fox grape_ of the
     Northern States. =21.= Stayman, _Gar. Mon._, =11=:37, 38, 39, 40.
     1869. _Northern Fox Grape._ =22.= Engelmann, _Mo. Ent. Rpt._,
     =1872=:61. _Fox grape_; _Northern Fox grape_. =23.= Ib., _Bush.
     Cat._., =1883=:9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 19. _Fox grape_; _Northern
     Fox grape_. =24.= Munson, _Am. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:136. _Fox
     grape._ =25.= Ib., _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:97, 98, 101. =26.=
     Planchon, _De Candolle's Mon. Phan._, =5=:322, 324. 1887. _Fox
     grape_; _Northern Fox grape_; _V. vinifera sylvestris americana_;
     _V. latifolia_; _V. canina_; _V. luteola_. =27.= Munson, _Soc.
     Prom. Ag. Sci. Rpt._, =1887=:59. _Fox grape._ =28.= Pearson, _Gar.
     and For._, =2=:584. 1889. =29.= Munson, _U. S. D. A. Pom. Bul._,
     =3=:11. 1890. =30.= Ib., _Gar. and For._, =3=:474. 1890. =31.=
     Britton and Brown, =2=:408. 1897. _Northern Fox grape_; _Plum
     grape_. =32.= Bailey, _Gray's Syn. Fl._, =1=:429. 1897. _Fox
     grape_; _Skunk grape_; _V. vulpina_; _V. blandi_. =33.= Munson,
     _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:232, 240. 1899. _Northern Fox grape._ =34.=
     Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:42, 45.

     Vine moderately vigorous, stocky, climbing; shoots cylindrical,
     densely pubescent; diaphragms medium to rather thick; tendrils
     continuous, strong, bifid or trifid. Leaves with long, cordate
     stipules, leaf-blade large, thick, broadly cordate or roundish;
     entire to three-lobed, frequently notched; sinuses rounded;
     petiolar sinus variable in depth and width, V-shaped; margin with
     rather shallow, acute pointed, scalloped teeth; upper surface more
     or less rugose, dark green, on young leaves pubescent, becoming
     glabrous when mature; lower surface covered with dense pubescence,
     more or less whitish on young leaves, becoming rusty or dun-colored
     when mature. Clusters small to medium, more or less compound,
     usually shouldered, compact; pedicels thick; peduncle short to
     medium. Berries medium to large; skin thick, covered with
     considerable bloom, strong musky or foxy aroma. Seeds two to four,
     large, distinctly notched, beak short; chalaza oval in shape,
     indistinct, showing merely as a depression; raphe, a groove. (See
     Plate.)

[Illustration: SHOOT OF _VITUS LABRUSCA_]

_Vitis labrusca_, the northern Fox grape, is mentioned in many of the
early writings of this country, particularly in those describing New
England. It was probably described by other botanists before Linnaeus
but if so their descriptions are so meager that it cannot be definitely
recognized. Linnaeus in 1753, under _Vitis labrusca_, says: "Leaves
cordate, slightly tri-lobed, dentate, downy below." Marshall in 1785
under the name _Vitis vulpina_, or Fox grape, says: "This in manner of
growth hath much the appearance of the other kinds. The leaves are
generally larger, and smooth, but whitish underneath. The fruit or
grapes are about the size of a common cherry and have a strong scent, a
little approaching to that of a Fox, whence the name of Fox-grape. There
are also varieties of this, some with whitish or reddish fruit which is
generally most esteemed, and others with black, of which are our largest
grapes." From the time of Marshall on all of the botanists give more or
less complete descriptions of this species and except for the brief
misunderstanding at first as to the name, its identity has never been
questioned. At one time it was supposed to grow in the Mississippi
Valley but Engelmann demonstrated that what were taken for Labrusca
vines in Missouri were in reality strongly pubescent forms of
Aestivalis.

Labrusca is indigenous to the eastern part of North America, including
the region between the Atlantic Ocean and the Alleghany Mountains. It is
sometimes found in the valleys and along the western slopes of the
Alleghanies. Many botanists say it is never found in the Mississippi
Valley; Munson reports specimens, however, from Indiana and Tennessee.
In the first-named area it ranges from Maine to Georgia. It has the most
restricted habitat of any American species of horticultural importance,
being much exceeded in extent of territory by _Vitis rotundifolia_,
_Vitis aestivalis_, and _Vitis riparia_.

Labrusca has furnished more cultivated varieties, either pure-breeds or
hybrids, than all other American species together. The reason for this
is partly, no doubt, due to the fact that it is native to the portion of
the United States first settled and is the most common grape in the
region where agriculture first advanced to the condition where fruits
were desired. This does not wholly account for its prominence, however,
which must be sought elsewhere. In its wild state Labrusca is probably
the most attractive to the eye of any of our American grapes on account
of the size of its fruit, and this undoubtedly turned the attention of
those who were early interested in the possibilities of American
grape-growing to this species rather than to any other.

The southern Labrusca is quite different from the northern form and
probably demands different conditions for its successful growth; in the
North at least two types of the species may be distinguished. Vines are
found in the woods of New England, which resemble Concord very closely
in both vine and fruit, excepting that the grapes are much smaller in
size and more seedy. There is also the large-fruited, foxy Labrusca,
usually with reddish berries, represented by such cultivated varieties
as Northern Muscadine, Dracut Amber, Lutie and others. Labrusca is
peculiar amongst American grapes in showing black-, white- and
red-fruited forms of wild vines growing in the woods. Because of this
variability it is impossible to give the exact climatic and soil
conditions best adapted to the species. It is reasonable to suppose,
however, that the ideal conditions for this or any other species are not
widely different from those prevailing where the species is indigenous.
In the case of Labrusca this means that it is best adapted to humid
climates and that the temperature desired varies according to whether
the variety comes from the southern or northern form of the species.

The root system of Labrusca does not penetrate the soil deeply,[152] but
it is said to succeed better in deep and clayey soils than
Aestivalis.[153] In the Southern and Middle States it does better on
eastern and northeastern slopes. As would be suspected from its original
marshy home, it endures an excess of water in the soil, and on the other
hand requires more water for successful growing than Aestivalis or
Riparia. In spite of its ability to withstand clayey soils, it seems to
prefer loose, warm, well-drained sandy lands to all others. The French
growers report that all varieties of this species show a marked
antipathy to a limestone soil, the vines soon becoming affected with
chlorosis when planted in soils of this nature. In corroboration of this
Stayman reports that it is not found growing native in clayey, limestone
soils. The Labruscas succeed very well in the North and fairly well in
the middle West, as far south as Arkansas, where they are raised on
account of their fruit qualities but here the vines are not nearly so
vigorous and healthy as are those of other species. In Alabama they are
reported to be generally unsatisfactory, and in Texas the vines are
short-lived, unhealthy, and generally unsatisfactory, particularly in
the dry regions. There are some exceptions to this, as, for instance, in
the Piedmont region of the Carolinas, where, owing to elevation or other
causes, the climate of a southern region is semi-northern in its
character.

[Illustration: SHOOT OF WYOMING]

The fruit of Labrusca is large and usually handsomely colored. The skin
is thick, covering a layer of adhering flesh, which gives the impression
of its being thicker than it actually is; it is variable in tenderness,
sometimes tough, but in many of our cultivated varieties it is so tender
as to be a detriment in that it is inclined to crack on the vines in
case of rain at ripening time, and the berries to crush in
transportation. The skin of this species usually has a peculiar aroma,
generally spoken of as _foxy_, and a slightly acid, astringent taste.
Beneath the skin there is a layer of juicy pulp, quite sweet and never
showing much acidity in ripe fruit. The center of the berry is occupied
by rather dense pulp, more or less stringy, with considerable acid close
to the seeds. Many people object to the foxy aroma of this species, but,
nevertheless, the most popular American varieties are more or less foxy.
Analyses have shown that Labrusca fruit is generally characterized by a
low percentage of sugar and acid, the very sweet tasting fox grapes not
showing as high a sugar content as some of the disagreeably tart
Aestivalis and Riparia sorts. This, in addition to the foxiness which
furnishes an excess of aroma in the wine, has prevented Labrusca
varieties from becoming favorites with the wine-makers. Must from these
varieties is adapted only for the making of dry wines, and when making
wines of any other class it is necessary to add sugar and water, the
quantities being governed by the final product desired.

In addition to the strong points already enumerated, it may be said that
Labrusca submits well to vineyard culture, is fairly vigorous and
generally quite productive. It grows readily from cuttings and in point
of hardiness is intermediate between Riparia, the hardiest of our
American species, and Aestivalis. The roots are soft and fleshy (for an
American grape) and in some localities quite subject to attacks of
phylloxera. None of the varieties of Labrusca have ever been popular in
France on this account. In the wild vines the fruit is inclined to drop
from the vine when ripe. This defect is known as "shattering" or
"shelling" among grape-growers and it is a serious weakness in certain
varieties of Labrusca. It is said to be more sensitive in its wild state
to mildew and rot than any other American species[154] but the evidence
on this point does not seem to be wholly conclusive. In the South and in
some parts of the middle West the leaves of all varieties of Labrusca
sunburn and shrivel in the latter part of the summer. The vines do not
endure drouth as well as Aestivalis or Riparia and not nearly so well as
Rupestris. Pearson[155] reports that the Labruscas can be sprayed with
copper sulphate mixtures with much less danger to the leaves than can
Aestivalis.


24. =VITIS VINIFERA= Linn.

     =1.= Linnaeus, _Sp. Pl._, =1=:202. 1753. =2.= Speechly, =1791=:1.
     =3.= Willdenow, _Sp. Pl._, =1=:1180. 1797. =4.= Bartram, _Dom.
     Enc._, =5=:289. 1804. =5.= Rafinesque, =1830=:7. _Wine Grape._ =6.=
     Darlington, _Fl. Cest._, =1853=:49. _Wine grape_; _Foreign grape_.
     =7.= Buckley, _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1861=:480. _European grape._
     =8.= Stayman, _Gar. Mon._, =11=:38. 1869. _European grape._ =9.=
     Bush, _Grape Cult._, =1=:140. 1869. _European grape._ =10.=
     Engelmann, _Mo. Ent. Rpt._, =1874=:74. =11.= Moore, _Mich. Pom.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1875=:36. =12.= Engelmann, _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:11,
     12, 13, 14, 19. =13.= Munson, _Am. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:137.
     =14.= De Candolle, _Or. Cult. Pl._, =1885=:191. =15.= Onderdonk,
     _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1887=:652. =16.= Planchon, _De Candolle's Mon.
     Phan._, =5=:324, 355. 1887. =17.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1889=:107,
     109. =18.= Husmann, =1895=:29, 187. =19.= Munson, _Rural N. Y._,
     =56=:610. 1897. =20.= Ib., _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:231, 233, 240.
     1900. _Asiatic Wine grape._ =21.= Bailey, _Cyc. Am. Hort._,
     =4=:1956. 1902. _fig. of leaves._ _Wine grape_; _European grape_.
     =22.= Viala and Ravaz, _Am. Vines_, =1903=:42, 115.

     Quite variable in vigor, not so high climbing as most American
     species. Tendrils intermittent. Leaves rounded-cordate, rather
     thin, rather-smooth, and when young, shining, frequently more or
     less deeply three-, five-, or even seven-lobed; usually glabrous
     but in some varieties the leaves and young shoots are hairy and
     even downy when young; lobes rounded or pointed; teeth variable;
     petiolar sinus deep, narrow, usually overlapping. Fruit, of
     cultivated varieties at least, very variable in size and color.
     Berries of cultivated varieties usually oval though many varieties
     are globular fruited. Seeds variable in size and shape, usually
     notched at upper end and characterized always by bottle-necked,
     elongated beak; a rather broad, usually rough, slightly distinct
     chalaza situated rather high up on the seed; raphe indistinct.
     Flowers soon after Labrusca. The roots are large, soft and spongy.
     A very variable species.

[Illustration: SHOOT OF _VITIS VINIFERA_]

Botanists have never agreed as to whether _Vitis vinifera_ is a single
species or a combination of two or more species which has been
cultivated for so long that it is impossible to discover the original
forms. The name, _Vitis vinifera_, is usually credited to Linnaeus
though it was used for this grape before Linnaeus' time by Bauhin and
possibly by others. The description of Linnaeus accompanying the name is
very short, as follows: Leaves sinuately lobed, glabrous. Many of the
earlier botanists, Tournefort for one, described numerous varieties as
though they were species. As a natural corollary of the uncertainty of
the botanical status of _Vitis vinifera_ the original habitat of the
species is not positively known. De Candolle, as noted in the first part
of this work, considered the region about the Caspian Sea as the
probable habitat of the Old World grape. There is but little doubt that
the original home of _Vitis vinifera_ is some place in western Asia.
There is strong corroborative evidence of this in the fact that the
climatic conditions under which the species flourishes are such as are
there found.

The first chapter in _The Grapes of New York_ has been devoted to this,
the Old World grape, and for a discussion of the horticultural
characters of the species and of the efforts to cultivate it in America,
the reader is referred to that chapter.

Neither American nor European writers agree as to the exact climate
desired by Vinifera for the reason, probably, that all of the varieties
in this variable species do not desire the same conditions. There are
certain phases of climate, however, that are well agreed upon, as
follows: The species requires a warm, dry climate, and is more sensitive
to change of temperature than our American species. Stayman, who had had
considerable experience in raising Vinifera grapes in different places,
says: Vinifera "will not endure much rain or grow on wet land. It is
only in a dry climate and on high rolling situations that it will
succeed, where there is not more than 31 inches of an annual rainfall
and for the growing and maturing season 15 inches." So far as soil alone
is concerned, the French growers tell us that it can be grown
successfully in a wide variety of soils, being much less particular in
this respect than our American species. They state that it will
withstand and grow successfully in soils so strongly impregnated with
lime that any of the American sorts would succumb to chlorosis.

There are certain characters connected with the fruit of this species
which are peculiar to it and are not found in any of our American sorts.
First, the skin, which is attached very closely to the flesh and which
is never astringent or acid, is of good flavor and can be eaten with the
fruit. Second, the flesh is firm, yet tender, and uniform throughout,
differing in this respect from any of our American sorts, which
frequently show a sweet, watery and tender pulp close to the skin with a
tough and more or less acid core at the center. Third, the flavor is
peculiarly sprightly, a quality known as _vinous_, because it
characterizes this species. It may be said in this connection, however,
that many Americans, accustomed to American grapes, prefer the flavor of
our native sorts to the vinous flavor of the Old World grape. Europeans
invariably, and Americans who live in Vinifera raising sections,
usually, deem the Vinifera flavor greatly superior. Fourth, a strong
adherence of the berry to the pedicel, the fruit never "shattering" or
"shelling" from the cluster.

Varieties of Vinifera have been selected for the making of wine through
so many centuries that this species has become the first and great
wine-making grape. Whatever the future may hold in store for American
grapes, there is no question but that at present the Viniferas are far
superior to any native Americans for wine-making purposes, both as to
quality in general and the number of kinds of wine which can be made.

The weak points of Vinifera are: First, an inability to withstand the
cold of our winters. The different varieties of Vinifera undoubtedly
vary considerably as to the exact amount of cold they will stand without
injury. All of them tried at this Station freeze to the ground even in
the mildest winters. Second, foliage particularly susceptible to the
attack of mildew and fruit susceptible to the attack of black-rot.
Third, they generally require a ripening season much longer than our
climate affords. Fourth, the roots are soft and spongy and very liable
to the attack of phylloxera, though they apparently penetrate more
readily in dense clays and hard dry soils than any of our American
species.

In the various hybrids that have been made between American and Vinifera
varieties it is usually found that the desirable qualities of Vinifera
are taken in about the same proportion as the undesirable ones. The
fruit is improved in the hybrid but the vine is weakened. Quality is
purchased at the expense of hardiness and disease-resisting power.
Vinifera may be grown very readily from cuttings. This is of little
cultural importance, however, as both in Europe and America varieties of
the species are usually grafted on phylloxera-resistant stock.




CHAPTER V

THE LEADING VARIETIES OF AMERICAN GRAPES


ADIRONDAC.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =27=:490. 1861. =2.= _Horticulturist_, =17=:94,
     132, 518. 1862. _fig._ =3.= _Mag. Hort._, =28=:447, 540. 1862. =4.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1862=:160. =5.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._,
     =1863=:127. =6.= _Mag. Hort._, =30=:25, 62, 140, 150, 208. 1864.
     =7.= Mead, =1867=:164. =8.= Fuller, =1867=:216. =9.= Thomas,
     =1867=:399. =10.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1867=:44. =11.= _Grape
     Cult._, =1=:115. 1869. =12.= _Gar. Mon._, =16=:249. 1874. =13.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:67. =14.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:56.
     =15.= _Montreal Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:82. =16.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =10=:493. 1891.

Adirondac is an old variety now nearly or quite obsolete. It is probably
a seedling of Isabella which it greatly resembles in vine and fruit
characters. It is of the Labrusca type, belonging to the southern group
of this species, and like most of the southern Labruscas lacks in
hardiness and vigor though it surpasses its parent in the first quality.
The vine makes a slow, weak growth and is particularly susceptible to
fungi. The quality of the fruit is very good, juicy and vinous, with the
slight foxy flavor peculiar to Isabella. Its earliness, a week or ten
days earlier than Concord, is one of its chief points of merit. The
Adirondac did not attain favor because of the many faults of the vine
and in the time of its cultivation was seldom found except in the
vineyard of the amateur. The claim is often made for this variety that
it is nearer the Black Hamburg in quality than any other American grape.

Adirondac was first exhibited by J. W. Bailey of Plattsburg, New York,
at the Montreal Horticultural Society Exhibition in Montreal in 1861.
The original vine was found in 1852 by J. G. Witherbee in his garden a
short distance from the shore of Lake Champlain in the town of Port
Henry, Essex County, New York. The variety was introduced by Bailey. On
account of its resemblance in vine to Isabella it is supposed by many to
be a seedling of that variety. Adirondac was placed on the grape list of
the American Pomological Society in 1867 and was dropped from it in
1883.

     Vine variable in vigor and productiveness, injured in severe
     winters, subject to attacks of mildew in unfavorable seasons.
     Foliage dark green, thick. Flowers semi-fertile, open in mid-season
     or earlier; stamens upright. Fruit variable in season of ripening,
     usually in edible condition about ten days before Delaware, does
     not always keep well. Clusters above medium to small, usually
     rather compact, seldom shouldered. Berries not uniform in size
     averaging below Concord, roundish to slightly oval on account of
     compactness of cluster, dark purplish-black, persistent. Skin
     intermediate in thickness. Flesh unusually tender and melting,
     sweet, mild, good to very good but with an after flavor which is
     not altogether agreeable. Seeds rather large, few in number. Must
     82-1/2 deg.-83 deg..


ADVANCE.

(Riparia, Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1872=:94. =2.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._,
     =1875=:386. =3.= _N. J. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:11. =4.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1883=:67, 152. =5.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =30=:108. 1893.

Advance is an unimportant variety now to be found only in the vineyards
of experimenters. At the time of its introduction (1872) it was of much
interest as a hybrid between Riparia, Labrusca and Vinifera, Clinton
being one parent and Duke of Magenta, a grape resembling Black Hamburg,
the other. In quality of fruit it is an improvement over Clinton but
unfortunately, as with so many primary hybrids of our native species
with _Vitis vinifera_, the vine is tender and susceptible to fungi.

This variety was produced by J. H. Ricketts of Newburgh, New York, and
was first exhibited at the grape show in New York City in 1870.

     Vine vigorous, productive, not very hardy, subject to attacks of
     mildew. Canes long, covered with considerable blue bloom. Leaves
     rather large, thin, dark green. Fruit ripens in mid-season, appears
     to keep well. Clusters above medium size, usually
     single-shouldered, the shoulder being connected to the cluster by a
     rather long stem, medium in compactness and with many abortive
     fruits. Berries medium to large, oval, dark purplish-black, covered
     with heavy blue bloom, persistent. Flesh somewhat tender, flavor
     sweet and spicy with considerable resemblance to that of Clinton,
     quality good.


AGAWAM.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =23=:86. 1857. (Rogers' hybrids.) =2.= _Ib._,
     =27=:104, 489, 533. 1861. =3.= _Horticulturist_, =17=:26, 510.
     1862. _fig._ =4.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1863=:130, 549. _fig._ =5.=
     _Horticulturist_, =20=:81. 1865. =6.= _Mag. Hort._, =31=:68, 106,
     333. 1865. =7.= Husmann, =1866=:124. =8.= Fuller, =1867=:230. =9.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1867=:44. =10.= _Horticulturist_, =24=:126.
     1869. =11.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:43, 153, 181, 262, 325. 1869. =12.=
     _Am. Jour. Hort._, =5=:263. 1869. _fig._ =13.= Barry, =1872=:421.
     =14.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1875=:387. _fig._ =15.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1883=:69. _fig._ =16.= _Gar. and For._, =3=:490. 1890.
     =17.= _Can. Hort._, =17=:191. 1894. _col. pl._ =18.= _N. Y. Sta.
     An. Rpt._, =15=:433. 1896. =19.= _Ib._, =17=:526, 548, 552, 553.
     1898. =20.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1899=:91. =21.= _Mo. Sta.
     Bul._, =46=:37, 43, 44, 46, 47, 55. 1899.

     _Randall_ (20).[156] ROGERS' NO. 15 (2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9).
     _Rogers' No. 15_ (10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15).

[Illustration: AGAWAM]

Agawam is the most largely grown of Rogers' hybrids both in the United
States and in New York, the qualities commending it being large size of
bunch and berry, rich, sweet, aromatic flavor, attractive appearance,
excellent keeping qualities, vigor of vine, and capacity for
self-fertilization. It has the distinction of being the only
self-fertile variety among Rogers' named hybrids. For a grape having its
proportion of European parentage the vine is vigorous, hardy and
productive, though not equal to many pure-bred American sorts in these
respects. In severe winters it is precariously hardy in New York. Its
chief defects in fruit are a somewhat thick and tough skin, coarse solid
texture of pulp, and, for the European palate, its decidedly foxy
flavor. The vine is susceptible to the mildews and in many localities
does not yield well. In some markets Agawam is highly esteemed and in
making certain wines it is much sought for in blending because of the
flavor it imparts. Although it ripens soon after Concord it can be kept
much longer and really improves in flavor the first few weeks after
picking. It may be kept in good condition in common storage until
January. Not uncommonly it shrivels on the stem making a raisin. It
seems to prefer somewhat heavy soils, doing better on clay than on sand
or gravel. The Agawam is often sold in the markets as Salem which it
resembles and by which it is surpassed in quality.

For an account of the parentage and origin of Agawam see "Rogers'
Hybrids" of which this is No. 15. It was first mentioned as a variety
about 1861. In 1869 Rogers gave the fruit the name Agawam from the
Indian name of a town in Hampden County, Massachusetts. It has become
one of the most, if not the most, popular of Rogers' hybrids and is in
some sections raised to a considerable extent as a market sort. It is
propagated and sold to-day by practically all nurserymen. It was placed
on the grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in
1867 and is still retained there.

     Vine vigorous, usually hardy, medium to productive, subject to
     mildew. Canes of average length, medium in number, rather thick,
     moderately dark brown; nodes enlarged, somewhat flattened;
     internodes short to medium; diaphragm nearly thick; pith of average
     size; shoots tinged with green, glabrous; tendrils intermittent to
     continuous, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds open in mid-season, of average size, long, somewhat
     thick, conical to nearly obtuse. Young leaves tinged with carmine
     on lower side and along margin of upper side, prevailing color pale
     green. Leaves of average size, thick; upper surface light green,
     dull, moderately smooth; lower surface pale green, slightly
     pubescent, flocculent; leaf not lobed, terminus somewhat acute;
     petiolar sinus deep, narrow, often overlapping; lateral sinus very
     shallow when present; teeth shallow, wide. Flowers occasionally on
     plan of six, nearly self-fertile, open medium late; stamens
     upright.

     Fruit ripens soon after Concord, keeps until mid-winter. Clusters
     variable averaging medium to large, short, rather broad, tapering
     to somewhat cylindrical, sometimes single-shouldered, somewhat
     loose; peduncle medium to short, nearly thick; pedicel of average
     length, usually thick, covered with few warts, much enlarged at
     point of attachment; brush very short, pale green. Berries nearly
     large, roundish to slightly oval, dark and dull purplish-red
     somewhat resembling Catawba, covered with lilac bloom, very
     persistent. Skin thick, tough, adheres slightly to the pulp,
     contains no pigment, somewhat astringent. Flesh pale green,
     translucent, tough, slightly stringy, rather solid, foxy, good in
     quality. Seeds somewhat adherent, two to five averaging four,
     large, rather narrow, long, often with slightly enlarged neck,
     blunt, brownish; raphe usually distinct, shows as a ridge in the
     bottom of a broad groove; chalaza rather large, distinctly above
     center, not obscure.


ALEXANDER.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _Dom. Enc._, =1804=:291. =2.= McMahon, =1806=:235. =3.=
     Johnson, =1806=:164. =4.= Adlum, =1823=:139. =5.= _Ib._,
     =1823=:140. =6.= Dufour, =1826=:5, 9, 24, 55, 116, 207, 247, 255.
     =7.= Adlum, =1828=:173. =8.= Ib., =1828=:174. =9.= Prince,
     =1830=:173, 216, 219. =10.= Ib., =1830=:174. =11.= Ib., =1830=:200.
     =12.= Downing, =1845=:253. =13.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._,
     =1847=:462. =14.= _Ib._, =1847=:468. =15.= _Ib._, =1856=:434. =16.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:68.

     _Alexander's_ (7, 15). _Alexandria_ (15). _Black Grape_ (16). _Buck
     Grape_ (11). CAPE (6, 15). _Cape grape_ (12, 13, 16). _Cape of Good
     Hope grape_ (9, 10). CLIFTON'S CONSTANTIA (4, 8, 10). _Clifton's
     Constantia_ (12, 16). _Columbian_ (11). _Constantia_ (6, 16).
     _Madeira of York, Pa._ (12). _Rothrock of Prince_ (16). SCHUYLKILL
     MUSCADEL (5, 7, 13). _Schuylkill Muscadel_ (9, 12, 14, 15, 16).
     _Schuylkill Muscadine_ (12). _Spring Mill Constantia_ (9, 12, 16).
     _Tasker's grape_ (1, 2, 3, 7, 9, 12, 16). _Vevay_ (13, 15, 16).
     WINNE (11). _Winne_ (12, 16). _York Lisbon_ (16).

Alexander is now a grape of the past but no other of our American
varieties better deserves historical record. We have seen in the
preceding chapters how important a part it had in the evolution of our
native grapes, being one of the first wild grapes to be domesticated.
The Alexander was a coarse grape with so much foxiness of flavor that
it did not please the early growers, who had been accustomed to European
sorts, as a table-grape, but it made a very good wine of the claret type
and was grown for this purpose until displaced by the Catawba. It was
wine made from this variety that Thomas Jefferson[157] pronounced
"worthy of the best vineyards of France." The early writers differ so in
their estimates of the good and bad qualities of this grape that it is
hard to give its true characters at this late date.

The early history of Alexander is really the history of two varieties:
the Schuylkill Muscadel and the Clifton Constantia. The first of these
varieties was, according to Bartram, found growing in the vicinity of
Philadelphia on the hills bordering the Schuylkill River in the
neighborhood of an old vineyard of European grapes. The finder, John
Alexander, was gardener to Governor Penn of Pennsylvania, into whose
garden he introduced it a few years before the American Revolution. It
was later known as Tasker's grape from a Mr. Tasker of Maryland who
cultivated it largely. The Clifton Constantia, according to Adlum,
originated with William Clifton of Southwark, Philadelphia, who states
that it was a chance seedling in his garden. Adlum says that the two
varieties had been confused, that "they are much alike in the growth of
the vine and the color of the grape but the Schuylkill has rather the
largest berries and is sweeter, and generally has a small shoulder or
branch with four or five grapes on it growing out from the top of the
bunch." Prince also describes the varieties as separate, but he says
"they are generally cultivated and considered as synonymous." Later
writers consider the two grapes identical.

Peter Legaux, the promoter of a vineyard company at Spring Mill, about
fourteen miles from Philadelphia, secured some vines of the Clifton
Constantia from Clifton and later introduced it under the name of Cape
grape stating that he had secured it from the Cape of Good Hope. Whether
he did this purposely and with intent to defraud or whether he had
accidentally mixed the cuttings secured from Clifton with some of a
large number of cuttings which had come from abroad will never be known.
When reproached for his deception he denied that this variety was a
native and continued to assert that he had secured it from the Cape of
Good Hope. In this he was strongly supported by Dufour who says: "I will
also try to save the character of our Cape grapes from being merely wild
grapes, because some are now found in the woods." Legaux's advertisement
of this variety had the effect of making it known at least and it is the
opinion of writers of that day that many were induced to try this grape
under the supposition that it was from the Cape of Good Hope who would
have scorned it had they supposed it to be a native. It came to be
considerably planted in all parts of the United States; was early
introduced into the West and preceded the Catawba as the popular grape
around Cincinnati. It was found worthless in New England and New York,
the season not being long enough to mature the fruit. With the
introduction and dissemination of Catawba it was gradually dropped from
cultivation, the Catawba being superior in quality, more resistant to
rot and mildew and slightly earlier. It is now unknown and it is
doubtful if there are any living vines in cultivation.

Alexander is generally considered a variety of Labrusca but there is
much evidence to show that it is a hybrid of Labrusca and Vinifera. This
was the opinion of some of the earlier writers but later it was
discredited. Bartram gives as one of the distinguishing characters of
Vinifera and American vines that the first show oval berries while the
latter do not, but he makes an exception of Alexander. Why this should
be an exception does not seem apparent unless it be credited to
hybridity. Furthermore, the season of Alexander, which is very late,
would also indicate foreign blood; a grape native of the vicinity of
Philadelphia would supposedly be able to ripen itself in that locality,
a thing that the Alexander seldom did perfectly, and it is spoken of in
southern Indiana as being very late. Its place of origin ("in the
vicinity of an old vineyard of European kinds") would indicate that
there was an opportunity for hybridization to take place. The
descriptions strongly suggest some of the coarser-textured of Rogers'
hybrids.

This solution, if it be accepted, would account for the difference of
opinion as to its origin. Bartram and Prince could see enough of the
characters of the native in a hybrid so that they could be deceived into
claiming it as a native, and Dufour on the other hand could see enough
of the Vinifera characters so that he felt there was no question as to
its being of foreign origin.

Downing gives what is probably the most complete description of this
variety we now have, although it was made from fruit raised some
distance farther north than where the variety matures properly. He says:
"It is quite sweet when ripe and makes a very fair wine but it is quite
too pulpy and coarse for table use. The bunches are more compact and the
leaves much more _downy_ than those of the Isabella. Bunches rather
compact, not shouldered. Berries of medium size, oval. Skin thick, quite
black. Flesh with a very firm pulp, but juicy, and quite sweet and
musky, when fully ripe, which is not till the last of October." Dufour
speaks of the berries ripening unevenly, requiring the green ones to be
picked out before sending to the wine press.


ALEXANDER WINTER.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:613. 1892. =2.= _Ib._, =14=:275.
     1895. =3.= _Ib._, =17=:526, 548, 553. 1898.

Alexander Winter is chiefly valuable because of the length of time it
will keep. As its name implies it is a _winter_ grape. The flavor is
most excellent and when well grown the appearance of bunch and grape is
attractive. Another desirable quality is that the average number of
seeds to the berry is small, being only two. The great defect of the
variety is that, even with cross-pollinization, perfect clusters do not
form. There are many green berries, and when ripe there are always some
small seedless berries indicating imperfect fertilization. Vine and
foliage indicate Labrusca parentage but the fruit suggests an admixture
of Vinifera. Although rarely found in the gardens and vineyards of New
York, Alexander Winter is well worth a place in the garden of the
amateur and of the grape-breeder because of its excellent keeping
qualities.

Alexander Winter was originated by S. R. Alexander, Bellefontaine, Ohio,
from a lot of mixed seed planted in 1884. It was received at this
Station in 1892. It seems not to have been tested elsewhere and is not
generally handled by nurserymen.

     Vine vigorous, injured in severe winters, productive. Foliage
     irregularly roundish, dark green. Flowers open in mid-season or
     earlier; stamens reflexed. It cannot be relied upon to set perfect
     clusters when standing alone and even when growing in a mixed
     vineyard fails to set fruit well. Fruit ripens about with Salem,
     keeps a long time in edible condition. Clusters above medium to
     small, very heavily shouldered, loose, contain many small seedless
     fruits. Berries variable in size, the fully developed fruits
     averaging medium to large, roundish, dull, light and dark red,
     covered with thin lilac bloom or at times with faint tinge of
     grayish-blue, persistent. Skin covered with scattering dark-colored
     dots, rather thick but tender. Flesh tender, vinous, with
     indications of Vinifera parentage, sweetish to agreeably tart,
     flavor pleasing, good to very good in quality. Seeds large, few in
     number; raphe sometimes shows as a raised cord.


(I) ALICE.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:84.

Alice is one of two New York seedlings of this name offered
grape-growers, neither of which is worth a permanent place in
viticulture. This grape is a white seedling of Martha, and much
resembles that variety. It was originated by J. A. Putnam, Fredonia, New
York, who writes that the vine was first fruited in 1890. On account of
its close resemblance to Martha it was generally considered unworthy of
perpetuation and is now practically obsolete.


(II) ALICE.

(Labrusca, Aestivalis?, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _Rural N. Y._, =46=:36. 1887. _fig._ =2.= _Ib._, =47=:161.
     1888. =3.= _Amer. Gard._, =9=:7. 1888. _fig._ =4.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =11=:613. 1892. =5.= _Amer. Gard._, =16=:423. 1895. _fig._
     =6.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1895=:233. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =14=:275. 1895. =8.= _Minn. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1896=:134.
     _fig._ =9.= _Rural N. Y._, =56=:662, 679. 1897. =10.= _N. Y. Sta.
     An. Rpt._, =17=:526, 548, 553. 1898.

A brief record of the origin, history and gross characters of Alice is
herewith given. The grape is of little value in New York.

This variety was found growing near an old stone wall by Ward D. Gunn of
Clintondale, Ulster County, New York, and was transplanted into his
vineyard in the spring of 1884. It was introduced by F. E. Young of
Rochester. This is a Labrusca, with a few characters that indicate
Aestivalis and Vinifera blood.

     Vine vigorous to medium, hardy, produces fair crops. Leaves medium
     to large, sometimes strongly rugose, with lower surface heavily
     pubescent. Flowers self-fertile or nearly so, open in mid-season;
     stamens upright. Fruit ripens with Concord or slightly earlier, the
     different clusters varying in season of ripening, ships well and
     keeps in good condition far into the winter. Clusters intermediate
     in size, usually with a small single shoulder, medium to compact.
     Berries above medium to small, roundish although frequently
     strongly compressed on account of compactness of cluster, rather
     dull, pale red, somewhat lighter than Catawba, covered with thin
     lilac bloom, persistent. Skin very thick. Flesh tender, vinous,
     somewhat foxy, sweet at skin to agreeably tart at center, good in
     quality, resembling Diana or Catawba. The seeds, which are few in
     number, often show a rough granular, warty surface around the
     chalaza.


ALLEN'S HYBRID.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =20=:474. 1854. =2.= _Ib._, =21=:182. 1855. =3.=
     _Essex Inst. Proc._, =1=:195. 1856. =4.= _Mag. Hort._, =26=:66.
     1860. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1862=:90. =6.= Strong,
     =1866=:330. =7.= Mead, =1867=:176, 187, 194. _fig._ =8.= _Ga. Sta.
     An. Rpt._, =13=:320. 1900. =9.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:40. 1901.

A half century ago Allen's Hybrid was the vine of promise in America. It
was the first named hybrid between _Vitis labrusca_ and _Vitis vinifera_
to be disseminated and as such awakened the slumbering hopes of the
horticulturists of a continent. American grape-growers had all but given
up the expectation of ever growing the European grape in the New World
when Allen announced this hybrid. Auspicious hope! Grape-growers
everywhere hybridized grapes and the growing of the vine received an
impetus surpassed only by that of the introduction of the Concord.
Botanists and horticulturists had doubted the possibility and the
practicability of crossing the Old World grape with the New World
species, when this variety removed the doubt and led them to hope that
we were to have varieties of grapes in America possessing many of the
coveted characters of the grapes of Europe.

After its introduction the variety was tested wherever grapes were grown
in the United States and Canada,--and for a generation. Its high
quality, entirely free from what was then considered objectionable
foxiness, handsome appearance, with some other qualities of its Vinifera
parent, at first indicated that it was a most valuable acquisition; but
it soon developed the tenderness of vine and susceptibility to fungi and
insects which have come to be the distinguishing marks of the primary
hybrids of native species and the European grape. Its cultivation has
long since ceased and it has now a place only in the history of American
grape-growing. It has been one of the parents of a number of other
grapes, chief of which is Lady Washington, produced from a cross between
Allen's Hybrid and Concord. The grape is lost to cultivation but the
name should be perpetuated as commemorating one of the great events in
American viticulture.

Allen's Hybrid was originated by John Fiske Allen of Salem,
Massachusetts. In the winter of 1843-44 he fertilized the blossoms of an
Isabella vine growing in a greenhouse with pollen from Chasselas de
Fontainbleau. Seeds were produced and planted the next year the vines of
which began to fruit in 1853 and 1854. One of these seedlings of greater
merit than the others was saved and named Allen's Hybrid; the others
were destroyed.

     "The vine is not hardy, and requires winter protection, but is
     vigorous and productive, ripening quite early, and in sheltered
     situations is a desirable variety. Bunch medium to large,
     shouldered, compact; berry medium to large, round, sometimes
     depressed; skin thin, white, changing to pale yellow when fully
     ripe; flesh tender, juicy, sweet, rich, with a delicate slightly
     vinous flavor, and one of the best in quality."[158]


AMBER QUEEN.

(Vinifera, Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1870=:33. =2.= _Ib._, =1873=:101.
     =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:70. =4.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =8=:342.
     1889. =5.= _Ib._, =17=:548, 552. 1898. =6.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._,
     =46=:42, 44, 46, 76. 1899. =7.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:40. 1901.

Amber Queen is interesting chiefly as having sprung from three species,
_Vitis vinifera_, _Vitis labrusca_ and _Vitis riparia_, and as showing
the characters of all in some degree. The fruit strongly indicates the
Vinifera parentage, the continuous tendrils Labrusca, and the vine, in
vigor of growth and several botanical characters, shows its descent from
Riparia. The variety has never been much grown, and when cultivated
could be best characterized by its faults--of not setting fruit well,
susceptibility to mildew and black-rot and of unproductiveness. It is,
however, reasonably successful in especially favorable localities.

The variety was first exhibited at a meeting of the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society in 1870. It was originated by N. B. White,
Norwood, Massachusetts, from seed of Marion fertilized with Black
Hamburg. Bush questions this parentage owing to the fact that Amber
Queen frequently shows continuous tendrils. In the vineyard of this
Station, however, Marion shows continuous as well as intermittent
tendrils, indicating that it would be quite possible for the Amber Queen
to have inherited its aberrant tendrils from that source.

     Vine a strong grower, usually hardy, produces light crops except in
     favored locations, both leaves and fruit subject to attacks of
     fungal diseases. Leaves above medium size, roundish, rather thick.
     Flowers sterile or nearly so, practically incapable of setting
     fruit when self-fertilized, open about in mid-season and bloom a
     long time; stamens reflexed. Fruit variable in season of ripening,
     sometimes before, at other times after Concord, usually requires
     more than one picking to secure the fruit at its best, does not
     keep well as the berries soon wither. Clusters variable in size but
     not large, usually loose and open but sometimes compact. Berries
     not uniform in size, roundish to oval, dark red covered with more
     or less lilac bloom, somewhat resembling Catawba in color, not very
     firm as the berries soon shrivel, persistent. Flesh very juicy,
     soft and tender, mildly sweet at skin to acid at center, good to
     very good in quality. Seeds variable in size, frequently with
     enlarged neck; chalaza distinctly above center.


AMBROSIA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =10=:494. 1891. =2.= _Ib._, =11=:614.
     1892. =3.= _Ib._, =17=:526, 545, 547, 553. 1898.

Ambrosia is a New York seedling which, though introduced nearly twenty
years ago, has not found favor with grape-growers. In quality, while
hardly worthy of its name, it ranks high and for this reason may be
worth a place in the vineyard of the amateur. On the Station grounds it
shells badly, differing in this respect from its supposed parent Salem.

The variety was originated by Alfred Rose of Penn Yan, New York, from
seed of Salem, planted in 1884. It was received for testing by this
Station in 1888. There are no records of its having been tested
elsewhere.

     Vine vigorous, healthy, usually hardy, moderately productive.
     Leaves intermediate in size; lower surface heavily tinged with
     bronze. Flowers occasionally on plan of six, fertile, open in
     mid-season or earlier; stamens upright. Fruit ripens about with
     Concord or Delaware, appears to keep well. Clusters large to
     medium, broadly and irregularly tapering, sometimes blunt at ends,
     usually not shouldered or shoulder when present small and short,
     compact to medium. Berries large to above medium, slightly oblate,
     attractive green changing to a yellow tinge, covered with a more or
     less gray bloom, drop from clusters easily. Flesh rather
     transparent and tender, mild, sweetish from skin to center,
     pleasant-flavored but somewhat variable in flavor and quality,
     ranking from medium to very good. Seeds separate readily from the
     pulp, quite large; raphe often shows as a partly submerged cord.


AMERICA.

(Lincecumii, Rupestris.)

     =1.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:614. 1892. =2.= _An. Hort._,
     =1892=:176. =3.= Husmann, =1895=:116, 125. =4.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =14=:276. 1895. =5.= _Ib._, =17=:526, 548, 553, 1898. =6.=
     _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1149, 1152. 1898. _fig._ =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Cat._, =1899=:29. =8.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:43, 45, 46, 47. 1899.
     =9.= _Ga. Sta. An. Rpt._, =13=:320. 1900. =10.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._,
     =56=:263, 274. 1900. _fig._ =11.= _Rural N. Y._, =60=:614. 1901.
     =12.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1904=:305.

America is illustrated and described in _The Grapes of New York_ chiefly
because of its possible value in breeding work. It may also be worth
growing in a limited way in this State for wine-making as it is reputed
by all who have tried it to be one of the best native grapes for a dark
red wine and to make a very good port. The notable qualities of the
variety as it grows at Geneva are: Vigor of growth, health of foliage,
persistence of berries, high sugar content and the peculiar flavor of
the fruit, liked by some and not by others. At least it can be said that
the taste of America is new to northern grape-growers; and, since it
wholly lacks the foxy taste and aroma of Labrusca, it offers
possibilities for breeding varieties lacking the distinguishing flavor
of Concord and Niagara. This variety would probably be somewhat
objectionable in northern markets as a table fruit because of the highly
colored juice, which stains the hands and the lips. The flavor is
decidedly that of _Vitis rupestris_.

Its originator claims for America great resistance to heat and cold; and
our experience, though limited, confirms the claim. So, too, it is said
to be a suitable stock upon which to graft Vinifera varieties to resist
phylloxera, a matter concerning which our experience in this region
offers nothing, though the parentage strongly suggests such resistance
to be the case. The vigor of the vine and the luxuriance of the foliage,
probably still more marked farther south, cannot but make it an
excellent sort for arbors. But the fact must be emphasized that America
is preeminently of interest to the northern grape-grower because it
gives him an opportunity to make use in breeding work, of the qualities
of Rupestris and Lincecumii, southern species combined in this variety
and thriving in the combination in northern conditions.

[Illustration: AMERICA]

The grape described here was originated by Munson from seed of _Jaeger
No. 43_ pollinated by a male Rupestris. It was received at this Station
in 1892 which was practically the date of its introduction. America has
been widely tested by experiment stations and the reports of its
behavior are generally favorable.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, usually hardy, produces heavy
     crops. Canes long, numerous, of medium size, dark reddish-brown,
     covered with heavy blue bloom; nodes enlarged, strongly flattened;
     internodes of average length; diaphragm medium in thickness; pith
     rather large; shoots glabrous, covered with blue bloom; tendrils
     intermittent; long, bifid.

     Leaf-buds open in mid-season, medium to small, of average length,
     rather thick, conical to obtuse. Young leaves tinged on both sides,
     making the prevailing color rose-carmine. Leaves healthy, inferior
     in size, rather thin; upper surface attractive medium green,
     glossy, smooth; lower surface light green, hairy; veins indistinct;
     lobes lacking or faintly showing, terminal lobe acute; petiolar
     sinus moderately deep and wide; teeth of average depth and width.
     Flowers sterile, usually on plan of six, open late; stamens
     reflexed.

     Fruit ripens with Concord or later, keeps well. Clusters nearly
     large, above medium length, broad, tapering, somewhat cylindrical,
     irregular, usually single-shouldered, averaging two or three
     bunches per shoot, usually compact; peduncle of medium length,
     rather thick; pedicel short, slender, covered with few, small,
     inconspicuous warts; brush short, thick, with reddish tinge.
     Berries medium to small, variable in size, roundish, attractive
     black or purplish-black, glossy, covered with heavy blue bloom,
     persistent, somewhat soft. Skin thin, very tender, adheres slightly
     to the pulp, contains an unusually large amount of purplish-red
     pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh dull white with faint reddish
     tinge, translucent, not very juicy, tender, not stringy, melting,
     spicy, vinous, sweet, good in quality. Seeds separate easily, two
     to five, average four, above medium size, long, of moderate width,
     pointed, yellowish-brown; raphe prominent, cord-like; chalaza
     large, slightly above center, irregularly circular, distinct.

There is a second variety under the name America, as Ricketts years ago
introduced an America which has probably passed from cultivation.


AMETHYST.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1903=:82.

Amethyst is one of Munson's hybrids as yet unknown to the grape-growers
of New York. It is a most excellent table grape, coming after the
Delaware which it much resembles in habit of growth and in fruit. It is
a stronger grower than Delaware, has proved to be as hardy, is seemingly
not attacked readily by black-rot, but like the Delaware is susceptible
to mildew. In quality it ranks with Delago, Brilliant, Goethe, Lindley
and Delaware, all parents one or two generations removed. According to
Munson it makes a good white wine. It is at least an amateur's grape, to
be sought because of high quality. It was originated by T. V. Munson of
Denison, Texas, being first fruited in 1898. It is a cross of Delago and
Brilliant and was introduced in 1902.

     Vine moderately vigorous, hardy, medium to productive, susceptible
     to attacks of mildew. Canes intermediate in length, number and
     thickness, light and dark brown deepening in color at the nodes.
     Leaves medium to nearly large, light green; lower surface pale
     green, pubescent. Flowers nearly fertile to slightly sterile, open
     rather late; stamens upright. Fruit ripens after Delaware, keeps
     well. Clusters medium to large, intermediate in length and width,
     usually single-shouldered, compact. Berries above medium to small,
     roundish to oval, strongly narrowing toward the pedicel on account
     of compactness of cluster, rather attractive dark red, covered with
     lilac bloom, usually persistent. Skin thick, of average toughness.
     Flesh rather tough, solid, vinous, sweetish at skin to agreeably
     tart at center somewhat resembling Brilliant, good to very good in
     quality. Seeds intermediate in size and length, often with enlarged
     neck.


AMINIA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =31=:333. 1865. =2.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1865=:40. =3.= _N. Y. Agr. Soc. Rpt._, =1870=:276. =4.= _Mich.
     Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1875=:341. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:70. =6.=
     _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:252. 1893. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:526, 548, 553. 1898. =8.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:42, 44, 46,
     48, 54. 1899. =9.= _Ga. Sta. An. Rpt._, =13=:320. 1900.

     ROGERS' NO. 39 (1, 2, 3, 4). _Rogers' No. 39_ (5).

Aminia is deserving the recognition of a color-plate and a full
description in this work because in quality it is one of the best early
grapes for New York. Besides being early and of good quality it keeps
well. It ripens with or a little after Moore Early and Hartford,
producing berries of high quality and attractive appearance but the
bunches are small, variable in size, not well formed as a rule, and the
berries ripen unevenly. The vine is vigorous, not as hardy as might be
wished for in New York, nor as productive as a commercial variety must
be, and shows the weaknesses characteristic of all of Rogers' hybrids.

[Illustration: AMINIA]

For an account of the origin of the Aminia see page 390 under "Rogers'
Hybrids." In 1867 Bush secured vines of _Rogers' No. 39_ from several
different sources. When these came into bearing he found he had three
different varieties. The original vine of _Rogers' No. 39_ having been
destroyed it was impossible to determine which was the correct one. Bush
selected the best of these and to avoid further confusion, with the
consent of Rogers, named it Aminia. But in spite of Bush's care there
are still at least two different varieties cultivated under this name.
Although the Aminia is found in many varietal vineyards, an examination
of over forty of the leading grape nurserymen's catalogs shows only
three who offer vines for sale.

     Vine vigorous, not always hardy, lacking somewhat in
     productiveness. Canes slightly rough, long, medium in number,
     thickish, dark brown to reddish tinge; nodes enlarged, usually not
     flattened; internodes medium to long; diaphragm somewhat thick;
     pith large; shoots pubescent; tendrils intermittent, long to
     medium, trifid to bifid, persistent.

     Leaf-buds open in mid-season, about medium in size and length,
     above average thickness, prominent, obtuse to conical. Young leaves
     colored on both sides, prevailing color rather bright carmine.
     Leaves large, of average thickness; upper surface medium green,
     rather dull, nearly smooth; lower surface light green, slightly
     pubescent; veins distinct; lobes usually three, terminal lobe
     acute; petiolar sinus rather deep, narrow, often closed and
     overlapping; basal sinus usually lacking; lateral sinus nearly
     shallow, narrow; teeth somewhat shallow, inclined to wide. Flowers
     open in mid-season, sterile; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens early, just after Hartford, keeps well. Clusters
     medium to small, of average length, broad, irregular, somewhat
     conical, sometimes with a long shoulder, rather loose; peduncle
     long, thick; pedicel longish, not slender, broad at point of
     attachment, covered with few warts; brush short, thick,
     brownish-red. Berries range from large to small, decidedly
     variable, roundish, dull black, covered with blue bloom,
     persistent, firm. Skin rather thick, somewhat tender, adheres
     considerably to the pulp, contains a large amount of purplish-red
     pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh greenish, translucent,
     moderately tender, rather solid and coarse, foxy, sweet at skin but
     somewhat acid at center; quality good. Seeds adherent, one to six,
     average three and four, very large, long, fair width, sharply
     pointed, light brown with yellow tinge; raphe obscure; chalaza
     large, above center, irregularly circular to oval, distinct.


ANTOINETTE.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _N. J. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:10. =2.= _Rural N. Y._,
     =48=:801. 1889. _fig._ =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:86. =4.= _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =15=:294. 1896. =5.= _Ib._, =17=:526, 545, 547,
     553. 1898. =6.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:235. 1902.

Antoinette is a white seedling of Concord which, on the Station grounds,
and in the State at large, has not shown sufficient merit to warrant its
recommendation. It is very similar to the several other white seedlings
of Concord, all of which have a decided varietal resemblance and which,
except in color of fruit, have the general characters of Concord.

T. B. Miner, of New Jersey, produced Antoinette from Concord seed over
thirty years ago.

     Vine medium to vigorous, usually hardy, fairly productive. Canes
     medium to short, usually roughened. Leaves of average size and
     thickness with lower surface heavily pubescent. Flowers open in
     mid-season or earlier, fertile; stamens upright. Fruit ripens with
     Concord or slightly earlier, keeps well. Clusters medium to small,
     cylindrical to tapering, usually not shouldered, variable in
     compactness. Berries large to below medium, roundish, dark dull
     green or whitish, often with a tinge of yellow, covered with heavy
     gray bloom, inclined to drop from pedicel, not firm. Skin usually
     covered with small scattering dark dots, thin, variable in
     toughness. Flesh rather tough, sweetish next the skin, tart at
     center, slightly foxy, good to very good in quality. Seeds separate
     from the pulp with difficulty, not numerous, rather large, dark
     brown.


AUGUST GIANT.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1872=:95. =2.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:72. =3.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:252. 1893. =4.= _Col. Sta.
     Bul._, =29=:18. 1894. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:86. =6.= _Del. Sta.
     An. Rpt._, =7=:134, 136. 1895.

The originator of August Giant has managed to secure a hybrid of _Vitis
labrusca_ and _Vitis vinifera_ in which the fruit characters are
decidedly those of the latter species. In appearance of berry and in
taste, when well grown, August Giant greatly resembles Black Hamburg.
The vine is unusually vigorous and, considering its parentage, is quite
hardy. The foliage is thick and luxuriant, though somewhat subject to
mildew. The vigor of vine, beauty of foliage, and the high quality of
the fruit make the variety a desirable one for the amateur, especially
where an ornamental vine is wanted. The variety needs to be grown where
the fruit can have a long and favorable maturing season.

August Giant was originated by N. B. White of Norwood, Massachusetts, in
1861 from seed of an early, large-berried red grape of the Labrusca
type, pollinated by Black Hamburg.

[Illustration: AUGUST GIANT]

     Vine very vigorous, usually hardy, not a heavy bearer, somewhat
     subject to mildew. Canes medium to long, numerous, thick, light to
     dark brown; nodes enlarged, slightly flattened; internodes below
     average length; diaphragm rather thick; pith large to medium;
     shoots slightly pubescent; tendrils continuous, medium to long,
     bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds open in mid-season, of average size, short, rather thick,
     conical to obtuse. Young leaves tinged with carmine on lower side
     extending beyond border of upper side. Leaves medium to very large,
     thick; upper surface dark green, glossy, smooth, slightly rugose on
     older leaves; lower surface pale green to indistinct bronze,
     pubescent; veins rather indistinct; lobes usually three, terminal
     lobe acute; petiolar sinus medium to deep, narrow, frequently
     closed and overlapping; lateral sinus shallow to a mere notch;
     teeth shallow, narrow. Flowers open in mid-season, sterile; stamens
     reflexed.

     Fruit ripens about a week later than Moore Early, keeps well.
     Clusters of average size or sometimes larger, medium to short,
     rather broad, irregularly tapering, not uniform, usually
     single-shouldered, loose to nearly compact; peduncle long to medium
     in length, somewhat thick; pedicel longish, thick, wide at
     attachment to berry, covered with numerous large warts; brush
     short, thick, greenish or with brown tinge. Berries resemble Black
     Hamburg in general appearance but somewhat variable, averaging
     large, oval to roundish, dark purplish-red or black, dull, covered
     with thick blue bloom, hang well to pedicel, firm. Skin of average
     thickness, tough, adheres slightly to pulp, contains a small amount
     of bright red pigment, strongly astringent. Flesh greenish,
     translucent, somewhat tough, stringy, agreeably tart at skin but
     acid at center, good in quality, resembling Black Hamburg. Seeds
     adherent, one to four, averaging three, large, rather broad, long,
     plump, somewhat blunt, light brown; raphe usually obscure; chalaza
     somewhat large, above center, irregularly circular, distinct.


AUTUCHON.

(Riparia, Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= Downing, =1869=:530. =2.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:325, 334, 368.
     1869. _fig._ =3.= _Horticulturist_, =24=:19, 1869. =4.= _Ib._,
     =25=:74. 1870. =5.= _Grape Cult._, =2=:265. 1870. =6.= Barry,
     =1872=:424. =7.= _Horticulturist_, =27=:14. 1872. =8.= _Montreal
     Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:159. =9.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:71. _fig._
     =10.= _Minn. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1884=:249. =11.= _Can. Cen. Exp.
     Farms Rpt._, =1891=:134. =12.= _Traite gen. de vit._, =5=:200.
     1903.

     ARNOLD'S NO. 5 (3). _Arnold's No. 5_ (1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12).

Autuchon was introduced about 1870 with great eclat. It was heralded as
the "best white grape in America--a veritable treasure." Later it was
grown and somewhat widely tested in France. But in neither country has
it come up to expectations. In America it has proved to be somewhat
tender to cold, an unreliable bearer and subject to rot and mildew. In
France it shows the same weaknesses and is not as resistant to
phylloxera as are other and better American sorts. The quality of
Autuchon is excellent, being that of its European parent with the
agreeable sprightliness of its American ancestor. According to the
reports regarding it from France it makes a "wine remarkably white,
vinous and fresh, slightly musky and agreeable, and of a beautiful
yellow color."[159]

Autuchon was originated by Charles Arnold of Paris, Canada, from seed
planted in 1859, The parents are Clinton pollinated by Golden Chasselas.
It is not in the Station collection, and the following description is
taken from the _Bushberg Catalogue_.[160]

     "Leaves dark green, very deep lobed and sharp pointed serratures;
     the unripe wood is very dark purple, nearly black. Bunches very
     long, not heavily shouldered, rather loose; berries medium size,
     round, white (green), with a moderately firm, but readily melting
     flesh, and an agreeable sprightly flavor, resembling the White
     Chasselas. Skin thin, without astringency. Ripens with the
     Delaware."


BACCHUS.

(Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1879= (cited by =2=). =2.= _Gar. Mon._,
     =22=:176. 1880. =3.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1880=:238. =4.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:72. _fig._ =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =9=:326. 1890. =6.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:252. 1893. =7.= _Tenn.
     Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:167. 1896. =8.= _Rural N. Y._, =59=:7. 1900.

Bacchus is a wine grape deemed worthy by its originator to bear the name
of the god of wine. It is an offspring of Clinton which it much
resembles in vine and leaf characters but surpasses in quality of fruit
and in productiveness. In New York Bacchus has very generally superseded
Clinton though neither is extensively grown. It is vigorous, productive,
hardy, free from mildew and adapted to a variety of soils; it requires a
long season for full maturity and cannot therefore be well grown in
northern locations though the seasons in the grape regions of New York
are usually sufficiently long. The wine-makers of the State mention it
as one of the most desirable grapes for a dark red wine. While it is
generally too tart for a dessert grape, yet if left on the vine until
frost, as late as it can hang, it becomes a good late table grape.
Bacchus is one of the best, if not the best, cultivated types of
Riparia, or of the Clinton group of Riparia. Its special points of merit
from a broad standpoint are: Resistance to cold, resistance to
phylloxera, value for wine-making, freedom from fungi and insects,
productiveness, ease of multiplication, and capacity to bear grafts. For
the above qualities it offers exceptional opportunities to the
plant-breeder. Its most prominent limitations are: Poor quality for
table use, inability to withstand dry soils or droughts and
non-adaptability to soils containing much lime.

[Illustration: BACCHUS]

There is no question about the origin of Bacchus. It is a seedling of
Clinton which, as mentioned above, it greatly resembles in every
character. The variety was originated by J. H. Ricketts of Newburgh, New
York, and was first exhibited by him before the American Pomological
Society in 1879. It is well known in eastern United States and, as in
New York, is highly thought of as a wine grape.

     Vine very vigorous, hardy, healthy, productive. Canes average in
     length, numerous, of medium size, rather light to dark brown with
     some bloom at nodes which are somewhat enlarged and flattened;
     internodes intermediate in length; diaphragm below average
     thickness; pith large to medium; shoots nearly glabrous; tendrils
     continuous, of mean length, bifid.

     Leaf-buds open early, of average size, rather short, thick, obtuse
     to conical. Young leaves faintly tinged with carmine on lower side
     only, prevailing color pale green with faint carmine tinge. Leaves
     medium to small, thin; upper surface dark green, glossy, smooth;
     lower surface dull green, not pubescent; veins indistinct; lobes
     three in number, terminal lobe acuminate; petiolar sinus medium to
     shallow, narrow sometimes nearly overlapping; basal sinus lacking;
     lateral sinus shallow, wide; teeth of average depth and width.
     Flowers open early, sterile; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens late and keeps well, hanging a long time on the vine.
     Clusters small to medium, below average length, rather slender,
     uniform, cylindrical, often single-shouldered, compact; peduncle
     almost short, intermediate in size; pedicel short to medium,
     slender, covered with a few small warts; brush short, wine-colored.
     Berries variable in size, below medium to small, roundish, black,
     glossy, covered with a moderate amount of blue bloom, hang well to
     pedicels, firm. Skin thin, of average toughness, adheres only
     slightly to the pulp, contains much wine-colored pigment, slightly
     astringent. Flesh dark green, translucent, fine-grained, somewhat
     tough, vinous, sweet at skin to tart near seeds, with slight
     Riparia spiciness, of medium quality, improving as the season
     advances. Seeds cling to pulp, one to four, average two, often many
     abortive, above medium size, rather short and wide, usually plump,
     sharply pointed, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza above center,
     pear-shaped, distinct. Must registers 95 deg.-110 deg..


BAILEY.

(Lincecumii, Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Rural N. Y._, =50=:221, 222. 1891. _fig._ =2.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:159. =3.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =14=:276. 1895. =4.= _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:526, 548, 553. 1898. =5.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._,
     =48=:1149, 1153. 1898. _fig._ =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1899=:29.
     =7.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:275. 1900. =8.= _Rural N. Y._,
     =60=:614. 1901.

In the Bailey are combined characters of three species, Vinifera,
Labrusca and Lincecumii--characters attained in three widely separated
regions, Europe, Massachusetts, and Texas. Moreover the characters of
Vinifera and Labrusca have been transmitted to Bailey through Triumph,
in which variety they are as well combined as in any other hybrid of the
two species. The Lincecumii parent, Big Berry, is at the head of
Munson's "Big Berry Family" of hybrids; brought in from the wild, it is
one of the best representatives of its species. Bailey, therefore, has
royal blood and if parentage counts in grapes, it should prove valuable.
Unfortunately New York, at least the Station vineyard, is a little too
far north for the fruit to mature well. In cold winters the vine is
liable to winter injury. In seasons when the grapes have matured the
appearance and quality of the fruit have been such as to recommend it.
Its vigor of vine and productiveness give it additional value, and if
not to be recommended for commercial plantings in this State, it can
surely be named as valuable for breeding purposes. The name of the
variety was bestowed upon it by its originator in honor of L. H. Bailey,
known by all grape-growers for his services to viticulture.

Bailey was originated by Munson from seeds of a wild Post-oak grape
called Big Berry, fertilized with pollen of Triumph. The seed was
planted in 1887 and the original vine came into fruiting in 1889-90. The
variety is now very generally disseminated throughout the East, and the
reports of its behavior, in the North at least, generally accord with
that from this Station given above.

     Vine vigorous, injured in severe winters, produces good crops of
     fruit. Canes dark reddish-brown, of good length, of medium size and
     number. Leaves average in size, light green, dull to slightly
     glossy, with very distinct veins on lower surface which is
     cobwebby. Flowers open late, fertile; upright stamens.

     Fruit ripens unevenly almost as late as Catawba, keeps well.
     Clusters rather large and long, not very broad, often blunt at
     ends, cylindrical to irregularly tapering, usually not shouldered
     but sometimes with a small, short shoulder, compact. Berries
     persistent, medium to large, vary in shape from roundish to ovate
     on account of compactness of clusters, change in color from
     purplish-black to black, covered with a heavy blue bloom. Skin
     medium to thin, strongly astringent, tough, adheres somewhat to the
     pulp, contains a large amount of purplish-red pigment. Flesh
     moderately juicy and tender, coarse, vinous, good in quality,
     releases the seeds rather easily. Seeds numerous, medium to above
     in size, moderately broad, above medium to medium length, blunt,
     brownish; raphe buried in a shallow, narrow groove; chalaza large,
     above center, circular to oval, distinct.


BANNER.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Bourquiniana?)

     =1.= _U. S. D. A. Yr. Bk._, =1906=:361. _col. pl._

Banner is one of the newer offerings for pomological honors. The Station
was not able to secure vines until 1906 and these have not yet fruited.
So far as is known it is not grown elsewhere in the State. Since the
variety has been well spoken of by horticulturists who have seen it, and
since it has been deemed worthy a place among the promising new fruits
illustrated and described in the _Year Book of the United States
Department of Agriculture_ for 1906, the variety is discussed here. The
technical description of it is quoted from the above reference.

The variety was originated by Joseph Bachman of Altus, Arkansas, from
seed of Lindley pollinated by Delaware. The seed was planted in 1898.
The originator states that he suspects a Stark-Star vine growing
alongside also furnished pollen as the Lindley blossoms were
unprotected.

     "Cluster large, broad conical, heavily shouldered, very compact;
     stem short; berries globular, of medium size, adhering tenaciously
     to the small green peduncles; skin moderately thick, and rather
     tough; amber red and glossy, but covered with a profuse bloom;
     flesh translucent, juicy, and rather meaty; seeds few, very small,
     brown; flavor refreshing subacid to sweet and aromatic; quality
     good to very good. Season late August and early September in
     Franklin county, Arkansas, ten days or two weeks later than
     Delaware."


BARRY.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1864=:136. =2.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1865=:40. =3.= _Mag. Hort._, =34=:345. 1868. =4.= _Am. Jour.
     Hort._, =5=:11. 1869. _fig._ =5.= _Horticulturist_, =24=:126. 1869.
     =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1869=:42. =7.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:182,
     326. 1869. =8.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:74. _fig._ =9.= _Mich. Bd.
     Agr. Rpt._, =24=:133. 1885. =10.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:252. 1893.
     =11.= _Rural N. Y._, =52=:671. 1893. =12.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol.
     =9=:191. 1896. =13.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:526, 548, 549,
     552, 553. 1898. =14.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1149, 1153. 1898.
     =15.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =18=:370, 395. 1899.

     ROGERS' NO. 43 (1, 2, 3, 4). _Rogers' No. 43_ (5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12).


Barry, first known as _Rogers' No. 43_, was dedicated in 1869, by
Rogers, to Patrick Barry, distinguished nurseryman, pomologist and
viticulturist. Happily the variety is such that it should long honor the
name it bears. The Barry is one of our best black grapes, resembling in
berry and somewhat in flavor and keeping quality its European parent,
Black Hamburg. The flavor is delicate and sweet, the flesh tender, with
thin skin and unobjectionable seeds. The appearance of berry and bunch
is attractive. The fruit keeps splendidly, and as this is written, on
the twenty-ninth of February, leap-year, there are before the writer
bunches of the Barry, kept in common storage without wrapping or other
special care, which are in perfect condition. The vine is vigorous,
hardy, and productive, but susceptible to mildew. The ripening season is
usually said to be that of the Concord but, while it may color with the
Concord it requires a longer time to ripen thoroughly and it is not at
its best, or even good, unless properly matured. For the table, for
winter keeping, and for an amateur grape in general the Barry may be
highly recommended.

For an account of the origin of Barry see page 390 under "Rogers'
Hybrids." It is first mentioned separately from the rest of Rogers'
hybrids in 1864, though not named until 1869. Barry was placed on the
list of the American Pomological Society in 1869 where it is still
retained. It is known and grown in the garden throughout the grape
regions of eastern America.

[Illustration: BARRY]

     Vine vigorous, usually hardy, productive, somewhat susceptible to
     mildew. Canes long to very long, numerous, usually thick, dark
     brown to slightly reddish-brown covered with a small amount of blue
     bloom; nodes not enlarged, very slightly flattened; internodes
     intermediate in length; diaphragm of average thickness; pith medium
     to above in size; shoots nearly glabrous; tendrils intermittent,
     fair length, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds open early, of average size, short, of medium thickness,
     obtuse to conical. Young leaves heavily tinged with carmine on
     lower surface, faintly tinged along margin of upper surface,
     prevailing color bright carmine. Leaves large to medium, of average
     thickness; upper surface light green, slightly glossy, nearly
     smooth; lower surface pale green, somewhat pubescent; veins rather
     indistinct; lobes vary from none to three, terminus acute; petiolar
     sinus deep, narrow, sometimes closed and overlapping; basal sinus
     usually lacking; lateral sinus shallow and narrow; teeth shallow to
     medium, of average width. Flowers open in mid-season, sterile;
     stamens reflexed. Fruit ripens with Concord or later, keeps very
     late. Clusters variable in size, medium to short, very broad,
     slightly tapering to nearly cylindrical, upper part of cluster
     often subdivides into several parts making compound clusters,
     frequently double-shouldered, usually compact; peduncle short,
     medium to rather stout; pedicel above average length, moderately
     thick, covered with few small warts, enlarged at point of
     attachment with fruit. Berries large, oval to spherical, dark
     purplish-black to black, glossy, covered with heavy blue bloom,
     adhere well to pedicel. Skin rather thin, tough, adheres strongly
     to pulp, contains but little pigment, not very astringent. Flesh
     pale green, translucent, tender when ripened under favorable
     conditions, stringy, vinous, pleasant-flavored, sweet next the
     skin, agreeably tart at center, above average quality. Seeds
     slightly adherent, one to five, average three, nearly large to
     medium, usually long, of mean breadth, deeply notched, rather blunt
     but often with slightly enlarged neck, brownish; raphe usually
     obscure, sometimes showing as a faint ridge in a broad groove;
     chalaza nearly small, pear-shaped or circular, above center,
     distinct.


BEACON.

(Lincecumii, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Ga. Sta. An. Rpt._, =13=:312, 321. 1890. =2.= _An. Hort._,
     =1892=:176. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:159. =4.= Husmann,
     =1895=:126. =5.= _Rural N. Y._, =55=:592. 1896. =6.= _Tex. Sta.
     Bul._, =48=:1149, 1153. 1898. _fig._ =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:526, 548. 1898. =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1899=:29. =9.=
     _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:48, 76. 1899. _10._ _Tex. Sta. Bul._,
     =56=:275. 1900. _fig._ =11.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:40, 51, 53.
     1901. _fig._

     BIG B CON (7).

Beacon is another of Munson's hybrids, a cross between Labrusca and
Lincecumii. It was received at this Station in 1892 and has borne fruit
many times since so that there has been abundant opportunity to see
grapes and vine. The variety is not especially well adapted to New York
as the fruit is dull in color, lacking in quality, and shells somewhat
badly. The vine is very vigorous, bearing a handsome, compact mass of
foliage which retains its color and freshness throughout drouths and the
heat of summer. In New York it must compete with Concord in commercial
vineyards and since it does not equal that variety, taking its character
as a whole, it cannot be recommended as a market grape. Its quality and
appearance are such that it will never be largely grown by the amateur
in the North. The variety, however, is of much interest and of possible
value to the grape-breeder.

Munson produced Beacon in 1887 from seed of Big Berry (a variety of
Lincecumii) pollinated by Concord, securing the first fruit in 1889. The
variety has been generally disseminated among grape specialists and
experiment stations and is now well known by grape-growers in general.

     Vine a medium to very strong grower, not always hardy, productive.
     Canes short, medium to rather slender, light brown. Leaves healthy,
     variable in size, rather thick, inclined to dark green, sometimes
     rugose, with veins showing indistinctly through the slight
     pubescence of the lower surface. Flowers open in mid-season, on
     plan of five or six, nearly fertile.

     Fruit ripens with Concord or later and keeps fairly well. Clusters
     are attractive in general appearance, of good size, rather long,
     medium to slightly slender, cylindrical to somewhat tapering,
     usually single-shouldered, compact to medium. Berries medium but
     variable in size, roundish, purplish-black to black, dull in
     appearance, covered with heavy blue bloom, inclined to shell in
     some localities, moderately firm. Skin medium to thin, tough,
     adheres strongly to pulp, contains a large amount of purplish-red
     pigment, astringent. Flesh moderately tender, slightly aromatic,
     spicy, vinous, mildly subacid to agreeably tart, often with a
     noticeable Concord flavor, about as good as Concord in quality.
     Seeds separate easily from the pulp, large to above medium, of
     average length, broad, blunt to medium, slightly notched; raphe
     obscure; chalaza above center, irregularly circular to slightly
     oval.


BEAUTY.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Bourquiniana?)

     =1.= Downing, =1881=:165 app. =2.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1881=:163. =3.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:43. =4.= _Kan. Sta.
     Bul._, =14=:85. 1890. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:89. =6.= _Tex. Sta.
     Bul._, =48=:1149, 1153. 1898.

The grape which bears the name Beauty is an Aestivalis hybrid with
Labrusca, one of Jacob Rommel's seedlings. It had the honor, according
to the _Bushberg Catalogue_,[161] of receiving at the Exposition at
Bordeaux, France, in 1880, the praise of having produced "the best
American white wine on exhibition." According to the above authority
Rommel stopped its propagation and dissemination because of its
susceptibility to fungi. The variety is now practically lost to
cultivation and was never largely grown in New York.

Beauty is a cross between Delaware and Maxatawney originated by Jacob
Rommel of Morrison, Missouri, over thirty years ago. Bush questions the
parentage as given by Rommel and thinks it more likely Catawba and
Maxatawney. Rommel's Beauty should not be confused with the Beauty of
Minnesota, a grape from the State for which it was named, which has been
discarded because of poor quality.

     Vine fairly vigorous, usually healthy and hardy, produces medium to
     good crops. Canes long to medium, numerous, dark reddish-brown
     often with a strong ashy-gray tinge, surface covered with slight
     blue bloom. Leaves medium to rather large, dark green; lower
     surface covered with considerable pubescence. Stamens upright.
     Fruit ripens between Delaware and Catawba, keeps and ships well.
     Clusters intermediate in size, strongly tapering, often not
     shouldered, rather compact. Berries small to medium roundish to
     slightly oval, dull dark red somewhat darker than Catawba, covered
     with a large amount of dark lilac bloom, persistent, firm. Flesh
     tender, slightly foxy, sweet, good to very good in quality. Chalaza
     very distinct.


BELL.

(Riparia, Labrusca, Bourquiniana, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Rural N. Y._, =45=:733. 1886. _fig._ =2.= _Mich. Pom. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1893=:118. =3.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:263. 1893. =4.= _Va.
     Sta. Bul._, =30=:106. 1893. =5.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =28=:290. 1895.
     =6.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:168. 1896. =7.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._,
     =73=:181, 182. 1897. =8.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1149, 1153. 1898.
     =9.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:142. 1898. =10.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1899=:31. =11.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:40, 52, 53. 1901.

     _Munson's No. 21_ (1, 2, 4). WILLIE BELL (4, 9).

Bell is still another of Munson's hybrids, its parents being Elvira
crossed with Delaware. Its characters are chiefly those of Elvira and in
particular it has the Elvira flavor, which is somewhat against it for a
table grape. As to its value for wine-making there are no records though
it may be assumed that it has the same value for this purpose as the
Elvira, which it so greatly resembles in flavor. From its behavior here,
this Station does not recommend Bell for New York.

Munson produced Bell in 1881 from seed of Elvira pollinated by Delaware.
After having tested it thoroughly the originator disseminated it and
continues to offer it in his catalog; proof of its value for some of the
grape regions.

     Vine a strong grower, hardy, usually produces full crops although a
     shy bearer in some localities. Leaves vigorous, healthy, medium to
     very large. Flowers open before mid-season, nearly fertile; stamens
     upright. Fruit ripens in mid-season or later, keeps well. Clusters
     intermediate in size and length, frequently shouldered, compact to
     medium. Berries medium to small, roundish, dull green sometimes
     with yellow tinge, covered with rather heavy gray bloom,
     persistent. Skin thin, very tender, adheres considerably to the
     pulp. Flesh moderately juicy and tender, sweetish at skin to tart
     at center, ranks about the same as Elvira in quality.


BERCKMANS.

(Riparia, Labrusca, Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1871=:114. =2.= _Ib._, =1877=:43. =3.=
     _Gar. Mon._, =23=:308. 1881. =4.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:75. =5.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1889=:24. =6.= _Ala. Sta. Bul._, =10=:8.
     1890. =7.= _Ark. Sta. Bul._, =39=:27. 1896. =8.= _Rural N. Y._,
     =56=:823. 1897. =9.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:526, 545, 547,
     553. 1898. =10.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1149, 1153. 1898. =11.=
     _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:37, 43, 44, 46, 48. 1899. =12.= _Kan. Sta.
     Bul._, =110=:245. 1902.

     DELAWARE AND CLINTON NO. 1 (1).

In Berckmans, generally speaking, we have the fruit of Delaware on the
vine of Clinton. Berckmans was disseminated nearly forty years ago and
though the fruit is seemingly better adapted for the market than
Delaware, and the vine much more vigorous, as hardy and as productive as
its better known parent, yet the variety is seldom grown other than as
an amateur grape. The berry and bunch resemble Delaware in shape; the
fruit is of the same color; bunch and berry are larger, but the vine is
not quite as productive; the flesh is firmer, making it a better shipper
and it keeps better; the quality is not so good, the flesh lacking
tenderness, sweetness and richness in comparison with Delaware. The vine
of Berckmans is much more vigorous and is less subject to mildew than
that of Delaware, but there are many reports that it suffers from
leaf-hoppers and the rose bug, insects which seem inordinately fond of
its foliage. The vine characters are not as good as those of Clinton.
The variety seems illy adapted to some soils and in particular does not
color well if not suited in this respect. In spite of its many good
qualities, popular verdict has decreed that Berckmans is but an
amateur's grape. The name commemorates the viticultural labors of P. J.
Berckmans, a contemporary and friend of Dr. A. P. Wylie of Chester,
South Carolina, who originated the variety and christened it Berckmans.

Berckmans was produced by Dr. A. P. Wylie[162] of Chester, South
Carolina, from Delaware seed fertilized by Clinton. The seed was
planted in 1868 and the plant bore its first fruit in 1870, the variety
being introduced some years later.

[Illustration: BERCKMANS]

     Vine similar to Clinton in growth and foliage, vigorous to very
     vigorous, hardy, produces average to good crops. Canes long,
     numerous, rather slender, light to dark brown; nodes prominent,
     flattened; internodes short; diaphragm below medium thickness; pith
     medium to above in size; shoots not pubescent; tendrils
     intermittent, long, bifid.

     Leaf-buds intermediate in size, short, of average thickness,
     conical to nearly obtuse, open very early. Young leaves decidedly
     pale green with faintest trace of carmine, prevailing color green
     on both sides. Leaves medium to small, thin; upper surface light
     green, smooth; lower surface pale green, not pubescent; veins
     inconspicuous; lobes vary from none to three, terminal lobe acute;
     petiolar sinus medium to shallow, wide; basal sinus usually
     lacking; lateral sinus shallow; teeth intermediate in depth and
     width. Flowers open rather early, fertile; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens with Delaware and keeps unusually well. Clusters
     attractive, much like Delaware in shape and size but slightly
     longer and more often shouldered, compact to medium, averaging
     slightly looser than either parent; peduncle rather short, slender;
     pedicel longish, slender, covered with but few warts; brush short,
     light green. Berries intermediate in size, slightly larger than
     Delaware, roundish to slightly oval, resemble Delaware in color but
     somewhat darker when well ripened, covered with lilac bloom,
     persistent, of average firmness. Skin thin, somewhat tough,
     slightly adhering to pulp, contains no pigment, nearly astringent.
     Flesh pale yellowish-green, translucent, fine-grained, tender,
     inclined to melting, vinous, sweet to agreeably tart, sprightly,
     very good in quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp, one to
     four, average three, slightly below medium in size, rather broad
     and blunt, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza of average size,
     slightly above center, irregularly oval, distinct.


BERTRAND.

(Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:17. =2.= _Rural N. Y._, =45=:653,
     660. 1886. _fig._ =3.= _Gar. Mon._, =28=:305. 1886. _fig._ =4.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:90. _fig._ =5.= _Texas Farm and Ranch_, Feb.
     8, =1896=:11. =6.= _Ala. Sta. Bul._, =110=:78. 1900.

     BLUE SEEDLING (1, 3). _Blue Seedling_ (4, 5).

Bertrand is a southern variety, almost without question an offspring of
Herbemont, and so far as can be judged from the descriptions of others,
we not having seen the fruit, not nearly equal to its parent. The
variety is hardy only as far north as Maryland and even in that State
must be planted in sheltered situations.

Judge J. B. Jones, Herndon, Burke County, Georgia, found Bertrand as an
accidental seedling, which had germinated in the spring of 1878. Judge
Jones gives the species as being Cordifolia but Berckmans says it looks
like an Aestivalis; it is now generally classed in the Bourquiniana
group. The following description of this variety is compiled from
various sources:

     Vine vigorous. Cluster above medium to rather large, usually
     conical, most often shouldered, moderately compact; peduncle long.
     Berries below medium in size, round, black with blue bloom; flesh
     melting, juicy, very high flavored. Skin thin, tough. Ripens late.
     Seeds few. Very productive in the South. Of value only for wine.


BLACK DEFIANCE.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1868=:10. (No name given.) =2.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:75. =3.= _Okla. Sta. Bul._, =14=:6. 1895. =4.=
     Husmann, =1895=:31. =5.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:37, 43, 76. 1899.
     =6.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:41. 1901.

     _Underhill's 8-8 Hybrid_ (2).

Black Defiance is one of Stephen Underhill's Vinifera-Labrusca hybrids,
at one time quite popular as a late table grape, but now superseded by
thriftier varieties. It ripens too late to be of much value in New York.
When phylloxera had driven French grape-growers to look to America for
varieties of grapes, and before grafting on resistant stocks was
practiced in that country, Black Defiance was looked upon with much
favor in France where it succeeded very well. The fruit is distinguished
by the size, lustrous blackness and handsome bloom of the berry. It is
now rarely cultivated in New York having been replaced by varieties more
certain to mature in this State.

Stephen Underhill of Croton-on-Hudson, New York, produced Black Defiance
from seed of Concord fertilized by Black Prince. It first fruited in
1866. The variety was introduced without the originator's consent.

Black Defiance is described as follows:[163]

[Illustration: BLACK EAGLE]

     "Growth medium, shoots smooth; leaves large, more or less
     three-lobed, with uneven margin; bunches large, oblong with large
     base, frequently branched; berries black, decidedly acid, pulp
     rather firm, ripe July 22nd; defoliated on October 6, 1896. Not
     good for table use."


BLACK EAGLE.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1868=:10. (No name given.) =2.=
     _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1875-6=:22. =3.= _Ib._, =1876-7=:32. =4.=
     Bush. Cat., =1883=:75. _fig._ =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =12=:618.
     1893. =6.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:168. 1896. =7.= _N. Y. Sta.
     An. Rpt._, =17=:527, 548, 553, 559. 1898. =8.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._,
     =48=:1149, 1153. 1898. =9.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:37, 42, 44, 46,
     48, 76. 1899. =10.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =18=:370, 386, 396.
     1899. =11.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:240. 1902.

     _Underhill's 8-12_ (4).

Black Eagle is a full brother of Black Defiance which it much resembles
but surpasses for New York because it is fully three weeks earlier in
ripening. On our grounds its season is about with Concord. The quality
of Black Eagle is of the best, but the vine lacks in vigor, hardiness
and productiveness and the fruit is susceptible to black-rot. As the
color-plate shows, bunch and berry are large and attractive; bunches
weighing nearly two pounds have been grown for exhibition purposes and
probably there are few if any showier hybrid grapes than this when at
its best. The leaf is that of _Vitis vinifera_, deeply lobed, of a
beautiful green, and with firm texture, making with thrifty vines one of
the most attractive grape plants to be found in our vineyards. The
variety is self-sterile. Black Eagle has wholly failed as a commercial
variety and its several weaknesses will prevent amateurs from growing it
largely, yet it is far too good a grape to give up altogether and lovers
of grapes should keep it in cultivation.

The variety originated with Stephen W. Underhill, Croton-on-Hudson, New
York, from seed of Concord pollinated by Black Prince. It first fruited
in 1866. The variety was sent out by Underhill for testing and was
introduced without the originator's consent.

     Vine medium to vigorous, not always hardy, not productive. Canes
     rather rough, medium to long, of average number, thick, approaching
     dark reddish-brown, covered with slight blue bloom; nodes strongly
     enlarged, slightly flattened; internodes above medium length;
     diaphragm thick; pith of average size; shoots pubescent; tendrils
     continuous, long, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds intermediate in size, short, rather thick, pointed to
     conical, open very late. Young leaves tinged with carmine on the
     under surface and along margin of upper surface making the
     prevailing color a light rose-carmine. Leaves of average size,
     medium to thick; upper surface dark green, slightly glossy, smooth
     to rugose; lower surface pale grayish-green, somewhat pubescent;
     veins not distinct; lobes five in number, terminal lobe acute;
     petiolar sinus deep to narrow, often closed and overlapping; basal
     sinus very wide and deep; lateral sinus wide at bottom narrowing
     towards top, deep; teeth intermediate in depth and width. Flowers
     open in mid-season or later, fully self-sterile; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens in mid-season, keeps well if picked before overripe.
     Clusters of large to average size, rather long, tapering, varying
     from single-to double-shouldered, loose to compact; peduncle
     longish, rather thick; pedicel long to medium, somewhat slender,
     covered with very few warts, enlarged at point of attachment to
     fruit; brush short, pale green. Berries variable in size averaging
     large, slightly oval, black, glossy, covered with a moderate amount
     of blue bloom, do not shatter, somewhat soft. Skin thin, rather
     tender, adheres strongly to pulp, with slight amount of
     wine-colored pigment, not astringent. Flesh pale green,
     translucent, somewhat tender, vinous, not foxy, sweet at skin to
     agreeably tart at center, quality good. Seeds separate easily, one
     to four, average two or three, rather large and broad, nearly long.


BLACK HAMBURG.

(Vinifera.)

     =1.= Speechly, =1791=:11,179. =2.= _London Hort. Soc. Cat._,
     =1830=:75. =3.= Hoare, =1840=:142. =4.= _Mag. Hort._, =9=:245.
     1843. =5.= _Ib._, =13=:43. 1847. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1852=:54. (For culture under glass.) =7.= _Horticulturist_,
     =15=:125. 1860. =8.= _Mag. Hort._, =26=:110. 1860. =9.= _Can.
     Hort._, =11=:59. 1888.

     _Admiral_ (4). _Black Gibralter_ (4). _Black Hamburgh_ (2). _Black
     Portugal_ of some (4). _Black Teneriffe_ (4). _Blue Trollinger_
     (4). _Bocksaugen_ (4). _Bommerer_ (4). _Brown Hamburgh_ (4). _Dutch
     Hamburgh_ (4). _Fleish Traube_ (4). _Frakenthaler_ (4).
     _Frankendale_ (4). _Frankenthaler gros noir_ (4). _Gelbholziger
     Trollinger_ (4). _Gibralter_ (4). _Hampton Court Vine_ (4, 8).
     _Hudler_ (4). _Languedoc_ (4). _Lugiana nera_ (4). _Malvasier_ of
     some (4). _Mohrendutte_ (4). _Pale Wooded Trollinger_ (4). _Purple
     Hamburgh_ (4). _Red Hamburgh_ (4, of some 2). _Richmond Villa
     Hamburgh_ (8). _Salisbury Violet_ (4). _Schwarzeblauer Trollinger_
     (4). _Schwarzer Gutedel_ of some (4). _Schwarzwelscher_ (4).
     _Troller_ (4). _Trollinger_ (4). _Valentines_ (4). _Victoria_ (4).
     _Warner's_ (2, 4). WARNER'S BLACK HAMBURGH (2). _Warner's Black
     Hamburgh_ (4). _Warner's Hamburgh_ (8). _Weissholziger Trollinger_
     (4). _Welscher_ (4).

[Illustration: BLACK HAMBURG (Reduced Size)]

Black Hamburg is a variety of _Vitis vinifera_, impossible to grow out
of doors in eastern America, but illustrated and described here because
it is one of the parents of many hybrids with American species and
because it represents, in fruit characters at least, about all that is
desirable in a good grape. Since it is a standard of excellence which
American breeders of table grapes have long sought to attain, we may
name its points of superiority over the table grapes now grown in our
vineyards. 1st. Bunch and berry are large, well formed, and uniform.
2nd. The fruits have a higher sugar and solid content than most American
grapes and keep better, ship better, make better wine and will make
raisins. 3d. The flavor, to most palates, is richer, more delicate, and
lacks the acidity of some American grapes and the foxiness of others.
4th. The pulp and skin of Black Hamburg are more tender than the
varieties of the species of this country and the seeds are readily
separated from the pulp. 5th. The berries do not shell from the stem
readily. 6th. The vines are more compact in habit, make a shorter and
stouter annual growth, and hence require less pruning and training. 7th.
The fruit is borne in greater quantity, vine for vine or acre for acre.
Added to the above qualities which make it desirable as a parent when
crosses are made between the grapes of this country and _Vitis
vinifera_, are comparative hardiness among its kind, a short seasonal
cycle of vegetation giving early maturity to fruit, ability to stand
more hardships than most of its species, and especially ability to
mature its fruit with as small amount of solar heat as any of its
species. Its weaknesses when planted out of doors in eastern America are
those of its species, which wholly prevent its successful cultivation in
the vineyards of this region and make it of interest and value only in
breeding and as an ideal toward which to breed.

The origin of Black Hamburg is apparently unknown. It was sent from
Hamburg, Germany, to England sometime in the early part of the
eighteenth century and it was in the latter country that it was given
the several variations of the name Hamburg. In the north of Europe it is
known as Frankendale or Frankenthal. Black Hamburg is grown in Europe
chiefly as a forcing grape. It is doubtful if all the synonyms refer to
one seed variety, but if not the same, they are so similar as to be
difficult if not impossible to distinguish from each other.

     Vine vigorous, tender, productive. Canes long, numerous, rather
     thick to medium, light brown but darker at nodes, covered with
     faint pubescence; nodes enlarged, slightly flattened; internodes
     short to medium; diaphragm thick; pith large; shoots slightly
     pubescent; tendrils intermittent, frequently several nodes with no
     tendrils, long, bifid to trifid, dehisce early.

     Leaf-buds large to medium, rather long, somewhat thick, conical to
     obtuse. Leaves good size, thin; upper surface light green, rather
     dull, of average smoothness; lower surface slightly lighter than
     upper surface, with small amount of pubescence, hairy; veins
     moderately distinct; lobes vary from none to five, terminal lobe
     nearly acute; petiolar sinus often strongly urn-shaped, of average
     depth, nearly narrow, sometimes closed and overlapping; basal sinus
     shallow to narrow; lateral sinus rather deep to narrow, often
     notched; teeth very irregular in depth and width.

     Fruit ripens early in October, keeps well. Clusters large, long to
     medium, rather broad, cylindrical to tapering, inclined to
     irregular, usually single-shouldered, nearly compact; peduncle
     medium to short, somewhat thick; pedicel long, slender, covered
     with small, numerous, prominent warts; brush short, thick, tinged
     with red. Berries rather large, oval to nearly roundish, dark
     purple to nearly black, slightly glossy, covered with faint blue or
     lilac bloom, do not drop from pedicel, moderate in firmness. Skin
     thin, tender, adheres to the pulp, contains no pigment, not
     astringent. Flesh pale green, tender, fine-grained, vinous,
     sprightly, rather sweet and refreshing, very good to best. Seeds
     separate easily, one to four averaging two or three, above medium
     size, long, rather narrow, sharply pointed, brownish; raphe
     obscure; chalaza intermediate in size, decidedly above center,
     distinct, circular to oval.


BLACK HAWK.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1865=:197. =2.= Fuller, =1867=:236. =3.=
     _Gar. Mon._, =9=:147, 214. 1867. =4.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1868=:175. =5.= Downing, =1869=:531. =6.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:14,
     15. 1869. =7.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1878=:482. =8.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1883=:75. =9.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:37, 42, 44, 46. 1899.

     _Miller's No. 4_ (1, 6).

Black Hawk is a seedling of Concord which it greatly resembles but all
in all does not nearly equal. It is chiefly remarkable because of its
very dark green foliage which at a little distance seems almost black.
It is rarely or almost never cultivated in New York.

Samuel Miller of Calmdale, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania, in the fifties
produced Black Hawk from Concord seed sent to him by E. W. Bull. The
stock was bought and the variety introduced by a Mr. Knox of Pittsburg.

The following description was compiled from various sources:

     Vine hardy, resembles Concord except for foliage being much darker.
     Bunch medium to sometimes large; berry medium to above, nearly
     round, black, of tender flesh but hardly good in quality; sometimes
     shatters. Ripens with Concord or slightly before. Self-sterile.
     Rather late in blooming.


BLACK IMPERIAL.

(Labrusca, Bourquiniana, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1891=:127. =2.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:93. =3.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:41. 1901.

Black Imperial is one of Dr. J. Stayman's grapes. It has high quality
and is handsome in appearance but is so susceptible to fungi as to be
almost worthless and has now passed from cultivation.

Dr. J. Stayman of Leavenworth, Kansas, produced Black Imperial from seed
of Dutchess some time in the eighties. The variety was first called
Black's Imperial. There was another variety preceding this which is
mentioned by Prince[164] and Fuller[165] in the sixties by the name of
Black Imperial.

The following description is taken largely from that of the originator:

     Vine usually moderately vigorous and productive. Cluster large,
     shouldered, compact. Berries of medium size, black, tender, juicy;
     flavor sweet, vinous; quality good to very good. Flowers
     self-fertile. Quite subject to mildew and black-rot.


BLACK PEARL.

(Riparia, Labrusca?)

     =1.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1875=:459. =2.= _Ohio Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1876-7=:90. =3.= _Ib._, =1882-3=:49. =4.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:75. =5.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1884=:215. =6.= _Mo. Sta.
     Bul._, =46=:37, 43, 45, 46. 1899.

     SCHRAIDT'S SEEDLING (1, 2). _Schraidt's Seedling_ (3, 4).

Viticulturists agree that Black Pearl is but an improved Clinton,
notwithstanding the originator's statement that it came from seed of
Delaware. Unfortunately the vine is not in the Station vineyard and our
estimate of its vine characters is taken from the descriptions of
others. According to the _Bushberg Catalogue_,[166] "The vine is a
vigorous healthy grower similar in appearance of growth and foliage to
Elvira and Noah." The bunches and berries, as they have been sent to
this Station, are larger than Clinton and of better quality though of
small value as a table fruit. It seems well agreed among wine-makers
that Black Pearl makes an exceptionally good red wine equalling or
surpassing any other of our northern varieties for this purpose. Without
doubt, from the many testimonials as to its value for wine-making, it
can be highly recommended for this purpose and as a good starting point
from which to breed wine grapes. So far, though grown for more than
thirty years, its culture is confined to the islands in Lake Erie
devoted to grape-growing and the variety can hardly be said to be known
in New York. It is probably too late for most parts of New York as it
ripens with Catawba.

Black Pearl was originated by Casper Schraidt of Put-in-bay, Ohio, over
thirty years ago. The originator states that it is a seedling of
Delaware but this has generally been discredited, as the vine is
evidently of the Riparia type. Bush says it is probably a seedling of
Clinton or Taylor.

     Vine a strong grower, does not winter-kill, usually a good yielder,
     susceptible to attacks of mildew. Canes are long, numerous, and of
     average thickness. Leaves are intermediate in size. Flowers open in
     mid-season or before, sterile or nearly so; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens with Catawba, keeps fairly well. Clusters small to
     medium, larger than Clinton, medium to rather slender, tapering to
     cylindrical, often single-shouldered, intermediate to compact.
     Berries below medium to very small, roundish, oblate or frequently
     compressed on account of compactness of cluster, black, glossy,
     covered with a moderate amount of blue bloom, persistent, firm.
     Skin thin, tender, adheres strongly to the pulp, contains an
     unusually large amount of purplish-red pigment, astringent. Flesh
     moderately juicy, usually with a decided red tinge, nearly tender,
     slightly spicy, tart, medium to below in flavor and quality. Seeds,
     which adhere but little to the pulp, are medium to below in size,
     short to medium, broad, slightly notched, blunt, dark brown; raphe
     obscure; chalaza central, oval to circular, distinct.


BRANT.

(Riparia, Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= Downing, =1869=:532. =2.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =6=:91. 1869.
     _fig._ =3.= _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1872=:553. =4.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:77. _fig._ =5.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =44=:119. 1893. =6.= _Tex.
     Sta. Bul._, =48=:1149, 1154. 1898.

     _Arnold's No. 8._ (1, 2, 4).

Brant and Canada are full brothers and so near alike that the two are
often confounded with each other. Neither has ever become popular in
North America because of their susceptibility to fungi. As Riparia and
Vinifera hybrids, the best of Arnold's seedlings from crosses of these
two species, they are of interest and of possible value in
grape-breeding. Since Brant and Canada are so nearly alike a discussion
of one will suffice for both and this is reserved for Canada, the better
known and more valuable of the two varieties.

Charles Arnold of Paris, Canada, produced this variety sometime in the
sixties. It is a seedling of Clinton pollinated by Black St. Peters. The
following description of it is taken from Downing's _Fruits and
Fruit-Trees of America_:[167]

     "Vine strong, healthy grower. Foliage of a dark reddish green,
     deeply lobed. Smooth on both sides. Bunch and berry medium, black.
     Flesh free from pulp, very juicy, sweet, and, when perfectly ripe,
     rich and aromatic. Ripens early."


BRIGHTON.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1872=:548. =2.= _Gar. Mon._,
     =16=:344. 1874. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1881=:24. =4.= Downing,
     =1881=:165 app. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:78. _fig._ =6.= _Rural N.
     Y._, =45=:622. 1886. =7.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:258. 1893. =8.=
     _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:527, 540, 543, 545, 546, 548, 549, 552,
     553, 559. 1898. =9.= _Ib._, =18=:367, 371, 386, 396. 1899. =10.=
     _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:37, 42, 44, 45, 48, 54. 1899. =11.= _Mich.
     Sta. Bul._, =169=:164. 1899. =12.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1899=:91. =13.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1900=:364. =14.= _Can.
     Hort._, =27=:345, 392. 1904.

     _Trask_ (12).

Brighton is one of the few Labrusca-Vinifera hybrids which have attained
prominence in commercial vineyards. It has the distinction, too, of
being one of the first, if not the first, secondary or attenuated hybrid
of Labrusca with Vinifera, _i. e._, the offspring of a hybrid crossed
with one of the original parents or with a variety of the same species.
The parents of Brighton were Diana Hamburg, a hybrid of Vinifera crossed
with Labrusca, and Concord, a pure-bred Labrusca. As we have seen, the
first or primary hybrids of Vinifera with Labrusca have given grapes of
high quality, but lacking in vigor, in resistance to fungi and
phylloxera, and for most part infertile in bloom. The secondary hybrids
have not shown the weaknesses of the primary hybrids in nearly so marked
a degree but have given, in many instances, as in Brighton, Diamond and
probably Delaware, varieties of nearly as high quality. It is now
generally recognized by viticulturists that the secondary hybrids with
Vinifera promise much more than do the primary ones and it is no mean
distinction that Brighton has of being the first secondary hybrid
brought about by the hand of man.

Brighton ranks as one of the leading amateur grapes in New York and is
among the ten or twelve chief commercial sorts of the State. Its good
points are: High quality, handsome appearance, certainty of ripening,
being earlier than Concord, vigorous growth, productiveness,
adaptability to various soils, and, for a hybrid, ability to withstand
fungi. It is thus seen that the infusion of foreign blood has given the
fruit of Brighton some of the excellencies of _Vitis vinifera_ while the
preponderance of _Vitis labrusca_ blood has preserved the vigor and
hardiness of the native species. Brighton has two serious defects which
no doubt have kept it from taking higher rank as a commercial variety:
It deteriorates in quality very quickly after maturity so that it cannot
be kept for more than a few days at its best, hence cannot be well
shipped to distant markets; and it is self-sterile to a more marked
degree than any other of our commonly grown grapes. To have it at its
best the fruit should be thinned.

This grape is a signal example of a variety resulting from careful and
skilful work in grape-breeding. Its originator, Jacob Moore,[168]
possessed of a high degree of intelligence and an unusually keen sense
of the latent possibilities in plants, with unwearied perseverance spent
years in the attempt to produce grapes combining the good characters of
the Old and the New World grapes. As a result of his zeal and patience
we have Brighton and Diamond, the most valuable grapes of their class.
Jacob Moore's demonstration of the value of the secondary hybrid, and
these two grapes, must serve to commemorate a life spent in self denial,
imposed poverty and comparative obscurity that horticulture might be
enriched.

Brighton is a seedling of Diana Hamburg pollinated by Concord, raised by
the late Jacob Moore at Brighton, New York. The original vine fruited
for the first time in 1870 and fruit was first exhibited at the meeting
of the New York Horticultural Society in 1872.

[Illustration: BRIGHTON]

     Vine vigorous and hardy, producing average to good crops, often
     subject to mildew. Canes long, numerous, thick, rather light brown;
     nodes slightly enlarged, usually flattened; internodes long to
     medium; diaphragm thick; pith nearly large; shoots glabrous,
     slightly pubescent; tendrils continuous, long, bifid.

     Leaf-buds of average size, short, stout, conical to pointed,
     sometimes slightly compressed, open moderately early. Young leaves
     lightly tinged with rose-carmine on lower surface, strongly tinged
     along margin of upper surface. Leaves medium to large, thick; upper
     surface dark green, dull, moderately smooth; lower surface pale
     green, slightly pubescent; veins not distinct; lobes three when
     present, terminal lobe acute to acuminate; petiolar sinus nearly
     intermediate in depth and width; lateral sinus shallow to medium in
     depth and width; teeth of average depth, narrow. Flowers open
     somewhat late, sometimes on plan of six, sterile; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens somewhat unevenly about mid-season, keeps fairly well
     for a short time but deteriorates rapidly after ripening. Clusters
     very large to medium, usually long, broadish, tapering, often
     heavily shouldered, loose to compact; peduncle quite long; pedicel
     of average length, somewhat thick, covered with few indistinct
     warts, broad at point of attachment to berry; brush pale green with
     brown tinge, thick, short. Berries irregular, medium to rather
     large in size, roundish to slightly oval, light and dark red,
     somewhat glossy, covered with dark lilac bloom, handsome,
     persistent, not firm. Skin thickish, very tender, adheres
     considerably to the pulp, contains no pigment, astringent. Flesh
     greenish, rather transparent, tender, slightly stringy, melting,
     aromatic, vinous, sweet or agreeably tart to center of berry, very
     good in quality. Seeds separate easily, number one to five, average
     three or four, above mean size, rather broad and sharply pointed,
     light brown with yellow tinge; raphe shows as a narrow obscure
     groove; chalaza large, above center, irregularly circular,
     distinct.


BRILLIANT.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _An. Hort._, =1889=:101. =2.= _Rural N. Y._, =49=:602. 1890.
     _fig._ =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1891=:151, 159. =4.= _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Cat._, =1891=:32. =5.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =28=:162. 1891. =6.=
     _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:259. 1893. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =12=:618. 1893. =8.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:96. _fig._ =9.= Husmann,
     =1895=:124. =10.= _Can. Hort._, =18=:3, 4, 58. 1895. _fig._ =11.=
     _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =28=:290. 1895. =12.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol.
     =9=:170, 171, _fig._, 195. 1896. =13.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =73=:183.
     1897. =14.= _Rural N. Y._, =58=:22. 1899. =15.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._,
     =46=:43, 48. 1899. =16.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =18=:396. 1899.
     =17.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:275. 1900.

In Brilliant, one of Munson's grapes, from Lindley crossed with
Delaware, we have a fine red grape in which the characters of the two
parents are so nearly equally combined that it cannot be said which it
most resembles. In cluster and size of berry, Brilliant resembles
Lindley; in color and quality of fruit it is about the same as
Delaware, differing from it chiefly in having more astringency in the
skin and therefore not quite equal to Delaware as a table grape. The
vine is strong and hardy; season about with Delaware. Brilliant does not
crack or shell and therefore ships well, and has very good keeping
qualities, especially on the vine, where it will often hang for weeks.
The defects which have kept it from becoming one of the standard
commercial sorts in New York are: Marked susceptibility to fungi but not
more susceptible than Delaware; variable in size of cluster; uneven in
ripening; and lack of productiveness. Brilliant is well known by amateur
grape-growers in New York and is grown somewhat for the market. All in
all it is probably the best known and most widely grown of Munson's
varieties in this State. In favorable situations, this variety may
always be expected to please the amateur, and the commercial grower will
often find it a profitable sort.

The seed which produced Brilliant was planted by Munson in 1883 and the
variety was introduced by him in 1887. It has been widely tested by
experimenters and grape-growers and is highly spoken of, whether in the
East, West, North or South.

     Vine variable in growth averaging vigorous, usually hardy, not
     always productive. Canes long, numerous, thick, darkish-brown;
     nodes enlarged, usually flattened; internodes long to medium;
     diaphragm thick; pith large, shoots pubescent; tendrils
     intermittent, long, bifid.

     Leaf-buds somewhat large, short, thick, obtuse to conical, open
     late. Young leaves heavily tinged on both sides with mahogany-red
     changing to light carmine. Leaves medium to large, thick; upper
     surface dark green, dull, rugose; lower surface grayish-green,
     downy; veins well defined; entire or obscurely three-lobed with
     terminal lobe blunt to acute; petiolar sinus deep, narrow,
     V-shaped; basal and lateral sinuses obscure and shallow when
     present; teeth intermediate in depth and width. Flowers open medium
     late, fertile; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens unevenly, in season about with Delaware, keeps a long
     time. Clusters average larger than Delaware, intermediate in length
     and breadth, often blunt, cylindrical to somewhat conical, usually
     slightly shouldered, medium to compact; peduncle rather thick;
     pedicel medium to short, thick, covered with few small warts, wide
     at point of attachment to berry; brush short, thick, pale green
     with reddish-brown tinge. Berries average larger than Delaware,
     roundish to very slightly oval, attractive dark red, not so
     brilliant as Delaware but more so than Brighton, rather glossy,
     covered with abundant lilac bloom, adhere strongly to pedicel,
     firm. Skin rather thin and tough, adheres considerably to pulp,
     contains no pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh pale green, rather
     transparent, juicy, slightly stringy, inclined to tenderness when
     fully ripe, fine-grained, vinous, sweetish at skin but tart next
     the seeds, good but not equal to Delaware. Seeds cling somewhat to
     pulp, one to four in number, average three, rather large and broad,
     slightly elongated, plump, light brown; raphe obscure; chalaza
     large, slightly above center, irregularly circular to slightly
     oval, distinct.

[Illustration: BRILLIANT]


BROWN.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =12=:619. 1893. =2.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:96. =3.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =14=:277. 1895. =4.= _Ib._,
     =17=:527, 548, 554. 1898. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1899=:90.
     =6.= _Rural N. Y._, =59=:722. 1900. =7.= _Ib._, =65=:914. 1906.
     =8.= _Ib._, =65=:937. 1906. =9.= _Ib._, =66=:24. 1907.

     BROWN'S EARLY (7, 9). BROWN SEEDLING (5, 6, 8).

Wm. B. Brown of Newburgh gives the history of the grape bearing his name
as follows:[169] "Brown's seedling came up in my yard at Newburgh, New
York, about fifteen years ago [this statement was made in 1899] near an
Isabella vine. There was not and never had been any other vine in the
yard at that time." The statement is further made that Charles Downing
examined the vine several times and said "there was no doubt but that it
was a seedling of the Isabella." Brown was exhibited at the New York
State Fair in 1892 and was given a first prize. It was again exhibited
at the World's Columbian Exposition in 1893 and was awarded a diploma
and honorable mention. The originator states that the variety "has been
exhibited in at least twenty-five fairs and has always received first
prize." Since 1892 Brown has been several times described with favorable
mention in the horticultural press. This variety was distributed in 1907
to the subscribers of the _Rural New Yorker_ as Brown's Early. In spite
of the encomiums of fairs and newspapers during the past fifteen or
twenty years, Brown has not received favorable recognition from the
grape-growers of New York. As the variety grows on the Station grounds
the quality is only good, not high, and the berries shatter badly.

     Vine vigorous to medium, hardy, very productive. Canes medium to
     short, intermediate in number, medium to slender, moderately dark
     brown. Leaves of average size and thickness, healthy, rather light
     green, slightly glossy; veins well defined, distinctly showing
     through the thick bronze pubescence of the lower surface. Flowers
     open medium early, nearly fertile; stamens upright. Tendrils
     continuous; diaphragm below medium to thin.

     Fruit ripens about with Hartford or a little earlier, appears to
     keep fairly well, inclined to shatter. Clusters variable in size,
     averaging medium to small, of mean length, slender to medium,
     cylindrical to slightly tapering, usually single-shouldered, loose
     to medium in compactness. Berries intermediate in size, roundish to
     slightly oval, black, covered with rather thick blue bloom,
     inclined to shatter from cluster soon after ripening, of average
     firmness. Skin intermediate in thickness and toughness, adheres
     slightly to the pulp, contains a small amount of wine-colored
     pigment, astringent. Flesh juicy, rather tough, fine-grained, foxy,
     mild next the skin to slightly tart at center, good in quality but
     not equal to the best varieties. Seeds intermediate in size, medium
     to short, rather blunt, light brown; raphe buried in a shallow
     groove; chalaza small, central to slightly above center, circular,
     moderately distinct.


CAMPBELL EARLY.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1892-3=:48. =2.= _Rural N. Y._,
     =52=:829. 1893. _fig._ =3.= _Ib._, =53=:666. 1894. =4.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1894=:98. _fig._ (Frontispiece). =5.= _Rural N. Y._,
     =55=:419, 658. 1896. _fig._ =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1897=:11,
     48. =7.= _Rural N. Y._, =57=:182, 642. 1898. =8.= _Ib._, =58=:546,
     786. 1899. =9.= _Mich. Sta. Sp. Bul._, =27=:9. 1904.

     CAMPBELL (9).

Probably no American grape has ever been more favorably received than
Campbell Early, or after introduction has been disseminated more
rapidly. The fact that it came from a grape-breeder who had already
given viticulture several valuable varieties, with the statement that
this was the result of years of experimenting and the greatest triumph
of a life devoted to improving grapes, gave warrant for the enthusiasm
with which it was received. Nor did first impressions belie the oft-made
statement that Campbell Early represented a phenomenal advancement in
grape culture. Bunch, berry and vine seemed to indicate that this was
the best black American grape under cultivation. Nearly two decades have
passed since Campbell Early was introduced, and though admitted by all
to be a good grape, yet it has hardly met the expectations of the
grape-growers who from almost every state and territory welcomed the
newcomer.

[Illustration: CAMPBELL EARLY]

The preeminently meritorious qualities of Campbell Early are: High
quality when mature; freedom from foxiness and from acidity about the
seeds; small seeds which easily part from the flesh; earliness of
maturity, ripening nearly a fortnight before Concord; large size and
attractive appearance of bunch and berry (the color-plate does not do
the Campbell Early justice as to size of berry and bunch); comparative
hardiness of the vine; and good shipping and keeping qualities. Campbell
Early falls short chiefly in not being adapted to as many soils and
conditions as are some of the varieties with which it must compete and
in all but localities well adapted to it the variety lacks
productiveness. In other words it is somewhat lacking in that elasticity
of constitution so characteristic of Concord. Its reputation for quality
has suffered, and to the detriment of the variety, because it attains
its full color before it is ripe and is therefore often marketed in an
unripe condition. The fruit is quite variable in size as grown under
different conditions and somewhat so as grown in the same vineyard,
ranging in size of bunch from very large to small, differing somewhat in
shape and with some compact and with some loose clusters. The color of
the berry is not as attractive as that of Concord as it has less of the
waxy bloom which makes the last named sort so handsome.

But the weaknesses attributed to Campbell Early do not wholly explain
why so good a variety has seemingly failed to meet expectations. Can it
be that the fault is with the American grape-grower more than with the
grape? American growers are not yet willing to give varieties of grapes
the particular care that each may need for its best development, but
seemingly prefer to grow those sorts which are cosmopolitan as to
environment and which will thrive under a general treatment. It cannot
be that the consumers of this fruit care for less than a dozen of the
several hundred American grapes; or that under the varied conditions of
half a continent over which grow a score of species of wild grapes but a
meager half dozen varieties can be grown for commercial purposes. If our
grape-growers were willing to give the Campbell Early, and a score of
other sorts of superior merit, the special care that European
vineyardists give the hundreds of varieties they successfully grow, our
viticulture would not long remain confined to the culture of a few
grapes of mediocre quality.

The name commemorates the services to viticulture of the originator of
the variety, Geo. W. Campbell[170] of Delaware, Ohio, who devoted a long
and active life to the improvement of the grape. The variety is a
seedling of Moore Early pollinated by another production of Campbell's,
which was a seedling of Belvidere pollinated by Muscat Hamburg. Campbell
Early bore for the first time in 1892, and was soon after introduced by
George S. Josselyn of Fredonia, New York. It is now known and grown
throughout the grape regions of eastern America.

     Vine vigorous to medium, hardy, productive to very productive.
     Canes of average length and number, somewhat thick, dark
     reddish-brown, surface often roughened with small warts; nodes
     intermediate in size, flattened; internodes medium to short;
     diaphragm of mean thickness; pith of average size; shoots
     pubescent; tendrils intermittent, rather short, trifid to bifid.

     Leaf-buds intermediate in size, inclined to long, slender to
     medium, pointed to conical, open early. Young leaves heavily tinged
     on lower surface and along margin of upper surface with bright
     carmine. Leaves medium to large, thick to medium; upper surface
     green, slightly glossy, intermediate in smoothness; lower surface
     bronze to pale green, heavily pubescent; veins distinct; lobes
     often three in number but usually entire, terminal lobe acute;
     petiolar sinus rather shallow, medium to wide; basal sinus usually
     pubescent; lateral sinus varying from medium wide to a mere notch,
     frequently dentate; teeth shallow to medium, narrow. Flowers
     fertile, open in mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit variable in season, extending through a long period, becomes
     marketable somewhat earlier than Worden, keeps and ships unusually
     well. Clusters variable in size ranging from very large to medium,
     rather long and broad, tapering to cylindrical, frequently
     single-shouldered, usually two bunches per shoot, compact to
     slightly loose; peduncle short to medium, thick; pedicel below
     average in length and thickness, covered with small numerous warts;
     brush long, light wine color. Berries somewhat variable in size,
     usually large, roundish to slightly oval, dark purplish-black,
     rather dull as the season advances, covered with heavy blue bloom,
     persistent, moderately firm. Skin medium to thin, tough, does not
     crack, adheres slightly to the pulp, contains a small amount of
     dark red pigment, somewhat astringent. Flesh greenish, translucent,
     juicy, varying from rather tough to nearly soft, slightly coarse,
     not foxy, somewhat vinous, nearly sweet from skin to center,
     quality good and improves by hanging on the vines, superior to
     Concord. Seeds separate readily from the flesh, one to four,
     average three, of medium size and length, rather broad, light
     brown, often with yellowish tips; raphe obscure; chalaza
     intermediate in size, slightly above center, oval, obscure.


CANADA.

(Riparia, Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Horticulturist_, =22=:363, 365. 1867. _fig._ =2.= _Rec. of
     Hort._, =1868=:44. =3.= Downing, =1869=:533. =4.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:79. _fig._ =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =10=:494. 1891. =6.=
     _Ib._, =17=:527, 548, 554, 559. 1898. =7.= _Traite gen. de vit._,
     =5=:182. 1903.

     ARNOLD'S NO. 16 (1, 2, 5). _Arnold's No. 18_ (3, 4, 7).

Canada is justly considered the most desirable of Arnold's several
hybrids of Riparia and Vinifera and is well known in Europe as well as
in America. In France when American varieties were being largely used in
the reconstruction of the vineyards destroyed by phylloxera, Canada was
one of the prime favorites, because of its short period for fruit
development and maturity and the comparatively high quality of the wine
which could be made from it. In America it has never gained great
popularity on account of its susceptibility to fungal diseases. In this
respect as in some others, it shows Vinifera more than Riparia
parentage; thus in shape, color and texture of foliage, in the flavor of
the fruit, and in the seeds there are decided indications of Vinifera
while the vine, especially in the slenderness of the shoots, and the
bunch and berry, shows Riparia. If, as is surmised, there is some
Labrusca in Clinton, the Riparia parent of Canada, there are no
discernible traces of the first named species in this variety. Canada
and Brant, its full brother, are often confused with each other but
there are numerous minor differences in buds, foliage, canes, in the
shape of the bunch, in the seeds and in the time of ripening which a
reading of the descriptions of the two varieties will reveal. Canada has
little value as a dessert fruit but makes a very good red wine, having,
according to the French, a most agreeable bouquet, but in America it is
surpassed by other wine grapes in so many characters that it can
probably never attain a place in this country for other than breeding
purposes.

The grape to which Arnold[171] gave the name Canada is a seedling of
Clinton, a Labrusca-Riparia hybrid, fertilized by Black St. Peters, a
variety of _Vitis vinifera_. Arnold planted the seed which produced
Canada and its brother Brant about 1860. During the decade that followed
the variety was sent out as _Arnold No. 16_, but as it became more
widely distributed the name was changed to Canada.

     Vine medium to very vigorous, hardy, not always healthy, usually
     productive. Canes long, numerous, variable in size but averaging
     slender, nearly ash-gray at internodes to reddish-brown at nodes,
     covered with a slight blue bloom; nodes enlarged, not flattened;
     internodes above medium to short; diaphragm of average thickness,
     rather large; shoots strongly pubescent; tendrils intermittent,
     nearly short, trifid to bifid.

     Leaf-buds intermediate in size, short, of average thickness,
     conical to obtuse, open rather late. Young leaves pale green with
     faintest trace of carmine, prevailing color green on upper and
     lower sides. Leaves intermediate in size, medium to thin; upper
     surface light green, nearly smooth; lower surface pale green,
     hairy; veins obscure; lobes five in number, often obscure, terminal
     lobe acute to acuminate; petiolar sinus deep, medium to narrow;
     basal sinus variable in depth and width; lateral sinus usually deep
     and narrow when well defined; teeth deep, wide. Flowers
     occasionally on plan of six, somewhat fertile to partly sterile,
     open moderately early; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens in mid-season or later, keeps fairly well. Clusters
     intermediate in size, long to medium, rather slender, uniform,
     often strongly cylindrical, sometimes single-shouldered, very
     compact; peduncle short, slender; pedicel long, slender, nearly
     smooth; brush short, light brown. Berries not uniform, average
     medium to small, roundish when not compressed by compactness of
     cluster, attractive purplish-black to black, glossy, covered with
     heavy dark blue bloom, persistent, firm. Skin thin, does not crack,
     rather tough, adheres but slightly to the pulp, contains a slight
     amount of pigment, not astringent. Flesh rather dark green, very
     juicy, fine-grained, somewhat tender when fully ripe, spicy,
     pleasant vinous flavor, nearly sweet to agreeably tart, ranking
     medium to above in quality. Seeds separate readily from pulp, one
     to three, average two, intermediate in size and breadth, of average
     length, blunt, light brown; raphe completely obscure; chalaza
     intermediate in size, slightly above center, oval, distinct,
     somewhat obscure.

[Illustration: CANADA]


CANANDAIGUA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

Canandaigua has not been generally distributed and would not be
mentioned here were it not for its exceptional keeping qualities. To
test the keeping qualities of grapes in common storage, 265 varieties
were put in the fruit house at this Station in the fall of 1907. The
test ended April 16, 1908, when it was found that Canandaigua was in the
best condition of all varieties. Its quality is very good at picking
time but seems, if anything, to improve in storage, and it was as good
at the end of the test as at the beginning. Its vine characters are
those of Labrusca-Vinifera hybrids and such, as the variety grows on the
Station grounds, as make it the equal of the average cultivated hybrid
of these two species. The characters of the fruit, too, show plainly an
admixture of Vinifera and Labrusca so combined as to make the grapes
very similar to the best of such hybrids. The variety is quite worthy of
trial.

Canandaigua is a chance seedling found by E. L. Van Wormer of
Canandaigua, New York, growing among wild grapes. Its high quality and
handsome appearance attracted his attention and the vine was put under
cultivation, after which its long-keeping qualities were discovered.
Vines were sent to this Station for testing in 1897. All of its
characters indicate that it is a hybrid between Labrusca and Vinifera.

     Vine vigorous, doubtfully hardy, medium to productive. Tendrils
     semi-continuous to semi-intermittent, bifid, dehisce early. Leaves
     large to medium, thin. Flowers sterile or sometimes partly fertile,
     open in mid-season; stamens reflexed. Fruit ripens after
     mid-season, keeps unusually well. Clusters variable in size,
     usually heavily single-shouldered, loose to medium. Berries large
     to medium, slightly oval to roundish, black, covered with a fair
     amount of blue bloom, persistent. Flesh firm, sweet and rich, good
     in quality, improving as the season advances. Seeds often long,
     with enlarged neck; raphe shows as a partially obscured cord in a
     medium deep groove; chalaza above center, distinctly pear-shaped.


CAPTAIN.

(Lincecumii, Rupestris, Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Rural N. Y._, =60=:637. 1901. =2.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1904=:306. =3.= _Munson Cat._, =1906=-7:16.

Captain has not made a good showing in the Station vineyard and we have
no reports of it from other parts of the State. The clusters are large
and long but very loose and unattractive in appearance, and the fruit
ranks low in quality. We are forced to conclude, judging from the
several seasons the variety has fruited on these grounds, that it is of
little value in New York. The breeding of Captain is such that it could
hardly be expected to thrive in this latitude.

Captain was produced by T. V. Munson from seed of America fertilized
with R. W. Munson.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, moderately productive. Canes long to medium,
     numerous, covered with rather thick blue bloom; tendrils
     intermittent, bifid and trifid. Leaves very large to medium, thick,
     not pubescent but very hairy along ribs. Flowers semi-fertile, open
     rather late; stamens upright. Fruit ripens later than Concord, does
     not keep long although it ships well. Clusters large to above
     medium, long, slender, sometimes double-shouldered, very loose.
     Berries very large to below medium, inclined to roundish, black,
     covered with heavy blue bloom, persistent. Skin contains a large
     amount of purplish-red pigment. Flesh medium juicy, coarse, tender,
     lacks character, tart from skin to center, fair in quality. Seeds
     numerous, separate easily from the pulp.


CARMAN.

Lincecumii, Vinifera, Labrusca, Bourquiniana?

     =1.= _Gar. Mon._, =28=:304. 1886. =2.= _Rural N. Y._, =50=:221,
     _fig._, 643, 690. 1891. =3.= _Ib._, =51=:147, 607, 774. 1892.
     _fig._ =4.= Husmann, =1895=:127. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1897=:20. =6.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:548, 554. 1898. =7.=
     _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1149, 1154. 1898. _fig._ =8.= _Mo. Sta.
     Bul._, =46=:38, 43, 45, 49. 1899. =9.= _Rural N. Y._, =59=:674,
     690, 752, 770, 802, 819. 1900. =10.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:41, 51,
     52, 54. 1901.

The Carman is another grape having the characters of three
species--_Vitis lincecumii_, _V. labrusca_ and _V. vinifera_--and hence
of interest to grape improvers at least. In the twenty-three years it
has been known in New York it has not become popular with grape-growers
chiefly because it ripens too late for this region and when ripe does
not attain the high quality ascribed to it elsewhere. Its most valuable
character is that of long keeping, whether while hanging on the vine or
after harvesting.

[Illustration: CARMAN]

T. V. Munson of Denison, Texas, raised Carman from seed of a wild
Post-oak grape taken from the woods, pollinated with mixed pollen of
Triumph and Herbemont. It was introduced in 1892 and placed on the
American Pomological Society fruit catalog list in 1897. The variety
was named in honor of E. S. Carman, for many years editor of the
_Rural New Yorker_, and a plant-breeder of note.

     Vine very vigorous to medium, hardy, lacking in productiveness.
     Canes long, numerous, thick, brown to reddish-brown; nodes but
     slightly enlarged, flattened; internodes long to medium; diaphragm
     somewhat thick; pith above medium size; shoots very pubescent;
     tendrils intermittent, long, trifid.

     Leaf-buds rather large, nearly short, thick, conical to obtuse,
     open rather late. Young leaves slightly tinged with rose on upper
     and lower sides. Leaves in good condition until injured by frost,
     large, thick; upper surface light to dark green, somewhat glossy,
     older leaves rugose; lower surface pale green, pubescent; veins
     indistinct; terminal lobe acute to obtuse; petiolar sinus deep to
     narrow; basal sinus often absent or shallow; lateral sinus medium
     to shallow when present; teeth intermediate in depth and width.
     Flowers on plan of five or six, fertile or nearly so, open very
     late; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens just before Catawba, an excellent keeper. Clusters
     variable in size, of average length and breadth, tapering to
     cylindrical, frequently single-shouldered, usually compact;
     peduncle above medium length and thickness; pedicel short, slender,
     smooth with very slight swelling at point of attachment to berry;
     brush short, slender, wine-colored. Berries inferior in size,
     roundish to slightly oblate, dark purplish-black to black, glossy,
     covered with a fair amount of blue bloom, persistent, firm. Skin
     rather thin, tough, nearly free from pulp, contains little or no
     pigment, not astringent. Flesh yellowish-green, not juicy, somewhat
     tender when fully ripe, has some Post-oak flavor, vinous, spicy,
     sweetish at skin to tart next the seeds, good to very good. Seeds
     separate easily from pulp, one to four, average two or three,
     small, of mean length and breadth, blunt, brownish; raphe sometimes
     cord-like; chalaza intermediate in size, slightly above center,
     oval to pear-shaped, distinct.


CATAWBA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= Adlum, =1823=:109, 139. =2.= Ib., =1828=:173. =3.= Ib.,
     =1828=:176. =4.= Prince, =1830=:175. =5.= Ib., =1830=:180. =6.= _U.
     S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1845=:312, 938, 939. =7.= _Ib._, =1847=:462,
     463, 464, 465, 466, 467, 469. =8.= _Mag. Hort._, =15=:513. 1849.
     =9.= _West. Hort. Rev._, =1=:15. 1850. =10.= _U. S. Pat. Off.
     Rpt._, =1851=:48, 49, 51. 11. _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1852=:54.
     =12.= Buchanan, =1852=:23, 71, 96, 106. =13.= Elliott, =1854=:244.
     =14.= Hooper, =1857=:274. =15.= _Horticulturist_, =16=:120. 1861.
     =16.= _Mag. Hort._, =28=:506. 1862. =17.= _Ib._, =29=:73. 1863.
     =13.= _Gar. Mon._, =5=:73, 74, 184. 1863. =19.= _N. Y. Ag. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1864=:42. =20.= Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt., =1867=:43. =21.=
     Fuller, =1867=:220, 241, 248. =22.= _Gar. Mon._, =9=:214. 1867.
     =23.= _Horticulturist_, =23=:298. 1868. _fig. of leaf._ =24.=
     Downing, =1869=:533. =25.= Barry, =1872=:421. =26.= _Gar. Mon._,
     =14=:167. 1872. =27.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1875-6=:72, 73.
     =28.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:80. _fig._ =29.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1883=:118. =30.= _Am. Gard._, =12=:581. 1891. =31.= _Gar. and
     For._, =8=:487. 1895. =32.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =15=:432. 1896.
     =33.= _Ib._, =17=:527, 540, 543, 544, 548, 552. 1898. =34.= _Ev.
     Nat. Fruits_, =1898=:53. =35.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =18=:367,
     374, 386, 396. 1899. =36.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:38, 43, 44, 45.
     1899. =37.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:235. 1902. =38.= _Rural N. Y._,
     =61=:722. 1902. =39.= _Traite gen. de vit._, =6=:282. 1903.

     _Arkansas_ (13). _Catawba Tokay_ (4, 13, 18, 24, 39). _Cherokee_
     (15). _Fancher_ (?24, 39). _Keller's White_ (39). _Lebanon
     Seedling_ (13, 18). _Lincoln_ (9). _Mammoth Catawba_ (39). _Mead's
     Seedling_ (39). _Merceron_ (39). MICHIGAN (16, 17). _Michigan_ (24,
     39). MUNCY (3). MUNCY PALE RED (5). _Muncy, pale red?_ (4). _Omega_
     (39). _Red Muncy_ (4?, 13, 18, 24, 28, 39). _Rose of Tennessee_
     (18). _Saratoga_ (?24, 39). _Singleton_ (13, 18, 28,?39). _Tekomah_
     (39). TOKAY (1). _Tokay_ (4, 28, 39). _Virginia Amber_ (18). _White
     Catawba_ (39).

From many points of view the Catawba is the most interesting of our
American grapes. The elasticity of constitution which enables it to
adapt itself to many environments and therefore to succeed in a vast
region; its possible existence for centuries in the wild state, for the
records of a century have not divulged the secret of its origin, of its
ancestry, or of its introduction; its high quality and attractive
appearance which give it intrinsic value as a table grape and for making
wine; the fact that it was our first great American grape and that after
a century it is still one of the four leading varieties of grapes
cultivated in eastern America and that after this lapse of time it is
the chief of all northern varieties for wine-making; all these make
Catawba of prime interest to the grower of American grapes. The Catawba,
too, has had the rare distinction of having a poet, Longfellow, sing its
praises:

    "Very good in its way is the Verzenay
       Or the Sillery, soft and creamy,
     But Catawba wine has a taste more divine,
       More dulcet, delicious and dreamy.
     There grows no vine, by the haunted Rhine,
       By the Danube or Guadalquiver,
     Nor island or cape, that bears such a grape
       As grows by the beautiful River."

[Illustration: CATAWBA]

In Chapter II, American Grapes, we have seen how important a part the
Catawba played in the first grape regions of this country. It is still
the leading grape along the shores of Lake Erie in northern Ohio, and
about the Central Lakes of New York. In the latter region immense areas
are devoted to this variety, the product going to the general market and
to the wine-cellars where it is the chief sort used in the making of
champagne. Its characters are such that it is not too much to say that
did it but ripen two weeks earlier in the other grape regions of New
York, the Chautauqua, Hudson and Ontario regions, the Catawba would
rival the Concord. Because of late ripening in New York this variety is
at its best only about the Central Lakes and on land extending back from
the water to an altitude of one hundred feet above the lake surface;
here as fine Catawbas are grown as anywhere in the world. As to soil, it
thrives in sand, gravel or clay provided there be an abundance of food
and humus, good drainage and plenty of bottom heat.

Of all the commercial grapes grown in New York Catawba is the best
keeper, lasting until March or later. Because of its fine quality it
often brings a higher price than other varieties and its reputation as a
dessert grape would be still better were it not too often picked before
fully ripe and therefore sour and unpalatable. The Catawba is the
standard red grape in the markets, and other red varieties are often
sold under its name. It makes a good light-colored wine, which as has
been said, is largely used as a base for champagne. The vine is
vigorous, hardy and productive but the foliage and fruit are susceptible
to fungi and this constitutes the chief defect of the variety and
accounts for the decline and the passing out of Catawba in many of the
grape regions of the past in the United States and its unpopularity in
some of the grape regions of the present. In its botanical characters,
in its adaptation, and in its susceptibilities it suggests _Vitis
vinifera_ crossed with _Vitis labrusca_, a possibility to be discussed
in a later paragraph.

The characters of Catawba seem readily transmissible to its offspring
and, beside having a number of pure-bred descendants which more or less
resemble it, it is one of the parents of a still greater number of
cross-breeds which, as a rule, inherit many of its characters. As with
Catawba, most of its progeny show Vinifera characters; as intermittent
tendrils, the Vinifera color of foliage, a vinous flavor wholly or
nearly free from foxiness, and the susceptibilities of Labrusca-Vinifera
hybrids to certain insects, fungi, and environmental conditions.

Catawba was introduced by John Adlum of the District of Columbia about
1823. Adlum secured cuttings of this variety from a Mrs. Scholl of
Clarksburgh, Montgomery County, Maryland, in the spring of 1819. This
vine had been planted by Mrs. Scholl's husband, who had since died. He
had always called it Catawba, but the family did not know from what
source it had been secured. Owing to the statement of a German priest
that it was the same as the Tokay of Hungary, Mr. Adlum called it by
that name. Some years later, when he found this to be a mistake, he
changed the name back to Catawba. Adlum found the same variety on a
trellis on land belonging to a Mr. J. Johnston, near Fredericktown,
Maryland. He also found a similar variety on a farm of his in Lycoming
County, Pennsylvania, which he introduced under the name of Muncy. Later
these two varieties were judged to be identical. Neither Adlum nor
Prince was able to trace the origin of Catawba, though both were among
the chief viticulturists of their day, were instrumental in distributing
this variety, and had correspondents in all parts of the Union.

In 1850, S. Mosher of Saloma Springs, Kentucky, wrote an article in the
_Western Horticultural Review_, giving an account of the finding of the
original vine by Dr. Solomon Beach, in 1821, on the farm of William
Murry, about ten miles from Asheville, Buncombe County, North Carolina.
The Murrys informed Beach that the grape was an old variety in the
neighborhood and that cuttings and roots had been sent to various
places. This story was later confirmed by Ravenel, who talked with a son
of the original Murry and was told that General Davy, in 1807, then
United States Senator from South Carolina, had secured some of the vines
and had carried some of them to Washington. This would account for its
falling into the hands of Adlum. It must be said, however, that it
appears strange that none of the many correspondents of Adlum or Prince,
some of whom lived not very far from where the Catawba was supposed to
have been found, had heard of this variety. That the Murrys had a vine
growing on their farm of peculiar excellence, is probable; that it was
Catawba is by no means certain. All that can be said is that the origin
of Catawba is not positively known.

Catawba was introduced into the grape region around Cincinnati by
Longworth in 1825. The favorable reports of the variety from this region
undoubtedly did much to secure its early and wide distribution. In most
sections it was compared with the Alexander or Cape grape, and proved
itself easily the superior in both vine and fruit characters. Up to the
time of the introduction of Concord, Catawba was the most popular
American grape cultivated. After that time, the earlier season and
superior vine of the former variety enabled it to supplant Catawba in
many sections. The Catawba was placed on the grape list in the first
American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1852.

The species to which Catawba belongs is uncertain. It is generally
classed as Labrusca, but practically all of those who have raised large
numbers of seedlings of the variety are of the opinion that it has some
Vinifera blood in its composition. The general appearance of the vine
would indicate Labrusca, but the vinous flavor of the fruit, the
susceptibility to mildew, the appearance of occasional seeds, and the
character of the seedlings, many of which resemble Vinifera more than
the parent, all indicate that there is a strain of Vinifera present.

     Vine vigorous to medium, hardy, productive, subject to mildew in
     unfavorable seasons. Canes of average length, numerous, rather
     thick, moderately dark brown with slight ash-gray tinge; nodes
     enlarged, sometimes slightly flattened; internodes of mean length;
     diaphragm rather thin; pith rather large; shoots slightly
     pubescent; tendrils continuous, of fair length, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds intermediate in size and thickness, short, conical to
     nearly obtuse, open moderately late. Young leaves tinged rose
     carmine on upper and lower sides. Leaves large, of average
     thickness; upper surface rather light green, dull, moderately
     smooth; lower surface grayish-white, heavily pubescent; veins well
     defined; lobes sometimes three, terminal lobe acute; petiolar sinus
     deep, narrow to medium; basal sinus often lacking; lateral sinus of
     average depth, narrow; teeth rather shallow, narrow. Flowers
     fertile, open rather late; stamens upright.

     Fruit late, one of the best keepers, lasting until March or later.
     Clusters large to medium, rather long, usually broad, nearly
     cylindrical to tapering, single-shouldered to sometimes
     double-shouldered, rather loose to compact; peduncle of average
     length, rather slender; pedicel variable in length, intermediate in
     thickness, covered with but few small, inconspicuous warts,
     considerably swollen at point of attachment to berry; brush short,
     pale green. Berries intermediate in size, oval to roundish, dull
     purplish-red, covered with a moderate amount of lilac bloom, not
     inclined to drop from pedicel, firm. Skin rather thick, variable in
     toughness, slightly adheres to pulp, with no pigment, somewhat
     astringent. Flesh green, translucent, juicy, fine-grained, slightly
     tough to soft, depending upon age, vinous, often sprightly with
     some foxiness, sweet and rich, very good in quality. Seeds separate
     easily from flesh, frequently abortive, average two, medium size,
     broad, often with a short prominent neck, distinctly notched,
     blunt, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza large, above center, oval
     to nearly roundish, rather distinct.


CAYUGA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _Rural N. Y._, =45=:265. 1886. _fig._ =2.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =11=:617. 1892. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:100. =4.= _Ga.
     Sta. Bul._, =53=:41, 54. 1901. _fig._

     _Sharon_ (3).

Cayuga is probably a descendant of Isabella through Adirondac. It
resembles its parent in both its good qualities and its faults. The
first are beauty, quality and earliness of fruit; the second lack of
vigor, susceptibility to fungi and lack of hardiness. Although known
since 1886, the Cayuga was never widely distributed in New York and is
now rarely found.

The variety was originated by D. S. Marvin, Watertown, New York, from
seed of Adirondac. Marvin, in a personal letter, says that the usually
imputed parentage of Eumelan crossed with Adirondac is a mistake, and
refers to another variety. Bush gives Sharon as a synonym of Cayuga but
this appears to be an error.

     Vine not vigorous, lacks in hardiness, an uncertain bearer,
     unproductive. Tendrils continuous, bifid. Leaves medium to small,
     inclined to dark green, thick. Flowers vary from nearly fertile to
     almost sterile, open in mid-season; stamens upright. Fruit ripens
     as early as Champion. Clusters variable in size, usually short and
     not shouldered, not uniform in compactness. Berries medium to large
     but some years often small and seedless, much like Isabella in
     shape, unattractive in color, ranging from dull reddish-purple to
     blackish, covered with blue bloom. Flesh tender, vinous, mild from
     skin to center, variable in flavor and quality, ranking from fair
     to very good. The seed-coat is often rough and warty.


CENTENNIAL.

(Labrusca, Aestivalis, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:66. =2.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:81.
     =3.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =9=:330. 1890. =4.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._,
     =28=:263. 1893. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:101. _fig._ =6.= _Mass.
     Hatch. Sta. Bul._, =37=:12, 15. 1896. =7.= _Ark. Sta. Bul._,
     =39=:28. 1896. =8.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:527, 548, 552.
     1898. =9.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1149, 1154. 1898. =10.= _Mo. Sta.
     Bul._, =46=:38, 45, 46. 1899. =11.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:41. 1901.
     =12.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:247. 1902.

     CONTINENTAL (1) but incorrectly.

Centennial is now scarcely heard of though at the time of its
introduction, shortly after the Centennial of 1876, it was looked upon
as a valuable acquisition. Its chief meritorious attributes are high
quality and attractive appearance; while its faults, which greatly
outweigh its merits, are lack of vigor, susceptibility to fungi, and
lack of hardiness. Centennial is much like Delaware and is surpassed by
it in nearly all respects.

The variety was originated by D. S. Marvin, of Watertown, New York. It
is a cross between a Labrusca seedling of Marvin's and a seedling of
Eumelan. It was first fruited in 1875, and was introduced in 1882 by the
originator. Vines were received by this Station in 1883. The tenderness
and lateness of ripening of Centennial, as well as its botanical
characters, indicate Vinifera blood.

The following description is a compilation from several sources:

     Vine vigorous, somewhat tender, fairly productive. Leaves rounded,
     slightly three-lobed, smooth. Clusters medium to small, compact,
     tapering or cylindrical, sometimes slightly shouldered. Berries
     medium to small, pale red or amber color with thin white bloom,
     adhere firmly to pedicel. Skin rather thick, tough. Flesh tender,
     juicy, sweet, resembling Delaware in flavor, good to very good.
     About the same season as Concord.


CHALLENGE.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =4=:72. 1868. =2.= _Ib._, =7=:102. 1870.
     =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:82. =4.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:259.
     1893. =5.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:38, 43, 45, 46. 1899. =6.= _Ga.
     Sta. Bul._, =53=:41. 1901. =7.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:238. 1902.

Some years ago Challenge was considered an excellent dessert grape,
being of good quality, hardy, and fairly healthy. Small plantations of
it still exist in New York, but it is rapidly passing out of
cultivation.

Challenge was originated about 1860 by Archer Moore, of Hammonton, New
Jersey. He supposed it to have come from seed of Concord fertilized by
Royal Muscadine. The variety was introduced by William F. Bassett of the
same place. We do not have a vine of Challenge growing on the Station
grounds, and the description written below is compiled from various
sources.

     Vine very vigorous; shoots slender, long. Leaf of medium size, dark
     green. Clusters rather large, compact, tapering, usually
     shouldered. Berries medium in size, round, pale red to
     reddish-purple in color with very thin bloom and inconspicuous
     dots, juicy, slightly acid; quality medium to good; not separating
     readily from the seeds. Season shortly after Concord.


CHAMPION.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1871=:69. =2.= _Am. Hort. An._,
     =1871=:83. =3.= _Horticulturist_, =30=:151. 1875. =4.= _Mich. Pom.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1875=:88, 295. =5.= _Gar. Mon._, =20=:47. 1878. =6.=
     _Montreal Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1879=:93. =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1879.= =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:36. =9.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:82. =10.= _Ib._, =1883=:138. =11.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol.
     =9=:172. 1896. =12.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:527, 528, 548,
     552, 554. 1898. =13.= _Miss. Sta. Bul._, =56=:11. 1899. =14.=
     Budd-Hansen, =2=:374. 1902.

     _Beaconsfield_ (6, 8, 9, 11). _Champion_ (10). EARLY CHAMPION (5).
     _Early Champion_ (9, 11). _Tallman?_ (5). TALLMAN SEEDLING (1, 2).
     TALMAN'S SEEDLING (10). _Talman's Seedling_ (9, 11). _Talman's
     Seedling_ (4). _Talman_ (10).

Champion is still a favorite early grape with some commercial growers
after having been grown for a generation, though its poor quality should
have driven it from cultivation years ago. Champion and Hartford are
rivals as early market grapes and for the distinction of being the
poorest in quality of all commonly cultivated grapes. The variety under
consideration is sourer and less agreeable to the taste than many wild
grapes. The characters which have kept it in cultivation are earliness,
good shipping qualities, though it does not keep well, productiveness,
attractive appearance, and a vigorous hardy vine. The hardiness of the
vine and its short season of fruit development and maturity make it a
good variety for northern and cold climates. This grape is best, in
appearance of fruit, in quality, and in the quantity produced, on a
comparatively light sandy soil. As grape consumers become more
appreciative of quality, Champion will be grown less and less.

The origin of Champion is unknown. It was first grown about 1870 in New
York. In 1871 Elliott acknowledged receipt of specimens of this variety
from William Chorlton of Staten Island. It was at that time generally
known as Tallman or Tallman's Seedling. At about the same time it was
being propagated and sold by R. J. Donnelly and J. I. Stone of
Charlotte, Monroe County, as Champion. Although many efforts have been
made, no one has succeeded in tracing the variety to the original vine.
At one time it was stated to have originated in the vicinity of New
Orleans, Louisiana, but later the southern Champion was found to be a
different variety. This variety was early introduced into Canada where
it was known as Beaconsfield, owing to its being first planted in that
country in a large vineyard owned by a gentleman of that name.

[Illustration: CHAMPION]

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, hardy, productive to very
     productive. Canes intermediate in length and number, of average
     size, rather dark brown; nodes enlarged, flattened; internodes
     medium to below in length; diaphragm thick; pith nearly large;
     shoots pubescent; tendrils continuous, inclined to long, bifid.

     Leaf-buds of medium size, short, rather thick, obtuse to conical,
     open in mid-season. Young leaves strongly tinged on lower side and
     along margin of upper side with carmine, making the prevailing
     color rose carmine. Leaves medium to large, intermediate in
     thickness; upper surface dark green, dull, rugose; lower surface
     dull gray often with trace of bronze, slightly downy; veins
     indistinct; lobes usually three, often obscurely five, terminal
     lobe acute; petiolar sinus deep to medium, of average width; teeth
     of fair depth, shallow. Flowers fertile, open medium early; stamens
     upright.

     Fruit ripens early, three weeks or more before Concord and about a
     week before Hartford, ships well but does not keep well, as its
     season is very short. Clusters medium to small, of mean length and
     breadth, blunt, cylindrical to slightly tapering, usually not
     shouldered, medium to compact; peduncle short, rather thick;
     pedicel inclined to short, covered with small inconspicuous warts;
     brush whitish tinged with brown. Berries medium to above in size,
     roundish, dull black covered with a moderate amount of blue bloom,
     not always persistent, somewhat soft. Skin thick, tender, adheres
     considerably to the pulp, contains a fair amount of light purplish
     pigment, astringent. Flesh light green, translucent, juicy,
     fine-grained, tender, foxy, rather sweet next the skin, agreeably
     tart at center, poor in quality. Seeds slightly adherent, one to
     five, average three, large, somewhat broad and long, blunt, light
     brown; raphe obscure; chalaza of fair size, slightly above center,
     circular, obscure.


CHAUTAUQUA.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:618. 1892. =2.= _Ib._, =13=:602.
     1894. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:102. =4.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:528, 548, 554. 1898.

In appearance Chautauqua is very similar to Concord, its parent, but it
ripens a few days earlier and is of slightly better quality though it
does not differ in these respects sufficiently to make it more than an
easily recognized strain of Concord. Inasmuch as it originated, and for
fifteen years has been known, in the region where the Concord reigns
supreme, and has not yet come into prominence, it is fair to assume that
it has some weakness and that the parent will remain dominant.

Chautauqua is a volunteer seedling of Concord found in a Concord
vineyard near Brocton, Chautauqua County, New York, by H. T. Bashtite
who sent vines of it to this Station in 1892.

     Vine medium to vigorous, not always hardy, not productive. Tendrils
     continuous, mostly trifid. Leaves large, irregularly roundish, dark
     green; lower surface tinged with bronze. Flowers semi-fertile to
     nearly fertile, open in mid-season or earlier; stamens upright.
     Fruit ripens in mid-season or a few days earlier. Clusters medium
     to large, rather broad, sometimes single-shouldered, intermediate
     in compactness. Berries unusually large, roundish to slightly oval,
     dark purplish-black, covered with abundant blue bloom, shatter
     badly. Skin thin, very astringent. Flesh rather tough, vinous,
     sweet at skin to acid at center, good to very good in quality. The
     pulp separates readily from the few broad and plump seeds.


CLEVENER.

(Labrusca, Riparia, Aestivalis?)

     =1.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =10=:494. 1891. =2.= _Ib._, =11=:618.
     1892. =3.= _Rural N. Y._, =52=:381. 1893. =4.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:103. =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:528, 548, 554. 1898.

There are two Cleveners discussed in American viticultural literature,
the origin and history of both of which are briefly set forth below. In
these general observations we need to consider but the northern one of
the two grapes. This variety has long been grown in New Jersey and in
New York and in both States is highly esteemed as a wine grape, the
resulting wine being well flavored and of a dark inky-red color. The
fruit is remarkable in coloring very early and in ripening very late.
The vine is hardy, very vigorous, succeeds in various soils and since it
bears grafts well it seems an excellent sort upon which to graft
varieties which do not thrive on their own roots. It is self-sterile and
must be planted with some other variety to set fruit well. Clinton makes
an excellent pollenizer because it blooms at the same time, and because
two wine grapes may be thus grown together. In spite of its good
qualities, Clevener is hardly holding its own in the commercial
vineyards of the State and it is not a desirable fruit for the amateur
who wants a table grape.

The Clevener here described has been raised in the vicinity of Egg
Harbor, New Jersey, for about forty years, but its place and time of
origin are unknown. It is generally considered to be a Riparia but the
continuous tendrils and other botanical characters indicate a strong
admixture of Labrusca blood and possibly Aestivalis or Bicolor as the
shoots and canes show considerable bloom.

The other variety under the name Clevener is a southern grape strongly
resembling Rulander or Louisiana. Opinions differ as to whether it be
of Aestivalis or Bourquiniana blood. This variety is unknown in New
York and of its origin and history there is no information.

     Vine a rampant grower, hardy, medium to productive, somewhat
     subject to attacks of leaf-hoppers. Canes long, numerous, rather
     thick, dark reddish-brown, covered with a slight amount of bloom;
     tendrils continuous, bifid. Foliage very healthy; leaves unusually
     large, intermediate in thickness, dark green with well defined ribs
     showing through the thin pubescence of the under surface. Flowers
     sterile, open very early; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens late, and appears to keep well. Clusters do not always
     fill well, small to medium, rather short and slender, irregularly
     tapering, often with a medium-sized single shoulder, variable in
     compactness. Berries small to medium, roundish to slightly
     flattened, black, rather glossy, covered with blue bloom,
     persistent, firm. Skin rather tough, thinnish and inclined to
     crack, adheres slightly to the pulp, contains an unusually large
     amount of dark purplish-red pigment. Flesh reddish-green,
     moderately juicy, rather tender and soft, fine-grained, very
     slightly aromatic, spicy, neither so sprightly nor so high-flavored
     as other varieties of the same season, not good enough in flavor
     and quality in general for dessert purposes. Seeds separate rather
     easily from the pulp, intermediate in size and length, medium to
     above in width, notched, nearly sharp-pointed, dark brown; raphe
     shows as a very small cord; chalaza large, at center or slightly
     above, irregularly oval, distinct.


CLINTON.

(Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= Adlum, =1823=:140. =2.= Ib., =1828=:176. =3.= Prince,
     =1830=:179. =4.= Rafinesque, =1830=:11. =5.= _N. Y. Ag. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1841=:388. =6.= _Horticulturist_, =2=:121, 341. 1847. =7.= _Ib._,
     =8=:120. 1853. _fig._ =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1860=:82. =9.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1862=:90. =10.= _Gar. Mon._, =5=:335. 1863.
     =11.= Strong, =1866=:332. =12.= Husmann, =1866=:50, 102. =13.=
     Fuller, =1867=:219. =14.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1869=:85. _fig._
     =15.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:82. =16.= _Can. Hort._, =11=:43. 1888.
     =17.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:103, 104. _fig._ =18.= _Ev. Nat.
     Fruits_, =1898=:75. =19.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:528, 540,
     544, 548, 554, 559. 1898. =20.= _Rural N. Y._, =59=:7, 306. 1900.

     WORTHINGTON (1, 2, 3, 4). _Worthington_ (15, 17).

Clinton is now but little grown, its place having been taken by better
varieties of its type. It has historical interest if not intrinsic
value, for it played an important part in the beginning of American
viticulture. Most viticulturists have ascribed to Clinton the
distinction of being the first cultivated "variety of _Vitis riparia_"
but without question this honor belongs to the Worthington of Adlum and
Prince, with a strong probability that Clinton may be Worthington
renamed. But it was as Clinton that _Vitis riparia_ was disseminated for
general culture and it is the name Clinton that stands at the parental
head of the long list of grapes now under cultivation from this species;
and so, in spite of its being the usurper of Worthington's honor, and
whether or not it be the older variety under an assumed name, it is
probably best that Clinton continue to be considered the first of its
race.

Clinton came into prominence, and brought the species to which it
belongs to the notice of grape-growers, because of its vigor, hardiness
and fruitfulness; and, later, its popularity was added to because of its
immunity to phylloxera. The vine is so vigorous that its growth is rank
and because of this and the straggling habit of growth it is very
difficult to keep under control on trellises and in most situations
needs a great deal of room. It can be grown in as high a latitude as any
of our native grapes but it blooms so early in the spring that the
blossoms are often caught by late frosts in northern climates. The
immunity of Clinton to phylloxera led to its being planted very largely
in France some years ago but it has now been discarded for better direct
producers in that country. The defects of the variety are: The fruit is
too small and sour and the seeds and skins too prominent for a market
grape and the wine is not of high quality, being too raucous, though the
harshness disappears somewhat with age. The fruit colors early in the
season but does not ripen until late and therefore suffers greatly from
birds. A slight touch of frost is supposed to improve its flavor. This
variety is so sensitive to calcareous soils that where lime or chalk
abounds the vines often die out after a few years. Clinton bears grafts
well, making a quick and firm union with Labruscas and Viniferas, and
roots very freely from cuttings.

This variety has been much used in grape-breeding and its blood can be
traced in many valuable varieties, among which are most of the desirable
wine grapes for the North. The offspring of Clinton are usually very
hardy and this, taken with other desirable characters, makes it an
exceptionally good starting-point for breeding grapes for northern
latitudes. Its seedlings often show intermittent characters and
otherwise indicate a strong strain of Labrusca.

[Illustration: CLINTON]

Clinton began to attract attention in New York about 1840. J. W.
Bissell, of Rochester, in the _Horticulturist_ of January, 1848, writes
that the vine from which cuttings were taken was found by L. B.
Langworthy, in the garden of a Mr. Peebles above Waterford on the
Hudson. The name Clinton was given by Langworthy, who introduced it to
the trade around Rochester about 1835. There were other cultivated
varieties growing in the Peebles garden and the Clinton was not supposed
to be a seedling. Although this account of the origin of the Clinton was
published in the then most popular horticultural publication in the
United States, there were no denials nor corrections made in any of the
succeeding numbers. In 1863 there appeared in the _Elmira Advertiser_ an
account of the origin of this variety in which it was stated that the
seed from which this variety had sprung was planted by Hugh White, then
a member of Congress, in his father's garden in Whitesboro, in 1819. Two
years later, so the story runs, when he was a junior in Hamilton
College, Clinton, New York, White transplanted the vine east of the
house of Dr. Noyes, with whom he then boarded. There were no denials of
this report, probably on account of the fact that the introducer at
Rochester was dead; and the account and Whitesboro as the place of
origin were later generally accepted by horticultural writers. In 1852
the Ohio Pomological Society determined that the Worthington and the
Clinton grapes were identical. Later this was generally accepted by
viticulturists as being correct. The Worthington is an old sort known to
Adlum and Prince, and was said by the latter to have originated in the
vicinity of Annapolis, Maryland.

Clinton was placed on the grape list of the American Pomological Society
fruit catalog in 1862, where it has since been retained.

Clinton is usually considered a Riparia, as most of the botanical
characters indicate this species. However, occasional canes with
continuous tendrils are characteristic of Labrusca.

     Vine a rank grower, healthy, hardy, productive. Canes long,
     numerous, slender to medium, brown to reddish-brown; nodes
     enlarged, slightly flattened; internodes of average length;
     diaphragm thick to medium; pith large; shoots smooth; tendrils
     usually intermittent but sometimes continuous, bifid.

     Leaf-buds rather large and short, thick, obtuse to conical, open
     early. Young leaves very faintly tinged with carmine on lower side
     only. Leaves hang until very late in the season, medium to small,
     thin; upper surface dark green, smooth; lower surface pale green,
     not pubescent; veins indistinct; petiolar sinus deep, medium to
     narrow, often urn-shaped; basal and lateral sinuses shallow to
     medium when present; teeth of average depth, rather wide. Flowers
     fertile, open early; stamens upright.

     Fruit colors early but is not edible until after mid-season.
     Clusters medium to small, of fair length, slender, cylindrical,
     uniform, usually single-shouldered, compact; peduncle medium to
     short, intermediate in thickness; pedicel nearly short, very
     slender, almost smooth; brush tinged with red. Berries small to
     medium, roundish to slightly oval, dark purplish-black to black,
     glossy, covered with rather thick blue bloom, adhere well to
     pedicel, firm. Skin very thin, tough, nearly free from pulp,
     contains considerable wine-colored pigment, somewhat astringent.
     Flesh darkish green, very juicy, fine-grained, slightly tough and
     solid, with some Riparia flavor, spicy, vinous, too tart for
     dessert use. Seeds adherent, average two in number, intermediate in
     size, short, blunt, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza of average
     size, above center, pear-shaped to long oval, distinct. Must,
     93 deg.-98 deg..


CLOETA.

(Lincecumii, Rupestris, Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     1. _Rural N. Y._, =60=:637. 1901. 2. _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1903=:83. 3. _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1904=:306.

Cloeta comes from T. V. Munson and is of the same parentage as Captain.
Munson says of it:[172] "Probably the best of all American black
grapes." But it does not sustain this high standard on the Station
grounds nor would it do so, we think, in other parts of the North.
Munson further states that it "requires hot, dry weather to acquire high
quality" and this explains why it does not succeed in this latitude as
it does in Texas.

The variety was produced from seed of America pollinated by R. W. Munson
and was introduced by the originator in 1902.

     Vine very vigorous, hardy, produces fair to good crops, susceptible
     to attacks of mildew. Canes long, numerous, covered with
     considerable blue bloom; tendrils intermittent, bifid. Leaves small
     to above medium, rather thick. Flowers bloom in mid-season; stamens
     upright. Fruit ripens after mid-season, does not keep well.
     Clusters medium to small, not uniform, frequently
     single-shouldered, intermediate in compactness. Berries medium to
     small, oval to roundish, black, covered with a fair amount of blue
     bloom, very persistent, not firm. Skin very thin and tender,
     contains a large amount of wine-colored pigment. Flesh somewhat
     tough and solid, sweet at skin to acid at center, spicy, medium to
     above in quality. The numerous small seeds are usually not notched.


COLERAIN.

(Labrusca.)

=1.= _Rural N. Y._, =47=:759. 1888. _fig._ =2.= _Bush. Cat._,
=1894=:105. =3.= _Rural N. Y._, =53=:616. 1894. =4.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
Rpt._, =14=:278. 1895. =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:528, 548, 554.
1898. =6.= _Rural N. Y._, =58=:23. 1899. =7.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._,
=169=:165. 1899.

Colerain is one of the numerous white seedlings of Concord and one of
the few of these seedlings of sufficient merit to be kept in
cultivation. It has the characteristic foliage and habit of growth of
its parent but is earlier by at least a week, is of much higher quality
and lacks somewhat the foxiness of most Labruscas. Colerain is sprightly
and vinous and neither seeds nor skins are as objectionable as in the
parent variety; the fruit hangs well to the vine and keeps as well as
most of the varieties of its class but owing to its tender pulp does not
ship well. It is reported to be more or less unproductive in some
localities. While Colerain has not attained commercial importance, it is
recognized as well worthy a place in home vineyards, and for this reason
and because it is one of the best if not the best of the white seedlings
of Concord it is given the honor of a color-plate and full description
in _The Grapes of New York_.

David Bundy of Colerain, Belmont County, Ohio, produced Colerain from
seed of Concord planted in 1880. The variety was soon after introduced
by the Colerain Grape Company of Colerain, Ohio.

     Vine medium to vigorous, usually hardy, healthy, not always
     productive. Canes intermediate in length and number, slender, dark
     reddish-brown; nodes of average size, flattened; internodes medium
     to below; diaphragm thick; pith rather large; shoots pubescent;
     tendrils continuous, rather short, bifid.

     Leaf-buds small, short, slender, pointed to nearly conical, open
     moderately late. Young leaves lightly tinged on lower side and
     along margin of upper side with a faint trace of carmine. Leaves of
     average size, nearly thick; upper surface light green, dull,
     moderately smooth; lower surface slightly bronze, downy; veins
     rather distinct; leaf not lobed, terminus acute; petiolar sinus
     shallow to medium, usually wide; basal and lateral sinuses very
     shallow when present; teeth shallow, of average width. Flowers
     fertile, opening in mid-season or earlier; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens a week or more earlier than Concord, keeps fairly well
     but does not ship well. Clusters attractive, averaging medium in
     size and length, somewhat slender, blunt, tapering to nearly
     cylindrical, irregular, usually strongly shouldered, moderately
     compact; peduncle medium in length and thickness; pedicel
     intermediate in length, inclined to slender, nearly smooth; brush
     of average length, green. Berries usually below Niagara in size but
     somewhat variable, roundish to slightly oval, light green, slightly
     glossy, covered with thin gray bloom, usually rather persistent.
     Skin unusually thin, tender, adheres to pulp, contains no pigment,
     slightly astringent. Flesh pale green, translucent, juicy,
     fine-grained, tender and soft when fully ripe, somewhat foxy,
     vinous, sweet, good in quality. Seeds separate easily from the
     pulp, few in number, usually one to three, averaging two, rather
     small and broad, notched, short to medium, nearly plump, brownish;
     raphe obscure; chalaza of average size, slightly above center,
     circular to nearly oval, showing only as a depression.


COLUMBIAN IMPERIAL.

(Labrusca, Riparia.)

     =1.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1893-4=:30. =2.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:105. =3.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1894-5=:67, 70. =4.= _N.
     Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =18=:374, 387, 395. 1899. =5.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._,
     =46=:38, 43, 44, 45, 49. 1899. =6.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:166,
     169. 1899. =7.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1899=:57. =8.= _Ga. Sta.
     Bul._, =53=:42. 1901.

     COLUMBIAN (3, 6). _Imperial_ (3). JUMBO (1). _Jumbo_ (2, 3).

Columbian Imperial is a showy, reddish-black, Labrusca-Riparia hybrid
chiefly remarkable for the great size of its berries; though the vine is
so exceptionally healthy and vigorous as to give it prominence for these
characters. The variety has remarkably thick, leathery leaves which seem
almost proof against either insects or fungi. The quality of the fruit,
however, is very inferior and the clusters are uneven as to the number
of berries and these shell off readily. The only possible value of the
variety is for exhibition purposes and for breeding to secure the
desirable characters named above. Columbian Imperial is a frequent
adornment of the salesbook of the fruit tree agents and the panegyrics
heaped upon it by misinformed or unscrupulous salesmen have given it a
rather wide distribution in the gardens of the amateur where it has no
place whatever.

The parentage of Columbian Imperial is unknown. The fruit was originated
by J. S. McKinley, Morgan, Orient P. O., Ohio, in 1885. It was
introduced by the Columbian Grape Company, of Kingston, Ohio, under the
name Columbian, also by J. R. Johnson of Dallas, Texas, under the name
Columbian Imperial. Supposed by many to be of Labrusca-Riparia blood.
The Labrusca shows plainly; the Riparia little, if at all.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, healthy, hardy, variable in
     productiveness. Canes long, numerous, thick to medium, dark
     reddish-brown, unusually heavily pubescent and spiny; tendrils
     continuous, long, bifid.

[Illustration: COLERAIN]

     Leaves healthy, variable in size, green, very thick; lower surface
     of young leaves pale green shading into bronze on older leaves with
     little, if any, pubescence. Flowers, strongly self-fertile; upright
     stamens. Fruit ripens late. Clusters medium in size, sometimes
     shouldered, and of average compactness. Berries large, roundish to
     slightly oval, dull reddish-black covered with thin lilac or faint
     blue bloom, not very persistent, firm. Skin thick, tough, contains
     no pigment. Flesh moderately juicy, tough, nearly sweet at skin to
     decidedly acid at center, with no pronounced aroma, fair to good in
     quality. Seeds adhere to the pulp, large to medium, plump, broad to
     medium, intermediate in length, rather blunt.


CONCORD.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =18=:490, 522. 1852. =2.= _Ib._, =19=:524, 542.
     1853. =3.= _Horticulturist_, =9=:124, 188, 236, 399, 515. 1854.
     =4.= _Mag. Hort._, =20=:63, _fig._, 431, 553. 1854. =5.= _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Cat._, =1854.= =6.= _Ib._, =1858=:233. =7.= Grant, =1864=:7,
     12. =8.= _Gar. Mon._, =11=:39. 1869. =9.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1872=:47. =10.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:83, 84, _fig._, 147. =11.=
     _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1891=:335. =12.= _Meehan's Mon._, =4=:47.
     1894. =13.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:528, 540, 543, 544, 548,
     552. 1898. =14.= _Ev. Nat. Fruits_, =1898=:72. =15.= _Mo. Hort.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1900=:360. =16.= _Traite gen. de vit._, =6=:178. 1903.

     BULL'S SEEDLING (1).

The Concord is known by all. The most widely grown of the grapes of this
continent, it also represents the dominant type of our native species
and with its offspring, pure-bred and cross-bred, furnishes seventy-five
per ct. or more of the grapes of eastern America. In New York,
approximately seventy-five per ct. of all the grapes grown are Concords
alone. The preeminently meritorious character of Concord, which has
enabled it to take first place in American viticulture, is the
elasticity of its constitution whereby it adapts itself to varying
conditions; thus the Concord is grown with more or less profit in every
grape-growing State in the Union and to an extent not possible with any
other grape. It succeeds on a greater number of soils than any other
variety. In the Chautauqua grape region there are six distinct types of
soil upon which grapes are grown and the Concord is the leading grape on
each of them.

A second character which commends Concord as a commercial variety is its
high degree of fruitfulness, as it gives large crops year in and year
out. Added to the above points of superiority are hardiness; ability to
withstand the ravages of both diseases and insects; comparative
earliness and therefore certainty of maturity in northern regions; fair
size of bunch and berry, good color, and an abundance of bloom, making a
most handsome grape. The Concord leaves out and blossoms somewhat late
in the spring and does not therefore often suffer from spring frosts and
the fruit is not easily injured by late frosts and hangs well on the
vine.

The Concord is not, however, without faults. Its quality is not high,
the grapes lack richness, delicacy of flavor and aroma, and have a foxy
taste disagreeable to many; on the other hand, the fruit is sprightly
and refreshing and does not cloy the appetite as do richer grapes. The
seeds and skin of Concord are objectionable, the seeds being large and
abundant and difficult to separate from the flesh and the skin is tough
and unpleasantly astringent. The Concord does not keep nor ship well as
compared with grapes having Vinifera blood and it rapidly loses flavor
after ripening; the skin is inclined to crack and the berries to shell
from the stems after picking. Concord is but slightly resistant to
phylloxera and in calcareous soils is subject to chlorosis. It requires
a rich soil and thrives best on a virgin soil; thus, in the Chautauqua
region of this State, much concern is now felt because of the failing
vineyards, most of which should not as yet have reached their prime.
While Concord is grown in the South, it is essentially a northern grape,
becoming susceptible to fungi in southern climates and suffering from
phylloxera in dry, warm soils.

Concord is a table grape and, to use an oft quoted expression coined by
Horace Greeley, it is "the grape for the millions." It can be produced
so cheaply that no other grape can compete with it in the markets. The
dominance of Concord is not wholly desirable for viticulture, as by
keeping out better varieties, the consumer is prevented from obtaining
grapes high in quality; and by giving the grower a feeling of
sufficiency in having this sort, other varieties do not receive the
consideration they deserve. The variety is used somewhat for making red
wines and a white wine as a base for champagne but it is a poor wine
grape, as much sugar must be added to attain the amount of alcohol
necessary for a good wine and the foxy taste is not a pleasant flavor.
Grape juice is made almost entirely from Concords and during the past
few years many carloads of grapes have been used in the Chautauqua
region for this purpose.

[Illustration: CONCORD]

The botanical characters of Concord indicate that it is a pure-bred
Labrusca; thus the seed with obscure raphe and chalaza, the pubescence
on the under surface of the leaf, the flesh characters of the fruit, the
continuous tendrils, the diaphragm, all belong to _Vitis labrusca_.
There are those, however, who maintain that it is possibly a
Labrusca-Vinifera hybrid, basing their claim upon the upright stamens,
the characters of some of the seedlings, and the opinion expressed by
Bull that a Catawba vine growing near by had fertilized the seed from
which Concord was raised.

Concord is a virile variety, having begotten a great number of valuable
offspring, both as pure-breeds and as cross-breeds. To these it has
seemingly transmitted its characters to a high degree. The reader who
takes the pains to look them up will find that many of these, even of
the pure-breeds, are white and that they are usually of higher quality
than the parent, indicating a white ancestor of Concord in which high
quality was possibly correlated with the light color.

The seed of a wild grape was planted in the fall of 1843 by E. W.
Bull[173] of Concord, Massachusetts, from which fruit was borne in 1849.
The wild grape from which the seed came had been transplanted from
beside a field fence to the garden in which there was at least another
grape, the Catawba, and the wild vine was open to cross-pollination. One
of these seedlings was named Concord and the variety was exhibited
before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in the fall of 1852. The
new grape was introduced in the spring of 1854 by Hovey & Co., of
Boston. From the time of its introduction the growth of this variety in
popularity was phenomenal. In 1854, the year of its introduction, it was
placed on the grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit
catalog as one of the "new varieties which promise well." In 1858 it was
placed on the regular list of recommended sorts where it has since been
retained. Husmann states, in the winter of 1855, that he secured buds at
Hermann, Missouri, from Soulard of Galena, Illinois. In other words,
its culture had spread halfway across the continent in the brief period
of a year. Before 1860, vineyards of Concord had been planted in
Chautauqua County, this State. In 1865 it was awarded a prize by the
American Institute known as the Greeley prize, from its donor, Horace
Greeley, as the best grape for general cultivation.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, hardy, healthy, usually productive
     of heavy crops. Canes above medium length, of average number, above
     mean thickness, rather dark reddish-brown to brown; nodes enlarged,
     flattened; internodes medium to long; diaphragm rather thick; pith
     large to medium; shoots pubescent; tendrils continuous, long,
     bifid, sometimes trifid.

     Leaf-buds medium to nearly large, short, below average thickness,
     conical to pointed, open in mid-season. Young leaves lightly tinged
     on lower side and along margin of upper side, prevailing color
     rose-carmine. Leaves large to medium, thick; upper surface dark
     green, slightly glossy, rather smooth; lower surface light bronze,
     heavily pubescent; veins distinct; lobes three when present,
     terminal lobe acute; petiolar sinus variable averaging medium in
     depth and width; basal sinus usually lacking; lateral sinus obscure
     and frequently notched; teeth shallow, medium to narrow. Flowers
     fertile, open in mid-season or earlier; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens about mid-season, keeps from one to two months.
     Clusters rather uniform, large to medium, intermediate in length,
     wide, broadly tapering, usually single-shouldered, sometimes
     double-shouldered, medium to rather compact; peduncle short to
     medium, thick; pedicel of average length, thick, nearly smooth;
     brush intermediate in length, pale green. Berries medium to large,
     roundish, slightly glossy, black covered with abundant blue bloom,
     not always persistent, firm. Skin of average thickness, moderately
     tough, slightly adherent to pulp, contains a small amount of
     wine-colored pigment, somewhat astringent. Flesh pale green,
     translucent, juicy, rather fine-grained, somewhat tough and solid,
     slightly foxy, sweet at skin, inclined to tartness next the seeds,
     good in quality. Seeds rather adherent, one to four in number,
     average three, nearly large, broad, distinctly notched, plump,
     blunt, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza of fair size, slightly
     above center, oval, nearly obscure. Must 70 deg.-80 deg..


COTTAGE.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =4=:327, 334. 1868. =2.= _Horticulturist_,
     =26=:22. 1871. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1879.= =4.= _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:36. =5.= _Rural N. Y._, =52=:655. 1893. =6.=
     _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:253. 1893. =7.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:108.
     =8.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1895=:131. =9.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =17=:528, 545, 547, 554. 1898. =10.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._,
     =169=:169. 1899.

[Illustration: COTTAGE]

In vine and fruit Cottage greatly resembles its parent, Concord, having,
however, remarkably large, thick, leathery leaves well shown in the
color-plate. It is noted, too, for its strong, branching root system.
With good foliage and good roots it is not surprising that it is a
vigorous, thrifty grower--if anything surpassing its parent in vigor of
growth. The canes are so rough as to be almost spiny indicating,
seemingly, outbursts of growth-force. The Cottage is of better quality
than its parent having far less foxiness and a richer, more delicate
flavor. It is given credit, too, of being a better shipper and a better
keeper and is from one to two weeks earlier. Its good qualities are
offset, however, by the fact that it lacks in soil adaptability, is
comparatively unproductive, and ripens unevenly. It blooms much earlier
than Concord. Cottage is recommended as an early grape of the Concord
type for the garden and a standard variety for northern localities. The
variety is widely distributed in varietal vineyards.

Cottage is another of E. W. Bull's seedlings, having been produced by
him from seed of Concord. It was introduced in 1869 and in 1879 it was
placed on the grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit
catalog, where it has since been retained.

     Vine vigorous, healthy, hardy, produces average crops. Canes often
     rough and hairy, long to medium, numerous, of fair thickness,
     rather dark brown, nodes slightly enlarged, not usually flattened;
     internodes intermediate in length; diaphragm thinnish; pith of
     average size; shoots very pubescent; tendrils continuous, of mean
     length, usually bifid.

     Leaf-buds small to medium, short, of fair thickness, conical to
     pointed, open moderately early. Young leaves tinged on lower side
     and faintly at the margin with red, making the prevailing color
     pale green with light carmine tinge. Leaves large, thick; upper
     surface dark green, glossy, smooth to slightly rugose; lower
     surface tinged with heavy bronze, with some pubescence; veins
     distinct; leaf usually not lobed, with terminus acute to acuminate;
     petiolar sinus usually deep and wide; teeth shallow, wide. Flowers
     fertile, open medium early; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens one or two weeks earlier than Concord, does not keep
     well. Clusters above medium to small, below average length,
     moderately broad, cylindrical to slightly tapering, sometimes
     single-shouldered, rather compact; peduncle somewhat long,
     intermediate in size; pedicel short, thick, covered with few,
     inconspicuous, small warts, wide at point of attachment to berry;
     brush dark red. Berries of average size, roundish, dull black, not
     glossy, covered with heavy blue bloom, drop badly from pedicel,
     firm. Skin rather thick, somewhat tender, slightly adherent to
     pulp, contains considerable dark purplish-red pigment, slightly
     astringent. Flesh juicy, tough, rather solid, foxy, agreeably
     sweet next the skin, tart at seeds, good to medium. Seeds separate
     somewhat readily from pulp, numerous, one to four, often four,
     above medium in size, rather broad, intermediate in length, blunt,
     light brown; raphe does not show; chalaza rather large, usually at
     center, irregularly circular, obscure.


CREVELING.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1858=:225. =2.= _Ib._, =1860=:79. =3.=
     _Horticulturist_, =15=:538. 1860. _fig._ =4.= _Mag. Hort._,
     =27=:103. 1861. =5.= _Horticulturist_, =17=:141. 1862. =6.= _Mag.
     Hort._, =29=:72. 1863. =7.= Mead, =1867=:163. =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Cat._, =1867=:45. =9.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =4=:60. 1868. =10.=
     Downing, =1869=:536. =11.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =8=:143. 1870. =12.=
     _Gar. Mon._, =13=:214, 279. 1871. =13.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:90.
     =14.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:528, 540, 544, 548, 554. 1898.
     =15.= _Ib._, =18=:374, 387, 395. 1899. =16.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._,
     =110=:240. 1902.

     _Bloom_ (2, 3, 5, 13). _Bloomburg_ (10). CATAWISSA (5). _Catawissa_
     (2, 6, 13). _Catawissa Bloom_ (10). _Columbia Bloom_ (2, 4).
     _Columbia County_ (10). LAURA BEVERLY (9, 12). _Laura Beverly?_
     (10).

Creveling was long a favorite early black grape for the garden, where,
if planted in good soil and kept well trained, it produces fine clusters
of large, handsome, very good grapes of the Isabella type. Under any but
the best of care, however, it is unproductive and sets loose, straggling
bunches. The wood is soft, long-jointed, reddish in color, with a large
pith and producing but few laterals. It is markedly self-sterile.

The origin of the Creveling is uncertain. It was first introduced to the
public about 1857 by F. F. Merceron of Catawissa, Pennsylvania. It is
said to have been in cultivation in Columbia County, Pennsylvania, some
years previous to the date given. The name Creveling came from a family
of that name, who cultivated the variety and may possibly have
originated it. It was placed upon the grape list of the American
Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1867 and dropped from their list in
1899. It is still widely cultivated in varietal vineyards.

     Vine vigorous, not quite hardy, usually not very productive. Canes
     long, above medium in number, rather thick, dark reddish-brown;
     nodes slightly enlarged, flattened; internodes medium to long;
     diaphragm thick; pith large; shoots glabrous; tendrils usually
     continuous, long, trifid to bifid.

     Leaf-buds rather large, short, thick, obtuse, open in mid-season.
     Young leaves tinged on upper and lower sides with rose-carmine.
     Leaves below medium to large, thick; upper surface dark green,
     dull, slightly rugose; lower surface pale green, rather pubescent;
     veins somewhat prominent; lobes usually three, sometimes obscurely
     five, terminal lobe acute to blunt; petiolar sinus deep to
     narrow, closed and sometimes overlapping; basal sinus very shallow
     when present; lateral sinus rather shallow, narrow; teeth shallow,
     of average width. Flowers sometimes on plan of six, sterile, open
     in mid-season or earlier; stamens reflexed.

     [Illustration: CREVELING]

     Fruit ripens a few days later than Hartford, does not keep well.
     Clusters resemble Isabella in general appearance, good size, medium
     to long, rather broad, irregularly tapering, usually
     single-shouldered the shoulder often being connected to the cluster
     by a long stem, loose; peduncle long, rather slender, often with a
     distinct reddish tinge; pedicel variable in length, thick, usually
     with no warts, wide at point of attachment to berry; brush
     intermediate in length, thick, dark wine-color. Berries medium to
     large, oval, dull black, covered with heavy blue bloom, persistent,
     rather firm. Skin thick, tough, adheres considerably to the pulp,
     with a moderate amount of wine-colored pigment, astringent. Flesh
     pale green, translucent, juicy, very stringy, tender, coarse,
     somewhat foxy, sweet at skin to tart at center, good in quality.
     Seeds separate rather easily, one to five in number, average two or
     three, above medium in size, broad, slightly notched, intermediate
     in length, blunt, light brown; raphe shows as a narrow groove;
     chalaza of fair size, at center or slightly above, oval, obscure.


CROTON.

(Vinifera, Labrusca, Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =5=:223, 224. 1869. _fig._ =2.= _Am. Hort.
     An._, =1870=:91, 92. _fig._ =3.= _Horticulturist_, =25=:275. 1870.
     =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1871=:16. =5.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1872=:546. _fig._ =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:57. =7.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:87. _fig._ =8.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:528, 545, 547, 554. 1898. =9.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:42, 51.
     1901.

The Croton is a feast both to the eye and the palate. The accompanying
color-plate does not do it justice as grown at its best, as it shows a
loose, straggling bunch, a characteristic of the variety only when
poorly grown. Unfortunately it has the fault of being difficult to grow
well, being adapted to but few soils and proving unfruitful, weak in
growth, precariously tender, and somewhat subject to mildew and rot in
unfavorable situations. But when well grown the consensus of opinion
among viticulturists is that it has few superiors among white grapes. It
has a sweet, delicate Vinifera flavor, with melting flesh which readily
separates from the few seeds. The fruit hangs on the vines until frost,
and keeps well into the winter. The Croton is among green grapes what
its parent, the Delaware, is among red grapes. In spite of its high
quality it has never become widely distributed, failing utterly as a
commercial variety, quality counting for but little in grape markets.
If this delicious fruit is to be saved to cultivation it must be by the
hands of the amateur.

Croton came from Stephen W. Underhill[174] of Croton Point, New York,
from seed of Delaware pollinated by Chasselas de Fontainbleau. The seed
was planted in the spring of 1863 and the vine fruited for the first
time in 1865. The grape was first exhibited at the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society meeting in 1868. It was placed on the grape list
of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1871 but was
dropped in 1883, chiefly on account of its susceptibility to fungal
diseases.

     Vine medium to vigorous, often somewhat tender, usually productive,
     subject to disease in unfavorable locations. Canes long, numerous,
     thick, rather dark reddish-brown; nodes enlarged, usually not
     flattened; internodes medium to short; diaphragm very thick; pith
     large; shoots glabrous; tendrils intermittent, long, bifid.

[Illustration: CROTON]

     Leaf-buds large, prominent, long, of average thickness, conical,
     open late. Young leaves tinged on lower side and at margin of upper
     side with faint carmine. Foliage remains until late in the season;
     leaves of medium size, intermediate in thickness; upper surface
     light green, dull, nearly smooth to rugose; lower surface pale
     green, slightly cobwebby or hairy; veins indistinct; lobes five in
     number, terminal lobe blunt to acute; basal sinus of average depth,
     rather narrow; lateral sinus inclined to deep and nearly narrow;
     petiolar sinus medium deep, narrow, often closed and overlapping;
     teeth inclined to shallow, wide. Flowers fertile, open late;
     stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens in mid-season or later, keeps fairly well. Clusters
     not uniform, very large to medium, longish, rather slender,
     irregularly tapering, often with an unusually heavy single
     shoulder, very loose to medium; peduncle long, thick; pedicel
     somewhat long, thick, covered with few, small, inconspicuous warts;
     brush intermediate in length, greenish. Berries irregular in size
     averaging about medium, roundish to slightly elongated, light
     green, changing to yellowish-green, covered with thin gray bloom,
     persistent, slightly soft. Skin thin, rather tough, adheres very
     slightly to the pulp, contains no pigment. Flesh green, somewhat
     transparent, very juicy, melting, vinous, pleasant flavor,
     agreeably sweet, good to very good in quality. Seeds separate very
     easily from the flesh, one to three, above medium in size, slightly
     elongated, fair breadth, notched, rather sharply pointed, light
     brown; raphe obscure; chalaza small, above center, irregularly
     circular to oval, indistinct.


CUNNINGHAM.

(Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= Prince, =1830=:191. =2.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1845=:939.
     =3.= _Gar. Mon._, =3=:83. 1861. =4.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =3=:301.
     1868. =5.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:34, 75. 1869. =6.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:87, 88. fig. =7.= _Texas Farm and Ranch_, Feb. 8, =1896=:11.
     =8.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1149, 1155. 1898. =9.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._,
     =46=:38, 43, 45, 46, 50, 54. 1899. =10.= _Traite gen. de vit._,
     =6=:268. 1903.

     _Long_ (4, 6, 7, 9). _Long No. 2_ (9). _Prince Edward_ (1).

The Cunningham is not known in New York and in fact has been cultivated
but little in America, but in France at one time it was one of the best
known American grapes, both as a direct producer and as a stock for
European varieties. It is not now largely grown in France, however,
having been superseded by better American varieties for the uses for
which it was formerly cultivated. It was much sought for by the French
as a stock for large Vinifera cions, the size of the vine giving an
opportunity for making a good graft. In the South, Cunningham is not
largely grown as there are several other varieties of its class superior
to it in quality of fruit and in vine characters as well. It seems
everywhere to have been an exceedingly capricious grower and very
particular as to soil and climate. It is said to make a deep yellow
wine of very good quality. It has little or no value as a table grape.

Cunningham originated in the garden of Jacob Cunningham of Prince Edward
County, Virginia, about the year 1812. Cuttings of this vine were sent
by Dr. D. N. Norton of Richmond to Prince in 1829. Prince introduced it
to the public. Its botanical characters mark it as an offshoot of the
Herbemont group of Bourquiniana.

The following description is a compilation from several sources:

     Vine very vigorous, spreading, rather productive, somewhat
     suceptible to mildew. Canes large and long, with stiff reddish
     hairs at base; shoots showing considerable bloom; tendrils
     intermittent, usually trifid. Leaves large, rather thick, roundish,
     entire or slightly lobed; smooth and dark green above,
     yellowish-green below and slightly pubescent; petiolar sinus
     narrow, frequently overlapping. Clusters of medium size, long,
     sometimes shouldered, very compact; peduncle short, strong; pedicel
     long, slender. Berries small, purplish-black with thin, grayish
     bloom. Skin thin, tough with considerable underlying pigment. Flesh
     tender, juicy, sprightly or somewhat acidly sweet. Seeds two to
     five, rather oval; beak short; chalaza distinct; raphe showing as a
     ridge.


CYNTHIANA.

(Aestivalis, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1863=:548. =2.= Husmann, =1866=:103. =3.=
     Ib., =1866=:104. =4.= _Gar. Mon._, =11=:149. 1869. =5.= _Grape
     Cult._, =1=:20, 239. 1869. =6.= _Ib._, =3=:2. 1871. =7.= _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Cat._, =1881=:24. =8.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:88. _fig._ =9.=
     _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1891=:127, 131. =10.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._,
     =28=:253. 1893. =11.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:38, 43, 45, 46, 50.
     1899. =12.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:246. 1902. =13.= _Traite gen.
     de vit._, =6=:274. 1903.

     ARKANSAS (3). _Arkansas_ (8). _Norton_ (13). _Norton Virginia_
     (13). _Norton's Virginia_ _Seedling_ (13). _Red River_ (2, 5, 6, 8,
     13). _Vitis Nortoni_ (13).

Cynthiana is another southern grape impossible to grow in the North and
therefore of but general interest for this work. There has long been a
heated controversy as to whether this variety differs from Norton. The
botanical differences between the two varieties are not greater than
might be attributed to environment, soil, climate and culture; but side
by side the two grapes ripen at different times, and the quality of the
fruit, and more particularly of the wine, is such that the varieties
must be considered as distinct. The distinction should be maintained for
Cynthiana is the better grape of the two. It has been much grown in
France for its intrinsic value and in the reconstruction of vineyards
destroyed by phylloxera.

[Illustration: CYNTHIANA]

As the history given below shows, the variety is an old one but it, with
Norton, was condemned by the early vineyardists because it could be
propagated from cuttings only with the greatest difficulty. Like most of
its species, Cynthiana is somewhat particular as to soil and location,
preferring sandy or gravelly loams and not thriving on clays or
limestones. While very resistant to phylloxera, it is not now much used
as a resistant stock because of the superiority of varieties of
Rupestris and because it is not easily propagated. It is very resistant
to cryptogamic diseases, mildew, black-rot and anthracnose, and is a
strong, vigorous grower. Its cycle of vegetation is long, the buds
bursting forth early and the fruit maturing very late. It has no value
as a table grape but according to the _Bushberg Catalogue_[175] it is
the best American grape for red wine. So, too, according to Viala,[176]
the wine from Cynthiana is the best of all the red wines produced from
American vines. It is said by French wine-makers[177] to contain "an
excess of all the elements which constitute the best ordinary wines,
color, tannin, acidity, and bouquet," and therefore to make a splendid
base for blending with wine from varieties lacking in the above
elements.

Cynthiana was received, some time in the fifties by Prince of Flushing,
Long Island, from Arkansas where it is said to have been found growing
in the woods. It was sent by Prince to Husmann at Hermann, Missouri,
where it did so well and was so highly spoken of by Husmann and his
neighbors that it soon became known to grape-growers. It was placed upon
the grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in
1881, where it still remains. Like Norton, Cynthiana is often considered
pure Aestivalis, although a strain of some other blood, probably
Labrusca, is apparent. Because of the similarity of this variety and
Norton the one is often grown as the other.

     Vine vigorous, healthy, hardy, usually a good yielder. Canes medium
     to nearly long, numerous, of average size, dark brown to
     reddish-brown, sometimes with faint ash-gray tinge, surface covered
     with thick blue bloom; nodes enlarged, flattened; internodes short
     to medium; diaphragm rather thin; pith of medium size; shoots
     slightly glabrous; tendrils intermittent to continuous, above
     medium in length, bifid.

     Leaf-buds small, short, slender, pointed to conical. Leaves
     variable in size, thick, firm; upper surface dark green, dull,
     rugose; lower surface slightly tinged with blue, faintly pubescent,
     cobwebby; veins distinct; lobes variable in number, terminal lobe
     acute; petiolar sinus deep, narrow, closed and sometimes
     overlapping; basal sinus shallow; lateral sinus rather shallow and
     narrow; teeth shallow, of average width; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens very late and keeps well. Clusters medium to small,
     rather long, intermediate in breadth, tapering to cylindrical, not
     very uniform, often single-shouldered, compact; peduncle above
     medium length, small; pedicel rather short and slender, covered
     with numerous warts, enlarged at point of attachment to berry;
     brush short, thick, wine-colored. Berries small, roundish, black,
     covered with a moderate amount of blue bloom, persistent, firm.
     Skin thin, tough, rather adherent to the pulp, contains a slight
     amount of purple pigment, astringent. Flesh darkish green,
     translucent, juicy, tough and solid, spicy, rather tart, poor in
     quality as a dessert grape. Seeds separate with difficulty from the
     pulp, one to six, average three, small, of mean breadth, short,
     blunt, dark brown; raphe distinct, cord-like; chalaza small,
     slightly above center, circular, distinct. Must 98 deg.-118 deg..


DAISY.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Kan. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1886=:187. =2.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =10=:495. 1891. =3.= _Ib._, =13=:602. 1894. =4.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1894=:111. =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:528, 548, 554.
     1898.

Daisy is an unimportant seedling of Goethe. The only reason for its
distribution was its delicate, spicy, pleasant flavor. It is probably
not worth perpetuating.

Dr. J. Stayman, Leavenworth, Kansas, is supposed to have originated
Daisy from seed of Goethe. On account of the fruit characters, Bush
questions the parentage but as it grows at this Station the reputed
parentage appears to be quite probably correct.

     Vine intermediate in vigor, not hardy nor productive, an uncertain
     bearer. Tendrils continuous, bifid to sometimes trifid. Leaves
     small to medium, light green; lower surface slightly pubescent.
     Flowers nearly self-sterile, open in mid-season; stamens upright.
     Fruit ripens with Concord or soon after, does not keep well.
     Clusters of medium size, rather loose. Berries medium to small,
     distinctly oval, somewhat darker red than Agawam, covered with thin
     lilac bloom, persistent, not firm. Flesh soft and tender, vinous,
     sweet, of pleasant flavor, good in quality. Seeds few, medium in
     length, usually with a slightly enlarged neck; chalaza above
     center, often with radiating ridges.


DELAWARE.

(Labrusca, Bourquiniana, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Horticulturist_, =8=:492. 1853. _fig._ =2.= _Ib._, =9=:98.
     1854. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1856=:214. =4.= _Horticulturist_,
     =12=:562. 1857. =5.= Downing, =1857=:336. _fig._ =6.=
     _Horticulturist_, =13=:58, 179. 1858. =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1858=:233. =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1858=:65. =9.= _Gar. Mon._,
     =1=:75, 164. 1859. =10.= _Ib._, =2=:13, 26, 117, 176. 1860. =11.=
     _Horticulturist_, =16=:16, 21, 33, 119. 1861. =12.= Fuller,
     =1867=:221. =13.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1872=:48. =14.= _Ib._,
     =1873=:64. =15.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1882-3=:28. =16.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1883=:91. _fig._ =17.= _Am. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:139.
     =18.= _Amer. Gard._, =12=:584. 1891. =19.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._,
     =28=:259. 1893. =20.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =15=:430, 431, 432,
     433. 1896. =21.= _Ib._, =17=:528, 540, 543, 544, 545, 547, 554.
     1898. =22.= _Amer. Gard._, =20=:622. 1899. =23.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._,
     =169=:169. 1899. =24.= _Amer. Gard._, =22=:481. 1901. =25.= _Traite
     gen. de vit._, =6=:186. 1903.

     _French Grape_ (10, 14). _Gray Delaware_ (25). _Heath_ (5).
     _Italian wine grape_ (5, 8, 13, 14, 16). _Ladies Choice_ (8, 11).
     _Powell_ (1, 14). _Red Riesling_, incorr. (5). _Rose Colored
     Delaware_ (25). _Ruff_ (9, 14). _Traminer_, incorr. (5). _Wine
     Grape_ (11).

Delaware is the American grape _par excellence_. Its introduction raised
the standard of quality in our viticulture to that of the Old World, for
there is no variety of _Vitis vinifera_ more richly or more delicately
flavored or with a more agreeable aroma than the Delaware. This variety
is rightly used wherever American grapes are grown as the standard
whereby to gauge the quality of other grapes. Added to high quality it
is endowed with a constitution which enables it to withstand climatic
conditions to which all but the most hardy varieties will succumb, and
so elastic as to adapt it to many soils and conditions, and to bear
under most situations an abundant crop. All of this makes it, next to
the Concord, the most popular grape for garden, vineyard and wine-press,
now grown in the United States. As with the Concord, its introduction
gave American grape-growing a great impetus and it is a question whether
or not, with its high quality, it has not had a more beneficial effect
on the viticulture of the country than the Concord.

Beside the qualities named above for the Delaware, it matures
sufficiently early to make its crops certain, is attractive in
appearance, keeps well on the vine and in the package, ships well and is
more immune than other commercial varieties to black-rot. Its faults
are: The small size of the vine, slowness of growth, susceptibility of
the foliage to mildew, its capriciousness in certain soils, and the
small size of the berries. The first two faults make it necessary to
plant the vines more closely than other commercial varieties stand. It
succeeds best in deep, rich, well-drained, warm soils but even on these
it must receive good cultivation, close pruning, and in some cases the
fruit must be thinned. It is, too, a necessity, where mildew is
abundant, to spray with bordeaux mixture which keeps the disease well in
check. Birds are very fond of this variety and it suffers in particular
from the depredations of robins.

Delaware is the best American table grape and as such commands a premium
in all of the markets, selling oftentimes for double the price of
Concord. It is also much sought for by wine-makers both for Delaware
wine and for blending in making champagne or other wines of high
quality. It is grown North and South and westward to the Rocky
Mountains, and is now proving especially profitable in many southern
locations as an early grape to ship to northern markets. The Delaware is
an especially desirable grape to cultivate in small gardens because of
its delicious and handsome fruit, its compact habit of growth, and when
in health, its ample and lustrous green, delicately formed leaves which
make it one of the most ornamental of the grapes.[178]

Delaware is the parent of an interesting but not particularly valuable
progeny; none of the pure-bred offspring nearly equal the parent though
many of them inherit its fine color and high quality. Among its
cross-bred offspring are some notable varieties, all of which are
described in their proper places in this work. An interesting fact
regarding the pure-bred progeny of Delaware is that, so far as we have
records, it seems to have given very few black grapes though there are
often white or rose-colored seedlings among them. Even in its cross-bred
offspring, red, or some tint of it greatly predominates, indicating
power in the transmission of color and suggesting the value of this
variety in breeding red grapes.

[Illustration: DELAWARE]

The Delaware grape was first brought to notice by Abram Thompson, editor
of the _Delaware Gazette_ of Delaware, Ohio. In the summer of 1849 he
saw fruit of this variety which had been brought into town from one of
the neighboring farms. An investigation disclosed that the variety was
being raised on the farms of a Mr. Warford and of a Mr. Heath, near the
banks of the Scioto River, a few miles from the town of Delaware, and
that Warford had brought the variety from the State of New Jersey more
than twenty years before. It was known in this neighborhood under the
name of Heath, or Powell. Thompson sent fruit of the variety to A. J.
Downing who gave it the name Delaware, after the town from which the
samples had been sent. Thompson also brought it to the notice of the
Ohio Pomological Society in the autumn of 1851. It was found that the
Delaware vines secured by Warford could be traced back to the garden of
Paul H. Provost, a Swiss of Frenchtown, Kingswood Township, Hunterdon
County, New Jersey. Provost, at this time, was dead, and definite
information was very difficult to secure as to where he had obtained his
vines. One account was that they had been received from a brother
residing in Italy, and in deference to this story, the variety was
locally known as the Italian wine grape. Another story was to the effect
that they had been brought to Provost's place by a German who had been
in this country only a short time but who had spent this interval with
Hare Powell of Philadelphia. Whether the German secured the vines from
the Old Country or from Powell is uncertain. There was a report that
they had been secured from Powell and that he in turn had received them
from Bland of Virginia. All of the stories as to how the vines came into
Provost's garden lack supporting evidence and some were of the opinion
that it had grown in the garden as a seedling.

The Delaware at once attracted great attention and the horticultural
journals were full of conflicting accounts of its history and of warm
discussions as to its botany. In 1856 it was placed on the grape list of
the American Pomological Society fruit catalog as "a new variety which
promises well;" two years later it was placed on the list of recommended
sorts.

There is still a difference of opinion as to the botany of this variety.
The theory advanced by many when it was first introduced, that it is a
pure Vinifera, has been abandoned. Millardet and others considered the
Delaware a hybrid between Vinifera, Labrusca, Cinerea and Aestivalis.
Munson holds that it is of Labrusca-Bourquiniana origin with a probable
slight admixture of Vinifera. He further states that he considers
Elsinburgh probably one of the parents. Historically this is
corroborated by the fact that Elsingburgh originated in New Jersey not
far from where Provost lived.

     Vine not a strong grower, hardy except in unfavorable locations,
     fairly productive, somewhat subject to leaf-hoppers and mildew.
     Canes medium to below in length, numerous, slender, rather light to
     medium dark brown; nodes slightly enlarged, not flattened;
     internodes rather short; diaphragm intermediate in thickness; pith
     small; shoots glabrous; tendrils intermittent, somewhat short,
     bifid.

     Leaf-buds rather small, of average length, slender, pointed to
     conical, prominent, open early. Young leaves tinged on lower side
     and along margin of upper side with a faint golden hue but the
     prevailing color is light rose-carmine. Foliage not always healthy;
     leaves medium to small, intermediate in thickness; upper surface
     dark green, dull, smoothish; lower surface pale green, slightly
     pubescent; veins inconspicuous; lobes three to five in number,
     terminal lobe acute to acuminate; petiolar sinus of average depth,
     narrow to medium; basal sinus shallow and narrow when present;
     lateral sinus moderately deep, narrow; teeth shallow, of fair
     width. Flowers fertile, open somewhat late; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens a few days earlier than Concord, keeps well. Clusters
     medium to small, of average length, slender, rather blunt, often
     cylindrical, regular, usually shouldered, compact; peduncle medium
     to short, slender; pedicel short, slender, smooth; brush
     intermediate in size, light brown. Berries uniform in size and
     shape, small to medium, roundish, light red, covered with thin
     lilac bloom, persistent, firm. Skin thin, moderately tough, adheres
     somewhat to the pulp, contains no pigment, slightly astringent.
     Flesh light green, translucent, juicy, tender, aromatic, vinous,
     sprightly and refreshing, sweet to agreeably tart from skin to
     center, best in quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp, one
     to four, average two, intermediate in size, rather broad, notched,
     short, blunt, light brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza of medium
     size, above center, circular. Must 100 deg.-118 deg..


DELAWBA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1891=:126. =2.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._,
     =1891=:393. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:114, 115. _fig._ =4.= _Ga.
     Sta. Bul._, =53=:42. 1901.

Of Delawba we can say but little, not having vines of it on the Station
grounds. It is an offspring of Delaware crossed with Catawba, as the
name indicates, and was introduced with the expectation that it would
take the place of one or the other or both of its parents. However, it
has made no impress upon the viticulture of this State though it has
been tested here and there in the several grape regions during the past
ten years. The fruit resembles Catawba, though not as attractive, the
berries averaging smaller, but it ripens almost as early as Delaware, a
great point in its favor. The vine, too, is more like Catawba than the
Delaware, being more vigorous and productive than the latter. The
reports of this variety indicate that it is very promising but it seems
not to be making headway as either a fancy or a commercial fruit
probably because of characters lacking in the fruit.

Dr. L. C. Chisholm of Spring Hill, Tennessee, produced the Delawba some
time about 1880 from seed of Delaware fertilized by Catawba. The variety
was introduced in 1895, after having received high encomiums from
various horticultural authorities. The following is a compiled
description:

     Vine usually vigorous and productive, resembling Catawba very
     closely, blooming with Concord. Cluster above medium to large,
     moderately compact, cylindrical or slightly tapering, sometimes
     slightly shouldered. Berries variable in size, ranging from above
     medium to below, of amber color with lilac bloom; skin quite tough.
     Not attractive in appearance. It is self-fertile and ripens its
     berries evenly. Quality good to very good. Ripens shortly after
     Delaware.


DEVEREAUX.[179]

(Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =9=:373. 1843. =2.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._,
     =1853=:299. =3.= _Horticulturist_, =12=:458. 1857. =4.= _Gar.
     Mon._, =2=:265. 1860. =5.= Downing, =1869=:531. =6.= _Grape Cult._,
     =1=:17, 326. 1869. =7.= (?) _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:118. =8.= _Ib._,
     =1894=:116. =9.= (?) _Texas Farm and Ranch_, Feb. 8, =1896=:11.

     BLACK JULY (5). _Black July_ (8, 9). _Blue Grape_ (5, 8, 9).
     _Devereux_ (5). _Hart_ (4, 5, 8). _Husson_ (5, 8, 9). _Lenoir_ (9,
     incorr. 5, 8). LINCOLN (4, 7). _Lincoln_ (5,? 8, 9). _McLean_ (4,
     5, 8, 9). _Sherry_ (5, 8, 9). _Sumpter_ (5, 9). _Thurmond_ (5, 8,
     9). _Tuley_ (5, 8, 9).

The Devereaux is an old southern grape now nearly obsolete because of
its capriciousness as to location. When it can be grown it is of high
quality and makes a very good wine. The variety is of only historical
and botanical interest. In France the Devereaux was at one time
considered a valuable wine grape.

An article in the _Horticulturist_[180] for 1857 states that the
Devereaux was found in the woods over forty years before that date by
Samuel M. Devereaux, who lived near Sparta, Georgia. It has been
considerably confused with varieties which resemble it. The name
Lincoln, in particular, is a questionable synonym which Dr. Curtis of
Hillsboro, North Carolina, in a letter to the _Gardener's Monthly_ for
1860,[181] states was found near the junction of the South Fork and
Catawba Rivers by Dr. William McLean. It was known locally under the
names of McLean and Hart. Later it was sent to Longworth, who gave it
the name Lincoln.

The descriptions of this variety from various sources are conflicting.
That given below is copied from the _Bushberg Catalogue_.[182]

     "Bunch long, loose, slightly shouldered; berry black, below medium,
     round; skin fine, tender; flesh meaty, juicy without pulp, and
     vinous; quality best. Vine a strong grower, and, when free from
     mildew, moderately productive; wood long-jointed, purplish brown at
     first, of deeper purplish red when ripe; with bi-forked,
     intermittent tendrils--these, as also the leaf stalk, are tinged on
     their base with a purplish brown hue, like the young canes; the
     buds are covered with a russet down, unfolding with that rosy
     complexion peculiar to the young, downy leaves of most Aestivalis.
     The developed foliage is of medium size, entire (not lobed),
     considerably wrinkled, turgid, with somewhat abundant hair tufts on
     the lower veins."


DIAMOND.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Gar. Mon._, =26=:336. 1884. =2.= _Ib._, =28=:333. 1886. =3.=
     _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1887-8=:85. =4.= _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1889=:328. =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =9=:332. 1890. =6.= _Kan.
     Sta. Bul._, =28=:161. 1891. =7.= _Rural N. Y._, =50=:691, 787.
     1891. =8.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =44=:118, 127. 1893. =9.= _Rural N.
     Y._, =53=:616, 645, _fig._, 646. 1894. =10.= _Gar. and For._,
     =8=:96, 377, 487. 1895. =11.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =15=:432, 433.
     1896. =12.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:175, 176. 1896. _fig._
     =13.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1897=:19. =14.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:529, 538, 540, 543, 544, 547, 549, 554. 1898. =15.= _Va. Sta.
     Bul._, =94=:139. 1898. =16.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:38, 44, 45, 50.
     1899. =17.= _Can. Hort._, =25=:125, 190. 1902. _fig._

     DIAMOND, _Moore_ (13). MOORE'S DIAMOND (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9.)
     _Moore's Diamond_ (15, 17).

[Illustration: DIAMOND]

Diamond is surpassed in quality and beauty by few other grapes. When to
its desirable fruit characters are added its earliness, hardiness,
productiveness and vigor it is surpassed by no other green grape.
Niagara is more productive and therefore more profitable in most
localities but in many essential characters it falls short of Diamond
and the difference in productiveness is not marked. We usually accord
Niagara first place among green grapes but Diamond rivals it for the
honor. The former attained high rank not only through merit but by much
advertisement while Diamond has made its way by merit alone. If we
consider the wants of the amateur and of the wine-maker as well as those
of the commercial vineyardist, unquestionably Diamond must be accorded a
high place among the best all-around grapes.

Diamond is a diluted hybrid between _Vitis labrusca_ and _Vitis
vinifera_; the touch of the exotic grape given by the Vinifera parents
has been just sufficient to give it the richness in flavor of the Old
World grape and not overcome the refreshing sprightliness of our native
fox grapes. It is without the insipid sweetness of the first or the
foxiness of the latter. The Vinifera characters are wholly recessive in
vine and foliage, the plant resembling very closely its American parent,
Concord. Diamond is not as highly esteemed as a commercial variety as it
deserves to be, for beside being of high quality the fruit packs,
carries and keeps well. Were it known by consumers the demand for it
would be such that it would command a fancy price and thereby more than
make up for its lack in fruitfulness, but through the unfortunate
condition of American fruit markets it is, more often than not, sold as
Niagara and has not therefore established the reputation it should have
in the markets. Diamond is in demand among wine-makers and especially
for the making of champagnes. For the amateur it has few superiors, the
chief drawback for the small garden being that robins prefer it to most
other varieties and greatly reduce the crop. Diamond is well established
in Canada and can be grown in as great a range of latitude as the
Concord. The vine is as free from the attacks of fungi as the Concord
but the fruit is a little more susceptible to cryptogamic diseases and
especially to black-rot, though not attacked by fungi so much as
Niagara.

The late Jacob Moore of Brighton, New York, originated Diamond about
1870 from Concord seed fertilized by Iona. It was introduced about 1885.
It has gained in favor somewhat slowly, and was not placed on the grape
list of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog until 1897.

     Vine medium to vigorous, hardy, productive in most locations. Canes
     medium to short, not very numerous, of average thickness, brownish
     or with a slight reddish tinge; nodes slightly enlarged, not
     flattened; internodes medium to short; diaphragm intermediate in
     thickness; pith of medium size; shoots pubescent; tendrils
     intermittent, bifid.

     Leaf-buds small, short, pointed to conical, open in mid-season.
     Young leaves tinged on lower side and along the edges with red.
     Leaves of average size, thick; upper surface light green, dull,
     nearly smooth; lower surface light bronze, downy; veins distinct;
     lobes usually three in number, indistinct; petiolar sinus very
     shallow; teeth shallow, of mean width. Flowers fertile, open early
     to somewhat late; stamens upright.

     Fruit usually ripens slightly earlier than Niagara, keeps well.
     Clusters variable in size, medium to short, rather broad, somewhat
     blunt, cylindrical to slightly tapering, often single-shouldered,
     compact; peduncle short to medium, moderately thick; pedicel short
     and thick, covered with a few, inconspicuous warts, wide at point
     of attachment to berry; brush slender, of average length, pale
     green. Berries above medium to medium size, roundish to strongly
     ovate on account of compactness, green with tinge of yellow on
     riper berries but less yellow than Niagara, glossy, covered with
     thin gray bloom, persistent, rather firm. Skin thin, toughish,
     adheres somewhat to the pulp, contains no pigment, astringent.
     Flesh pale green, rather transparent, juicy, tender, inclined to
     melting, fine-grained, slightly aromatic, sprightly, nearly sweet
     next the skin to agreeably tart at center, quality very good. Seeds
     separate easily from the pulp, one to four, average two or three,
     intermediate in size, rather broad and long, moderately
     sharp-pointed, yellowish-brown; raphe shows as a narrow obscure
     groove; chalaza small, slightly above center, oval, rather obscure.


DIANA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Aestivalis?)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =10=:242. 1844. =2.= _Horticulturist_, =4=:224,
     535. 1849. =3.= _Mag. Hort._, =16=:28, 306, 546. 1850. =4.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1854.= =5.= _Mag. Hort._, =27=:6, 262, 490, 523,
     531. 1861. =6.= _My Vineyard at Lakeview_, =1866=:78. =7.= _N. Y.
     Ag. Soc. Rpt._, =1866=:803, 881. =8.= _Horticulturist_, =22=:356.
     1867. =9.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =5=:15, 297. 1869. =10.= _Mich. Pom.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1873=:60. =11.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:37, 119,
     123, 136, 153. =12.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, Pt. =1=:96. 1883.
     =13.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:93. _fig._ =14.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:540, 543, 544, 545, 547, 554. 1898. =15.= _Va. Sta. Bul._,
     =94=:137. 1898. =16.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:38, 43, 45. 1899. =17.=
     _Rural N. Y._, =61=:719, _fig._, 722. 1902.

[Illustration: DIANA]

When introduced Diana promised to be the popular grape of the North and
especially of New England. Its many good qualities warranted the high
hopes of those who first grew it but time revealed so many defects that
the variety never became widely distributed although few grapes surpass
it, or even equal it, in high quality and handsome appearance when at
its best. Diana is a seedling of Catawba and was hailed as superior to
its parent in quality, appearance and earliness. It was the last named
character that especially commended it to northern grape-growers.
Catawba can be grown in New York only in the most favored locations and
hardly at all in New England even in its southern parts. It fails in the
North because the seasons are too short for the fruit to mature. Diana
is about two weeks earlier than Catawba and it was therefore thought
that the offspring, lacking the defect of the parent, would take the
rank in the North that the older variety held in the South.

Diana bears a strong resemblance to Catawba, differing chiefly in having
a lighter color, a delicate pale red or rose, and in being less pulpy
and more juicy. Usually the bunches, too, are more compact, those of
Catawba as grown in the North being as a rule loose and sometimes
straggling. The flavor resembles that of Catawba but when well grown and
fully ripe it is more delicate and has less of the wild taste. The
grapes keep exceptionally well. But its great point of superiority over
Catawba is its earliness; it ripens from ten days to a fortnight
earlier, making possible, as said above, its culture far to the north.
The defects of Diana are as marked as its good qualities. It is
precariously tender in cold winters and in regions where Concord goes
without protection Diana must be favored. The grapes ripen unevenly,
many being green when others are mature, and berries and foliage are
both susceptible to fungi. Lastly it is in many localities a shy bearer
and is almost always capricious. During the first few years in bearing,
the fruit of Diana is very imperfect in flavor and deficient in size,
true of many grapes but particularly so of this one. The best qualities
of Diana are not brought out until the vines are seven or eight years of
age.

Perhaps no grape better illustrates the importance of local influences
and of knowledge of the peculiarities of varieties than Diana. All
grapes have their likes and dislikes but this one is capricious beyond
most others. It wants, for instance, comparatively poor, dry, gravelly
soil without any considerable amount of humus or nitrogen. On clays,
loams, or rich soils, the vines make a rank growth and the fruits are
few, late and of poor quality. So, too, it needs to be long pruned, and
to have all surplus bunches removed leaving a comparatively small crop
to mature, and these should hang until frost. To the fact that Diana is
so easily influenced must be attributed the great diversity of opinion
as to its worth, some holding it to be a most excellent variety while in
a nearby vineyard it is considered worthless.

In favorable situations Diana may be expected to make a most
satisfactory grape for the amateur and where it does especially well it
will prove a profitable variety for the local market. Its splendid
keeping qualities make it a very desirable grape for late winter. It is
even better in this respect than Catawba, one of the best keepers. While
the pulp of Diana has the meaty structure which adapts it for long
keeping its pulpiness is not objectionable as in some grapes and its
thick skin has a rich, spicy flavor. Wine made from Diana is said to be
second to none from our native grapes, equalling or surpassing that made
from Catawba.

To Mrs. Diana Crehore of Milton, Massachusetts, is due the honor of
having originated Diana. The variety was produced from seed of the
Catawba open to cross-pollination, planted about 1834. It was exhibited
before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1843. The Pomological
Congress at their second meeting in 1850 placed Diana on their list as a
"new variety which promises well," and in 1854 it was included in the
American Pomological Society list of sorts recommended for general
cultivation. The demand for this grape was so keen that in 1850 it was
sold for $15 a vine.

The species of Diana is usually given as Labrusca but the Vinifera-like
berries and the intermittent tendrils indicate Vinifera and the bloom on
the shoots suggests a strain of either Bicolor or Aestivalis.

     Vine vigorous, not always hardy, produces light to medium crops,
     somewhat susceptible to attacks of leaf-hoppers and fungi. Canes
     pubescent, long, of average number, thick to medium, light brown to
     reddish-brown, covered with thin blue bloom; nodes enlarged,
     slightly flattened; internodes medium to long; diaphragm thick;
     pith medium to large; shoots pubescent; tendrils intermittent,
     long, bifid.

     Leaf-buds large, of average length, thickish, obtuse to conical,
     open in mid-season. Young leaves colored on lower side and along
     margin of upper side with faint carmine, the smaller leaves usually
     heavily coated with thick silvery down. Leaves medium to large,
     inclined to thick; upper surface variable in color ranging from
     light to dark green, usually rather dull, nearly smooth to slightly
     rugose; lower surface pale green, heavily pubescent; lobes vary
     from three to five, terminal lobe acute; petiolar sinus moderately
     deep, wide to medium, often closed and overlapping; basal sinus
     shallow, not wide; lateral sinus not deep, medium to narrow; teeth
     shallow, intermediate in width. Flowers fertile, open in
     mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens earlier than Catawba, keeps unusually well. Clusters
     medium to large, intermediate in length, rather broad, tapering to
     slightly cylindrical, occasionally shouldered, the shoulder being
     attached to the cluster by a rather long stem, compact to medium;
     peduncle short to medium, slender; pedicel above average length,
     covered with small scattering warts; brush of fair length, rather
     slender, pale green. Berries somewhat irregular in size, above
     medium to small, roundish to slightly ovate in compact clusters,
     rather light red covered with thin lilac bloom, persistent, firm.
     Skin very thick, tough, adheres slightly to the pulp, contains no
     pigment, with but little astringency. Flesh pale green,
     translucent, juicy, tough, fine-grained, vinous, with a little
     foxiness, sweet at skin to agreeably tart at center, good in
     quality. Seeds do not separate readily from the pulp unless fruit
     is fully ripe, one to three, average two, intermediate in size,
     breadth and length, light brown; raphe buried in a rather wide,
     shallow groove; chalaza large, above center, circular, distinct.
     Must 88 deg.-90 deg..


DIANA HAMBURG.

(Vinifera, Labrusca, Aestivalis?)

     =1.= _N. Y. Ag. Soc. Rpt._, =1864=:38. =2.= _Mag. Hort._, =31=:105,
     331, 364. 1865. =3.= Thomas, =1867=:403. =4.= _Am. Jour. Hort._,
     =2=:328, 329. 1867. _fig._ =5.= _N. Y. Ag. Soc. Rpt._, =1868=:224.
     =6.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:90.

Diana Hamburg has long since passed from cultivation and was never
widely grown. Its parentage is indicated in its name. It is worth
discussion here only because it is an illustration of what can be done
in grape-breeding and because it was one of the parents of several
better known sorts chief of which is Brighton. The fruit of Diana
Hamburg is that of the European parent, while the vine is more nearly
that of Diana in appearance but quite that of Black Hamburg in
constitution, being very susceptible to disease, somewhat tender,
unproductive in our climate and ripening its fruit late.

Diana Hamburg was the first of Jacob Moore's productions, having been
raised from seed of Diana fertilized by pollen of Black Hamburg about
1860. It was first exhibited at the New York Agricultural Society
meeting in September, 1864. For a few years it attracted some attention
but soon passed from cultivation. The following description is compiled
from various sources:

     Vine vigorous when not diseased; canes short-jointed. Leaves of
     medium size, somewhat concave. Fruit-clusters large, compact,
     shouldered. Berries above medium, slightly oval, dark red, tender,
     free from pulp. Except in color, which shows a more reddish tinge,
     it very closely resembles Black Hamburg. The vine is tender and
     very susceptible to mildew.


DON JUAN.

(Vinifera, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Horticulturist_, =29=:329. 1874. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1875=:114. =3.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1875=:386. =4.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:92. =5.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =36=:45. 1891.

In spite of many good characters, as high quality, attractive
appearance, and a vine above the average in vigor and hardiness, Don
Juan has not become established in American viticulture. It has been
tested by grape collectors for forty years and is now passing from even
the collections. Its chief fault in this State is that it ripens too
late.

Don Juan was originated by J. H. Ricketts of Newburgh, New York, over
thirty years ago from seed of Iona pollinated by General Marmora. The
originator claimed that Don Juan was a better grape than its parent,
Iona, but it has fallen far short of this in the vineyards of the State.
The connection of the name with the grape is not apparent.

     Vine intermediate in vigor, appears hardy and productive. Canes
     short, rather brittle, slightly roughened; tendrils intermittent,
     bifid. Leaves medium to thin, not very large, light green. Fruit
     ripens rather late, keeps well. Clusters medium to large, rather
     broad, shouldered, strongly tapering, very loose. Berries large to
     medium, distinctly oval, dark red, covered with dark lilac or
     slightly blue bloom, strongly persistent, somewhat soft. Flesh
     tender and nearly melting, vinous, resembles Black Hamburg somewhat
     in flavor, good in quality.


DOWNING.

(Vinifera, Aestivalis, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Am. Hort. An._, =1871=:79. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1875=:113. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:92. =4.= _Gar. Mon._,
     =26=:366. 1884. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:17. =6.= _Kan.
     Sta. Bul._, =28=:160. 1891. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:619.
     1892. =8.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:176. 1896. =9.= _Mich. Sta.
     Bul._, =169=:169. 1899. =10.= _U. S. D. A. Yr. Bk._, =1901=:388.
     _col. pl._

     CHAS. DOWNING (1). _Charles Downing_ (3, 10). RICKETTS' NO. 1 (2).
     _Ricketts' No. 1_ (10).

Little known in cultivation, although it has been grown since 1870 and
has had the recommendations of our most expert horticulturists, Downing
is well worthy a place in the garden of grape-growers at least.

[Illustration: DOWNING]

Its high quality, handsome appearance, and excellence as a keeper, make
it desirable in all regions where the climate is sufficiently temperate
to allow it to withstand the winter and to develop in full its admirable
fruit characters. Added to the above qualities are fair vigor and health
of vine, while with its defects must be mentioned late ripening and
susceptibility to mildew in unfavorable seasons. When grown in most
parts of New York the vine of Downing should be laid down in the winter
or receive other protection. In most seasons, too, unremitting warfare
must be kept up with bordeaux mixture to check mildew. In appearance of
bunch and berry Downing is one of the most distinct of our varieties,
the clusters being large and well formed and the berries having the long
oval shape of a Malaga with a delicate light bloom. The flesh, too,
shows _Vitis vinifera_ in texture as well as quality while neither seeds
nor skins are as objectionable as in the best of our pure-bred American
varieties. Few amateurs realize the richness of our cultivated
grape-flora or the garden would be supplied by other varieties than
Concord, Niagara and Delaware and of these Downing would be one.

J. H. Ricketts of Newburgh, New York, originated Downing some time about
1865. It is one of the first of Ricketts' hybrids and was first known as
_Ricketts' No. 1._ The parentage is variously given as Isabella
fertilized by Muscat Hamburg, Croton fertilized by Black Hamburg, and
Israella fertilized by Muscat Hamburg.[183] The last combination is that
given by J. G. Burrows of Fishkill, New York, who was connected with J.
H. Ricketts in his work and who introduced Downing in 1883; hence it is
probably correct. Ricketts thought highly of this variety and gave it
the name of America's great pomologist, Charles Downing.

     Vine variable in vigor, usually winter-kills somewhat, not very
     productive, especially where it winter-kills. Canes short, few,
     rather slender, nearly dark green to slightly ash-gray tinge,
     surface covered with thin blue bloom, often roughened with few
     small warts; nodes much enlarged, strongly flattened; internodes
     medium to short; diaphragm rather thick; pith large to medium;
     shoots glabrous; tendrils intermittent, of average length, bifid to
     trifid.

     Leaf-buds intermediate in size and thickness, short, obtuse to
     nearly conical, open very late. Leaves medium to small, roundish,
     thick; upper surface dark green, slightly glossy, rugose; lower
     surface rather deep green with almost no pubescence; veins somewhat
     distinct; lobes none to five, terminal lobe acute; petiolar sinus
     of medium depth, very narrow, closed and overlapping; basal sinus
     usually lacking but shallow and narrow when present; lateral sinus
     shallow to medium, narrow; teeth above average in width and depth.
     Flowers open late; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens a little later than Concord, often keeps until spring.
     Clusters large, long, rather slender, cylindrical to slightly
     tapering, uniform, sometimes loosely shouldered, variable in
     compactness; peduncle short to medium, inclined to thick; pedicel
     intermediate in length, slender, covered with numerous warts; brush
     long, slender, greenish. Berries large to medium, distinctly oval,
     dark purplish-black, glossy, covered with light blue bloom,
     strongly persistent, almost firm. Skin very thick, tender, adheres
     considerably to the pulp, contains almost no pigment, without
     astringency. Flesh greenish or with slight yellow tinge,
     translucent, very juicy, tender, fine-grained, vinous, mild, very
     good in quality. The few seeds separate easily from the pulp, one
     to three, average two, intermediate in size and breadth, strongly
     notched, rather long, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza of mean
     size, surface frequently roughened, above center, circular to oval,
     variable in distinctness.


DRACUT AMBER.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1859=:48, 66. =2.= _Gar. Mon._,
     =3=:26. 1861. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1883=:26. =4.= _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:620. 1892. =5.= _Iowa Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1893=:161. =6.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:117. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =17=:548, 554. 1898. =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1899=:28.

     _Early Amber_ (6).

Dracut Amber receives the attention given it here chiefly because it is
a representative variety of the northern Labrusca and of the red type of
Labrusca. The fruit has no particular merit, its thick skin, coarse
pulp, seeds and rank foxy taste all being objectionable. But the vine is
very hardy and productive, and the fruit ripens early making it valuable
in the northern limits of viticulture and in other locations where a
vigorous, hardy early grape is wanted. It is of no value for the market
or for wine-making and therefore of use only for the home in the far
North, though the fact that it does not keep well is still further
against it for this purpose. The variety is of interest to the breeder
who desires a red Labrusca of the northern type.

[Illustration: DRACUT AMBER]

Asa Clement of Dracut, Massachusetts, originated Dracut Amber from
seed of a native reddish Labrusca that grew near a Catawba vine. The
seed was planted about 1855 and Mr. Clement called the resulting vine
the Amber grape. Later the new variety was introduced by Jacob W.
Manning under the name Dracut Amber. Catawba is supposed by Clement to
have been the male parent, but this is wholly conjectural and doubtful
as the botanical and horticultural characters are those of a northern
Labrusca. It was placed on the grape list of the American Pomological
Society fruit catalog in 1883 and was dropped, probably inadvertently,
in 1897, as it was replaced in 1899 and has since remained.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, productive, somewhat susceptible to attacks
     of leaf-hoppers. Canes long, rather numerous, medium to below in
     size, darkish-brown; nodes slightly enlarged, usually flattened;
     internodes medium to below in length; diaphragm of average
     thickness; pith above medium size; shoots pubescent; tendrils
     continuous, long, bifid to sometimes trifid.

     Leaf-buds decidedly variable in size, length, and thickness,
     prominent, obtuse to conical. Young leaves tinged on lower side
     with bright carmine and very strongly colored along margin of upper
     side with carmine. Leaves large to medium, rather thick; upper
     surface dark green, dull, smoothish; lower surface pale green or
     grayish, faintly cobwebby; veins indistinct; lobes three or
     sometimes five in number with terminal lobe obtuse to acute;
     petiolar sinus moderately deep, rather narrow to medium; basal
     sinus shallow to narrow; lateral sinus usually shallow, medium to
     rather wide; teeth shallow, of average width. Flowers sometimes on
     plan of six, slightly sterile to fertile, open in mid-season;
     stamens variable in length.

     Fruit ripens earlier than Concord, does not keep well, as the
     berries soon shrivel. Clusters not especially satisfactory in
     general appearance, variable in size, short to medium, rather
     broad, somewhat cylindrical, irregular, rarely shouldered, compact
     to medium; peduncle short, slender; pedicel nearly short, of
     average thickness, covered with numerous warts, enlarged at point
     of attachment to berry; brush rather long, light yellowish-green.
     Berries medium to large, variable in shape ranging from oval to
     roundish, dull pale red or dark amber, covered with thin lilac or
     faint blue bloom, often inclined to drop when overripe, soft. Skin
     unusually thick, somewhat tender, adheres slightly to pulp,
     contains no pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh greenish,
     translucent, juicy, rather fine-grained and tough, very foxy,
     moderately sweet to decidedly acid at center, inferior in quality.
     Seeds adherent, two to five in number averaging three, large to
     below medium, broad to medium, light brown; raphe shows only as a
     groove; chalaza intermediate in size, oval, above center, rather
     distinct and in a depression.


DUTCHESS.[184]

(Vinifera, Labrusca, Bourquiniana? Aestivalis?)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1877=:36. =2.= _Gar. Mon._, =22=:176.
     1880. =3.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1880=:239. =4.= Downing,
     =1881=:166 app. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1881=:24. =6.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:124. =7.= _Ib._, =1885=:103, 107. =8.=
     _Kan. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1891=:126. =9.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =14=:87.
     1890. =10.= _Ala. Sta. Bul._, =10=:9. 1890. =11.= _Gar. and For._,
     =5=:512. 1892. =12.= _Can. Hort._, =17=:253, 267. 1894. =13.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:117, 118. _fig._ =14.= Husmann, =1895=:32, 95,
     102. =15.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:176, 195. 1896. =16.= _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =15=:432. 1896. =17.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:529, 538, 541, 544, 548, 549, 552. 1898. =18.= _Miss. Sta.
     Bul._, =56=:12. 1899. =19.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:38, 43, 45, 46,
     76. 1899. =20.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =44=:91. 1899. =21.=
     _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1900=:365.

Dutchess is a variety for the amateur, always to be sought for because
of its delicious flavor, its handsome appearance, and its long-keeping
qualities. It has never been largely grown in commercial vineyards
because the vine is tender to cold and capricious as to soil and other
conditions. Moreover the berries do not ripen quite evenly and berries
and foliage are very susceptible to fungi. In soils to which it is not
adapted berries and bunches are small and the latter are loose and
straggling. But in spite of its defects Dutchess should not be discarded
by the grape-lover for there are few grapes better for the table and
that will take its place as a pure-flavored, refreshing, juicy grape. It
is sweet and rich and yet does not cloy the appetite; the flesh is
translucent, sparkling, fine-grained and tender; the seeds are small,
few and part readily from the pulp; the skin is thin yet tough enough
for good keeping but not so much so as to be objectionable in eating.
The bunches are large and compact when well grown and the berries,
though but medium sized, are attractive because of their translucency,
the touch of amber when fully ripe, and the distinctive dots so well
shown in the color-plate. Dutchess does not want an extremely rich soil
nor close pruning and the bunches should be thinned and as soon as ripe
ought to be picked as there is a tendency to crack when overripe or
exposed to the wet. Dutchess is self-fertile and therefore desirable
where only a few vines are wanted, obviating the trouble of mixed
planting for cross-pollination. The clusters are especially fine when
bagged.

[Illustration: DUTCHESS]

Dutchess is another variety from A. J. Caywood[185] of Marlboro, New
York, from seed of a white Concord seedling pollinated by mixed pollen
of Delaware and Walter planted in 1868. The white fruited maternal vine
was an offspring of Concord pollinated by Montgomery. Dutchess was
introduced by its originator about 1880. The variety was placed on the
grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1881
where it has since been retained.

     Vine vigorous to weak, depending upon amount of winter injury,
     often not hardy, an uncertain bearer, susceptible to mildew in some
     localities. Canes intermediate in length and number, medium to
     below in size, moderately dark brown, covered with a slight amount
     of bloom, surface usually somewhat roughened; nodes slightly
     enlarged and flattened; internodes short to very short; diaphragm
     unusually thick; pith below average size; shoots slightly
     pubescent; tendrils intermittent, short, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds large to medium, short, thick to medium, conical to
     obtuse. Young leaves faintly tinged on lower side and along margin
     of upper side with light rose-carmine. Leaves above medium to
     below, irregular in outline, of average thickness; upper surface
     light green, slightly glossy, moderately smooth; lower surface pale
     green, pubescent; veins not distinct; leaf usually not lobed, with
     terminus slightly acute; petiolar sinus of average depth, medium to
     narrow; basal sinus shallow when present; lateral sinus varies from
     medium in depth to a mere notch; teeth intermediate in depth and
     width. Flowers fertile or nearly so, open somewhat late; stamens
     upright.

     Fruit ripens in mid-season, keeps and ships well. Clusters large to
     medium, long, rather slender, below average width, not very
     uniform, slightly tapering to cylindrical, with prominent single
     shoulder, medium to compact; peduncle short to medium, not very
     thick; pedicel inferior in length, quite slender, nearly smooth,
     enlarged at point of attachment to fruit; brush amber-colored.
     Berries of medium size, roundish to oval, pale yellowish-green
     verging on amber, some berries showing a decided bronze tinge,
     covered with thin gray bloom, persistent, firm. Skin sprinkled with
     small dark dots, rather thin, tough, adheres to the pulp, contains
     no pigment, without astringency. Flesh very pale green,
     translucent, juicy, fine-grained, tender, vinous, sweet, of
     pleasant flavor, quality high; on heavy clay soils the quality is
     not fully developed. The seeds, which are tender and easily
     crushed, separate readily from the pulp, one to two or occasionally
     three, rather small, wide, short to medium, plump, moderately
     sharp-pointed, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza of average size,
     roundish, above center, distinct.


EARLY DAISY.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Pa. Sta. Rpt._, =1892=:121. =2.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:119.
     =3.= _Amer. Gard._, =15=:392, 445. 1894. =4.= _Ill. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1904=:228. =5.= _Can. Cen. Exp. Farms Rpt._, =1905=:107,
     108.

The variety has been tried thoroughly in various grape regions and
though it seemingly has no serious faults, on the other hand its good
qualities are not such as to make it more than commonplace. Its
earliness ought to commend it somewhat as the ripening period is eight
or ten days earlier than Champion or Moore Early, making it one of the
very earliest varieties. For a grape maturing at its season it both
keeps and ships well. It would seem to be as desirable, or more so, than
Hartford or Champion.

Early Daisy was originated by Mr. John Kready of Mount Joy,
Pennsylvania, in 1874, as a chance seedling in his garden. It is
supposed by many, from its general characters, to be a seedling of
Hartford.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, produces fair crops. Tendrils continuous,
     bifid. Leaves medium to small, light green; lower surface slightly
     pubescent, cobwebby. Flowers nearly sterile. Fruit ripens as early
     or earlier than Hartford and is a good shipper and keeper for an
     early grape. Clusters small to medium, often blunt at ends,
     slightly cylindrical, sometimes single-shouldered, compact. Berries
     of medium size, roundish, rather dull black, covered with abundant
     blue bloom, persistent. Skin tough, contains a large amount of
     purplish-red pigment. Flesh tough, solid, slightly aromatic, rather
     tart at skin to acid at center, inferior in flavor and quality.
     Seeds numerous, of average size. Not good enough for dessert
     purposes.

[Illustration: EARLY OHIO]


EARLY DAWN.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Aestivalis.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1875=:67. =2.= _Ib._, =1881=:43. =3.=
     Downing, =1881=:166, app. =4.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:94. =5.= _Va.
     Sta. Bul._, =30=:108. 1893.

Early Dawn is a black Labrusca-Vinifera hybrid of fine quality and
attractive appearance but so lacking in necessary vine characters in New
York as to be practically worthless. Although it originated in New York
it was never widely grown in this State. It is now, so far as records
show, nearly obsolete.

Dr. Wm. A. M. Culbert of Newburgh, New York, is the originator of Early
Dawn, the date of its origin being some time about 1870. It is reported
to have come from seed of Israella fertilized by Black Hamburg.

     Vine a fair to strong grower, not very hardy, medium to very
     productive. Canes rather long, covered with thin blue bloom;
     tendrils intermittent, bifid to trifid. Leaves medium to small;
     lower surface very pubescent and slightly hairy. Flowers sterile or
     nearly so, open in mid-season; stamens reflexed. Fruit ripens about
     two weeks earlier than Concord, keeps and ships well. Clusters
     medium to large, nearly cylindrical, irregular in outline, vary
     from not shouldered to a heavy single shoulder or sometimes with a
     double shoulder, medium in compactness. Berries rather small,
     roundish, attractive purplish-black, covered with heavy blue bloom,
     persistent. Flesh very juicy, tender, slightly vinous, sprightly,
     agreeably tart, variable in flavor and quality, ranging from fair
     to very good. Seeds not numerous, broad, plump.


EARLY OHIO.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _An. Hort._, =1892=:176. =2.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =12=:619.
     1893. =3.= _Rural N. Y._, =53=:645. 1894. _fig._ =4.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:119, 120. _fig._ =5.= _Wis. Sta. An. Rpt._, =13=:226. 1896.
     _fig._ =6.= _Rural N. Y._, =56=:627, _fig._, 630, 823. 1897. =7.=
     _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:529, 548, 554. 1898.

Early Ohio is remarkable, chiefly, in being one of the earliest
commercial grapes. The fruit resembles that of Concord, of which it is
probably a seedling. The claims made for this variety that it is hardy,
vigorous and productive, have not been borne out on the Station grounds;
but on the contrary the vine is somewhat tender, is not a strong grower,
and does not bear large crops. The quality is very poor. Now that the
South is sending many grapes of high quality to northern markets at the
time Early Ohio and other grapes of its season are ripening it is
doubtful if a grape having only earliness to commend it should have a
place in our viticulture. Notwithstanding its defects Early Ohio is
grown somewhat commonly in New York though its culture is on the wane.

The original seedling of Early Ohio was found in the year 1882 in the
vineyard of R. A. Hunt, at Euclid, Ohio, between rows of Delaware and
Concord. It was introduced in 1892 by the C. S. Curtice Company, of
Portland, New York.

     Vine medium to weak, often tender, usually produces medium crops.
     Canes short to very short, few in number, rather slender, brownish
     with a slight reddish tinge; nodes somewhat enlarged, flattened;
     internodes short; diaphragm thick; pith intermediate in size;
     shoots pubescent; tendrils continuous, usually short, bifid.

     Leaf-buds rather small and short, inclined to slender, pointed to
     conical, open in mid-season. Young leaves lightly tinged on under
     side and along margin of upper side with rose-carmine. Leaves
     intermediate in size, of average thickness; upper surface light
     green, dull, smoothish; lower surface varies from pale green to
     slight bronze, pubescent; veins fairly distinct; lobes vary from
     none to three, with terminal lobe acute; petiolar sinus medium to
     shallow, rather wide; basal sinus usually absent; lateral sinus
     nearly shallow, wide to rather narrow; teeth shallow to sometimes
     medium, somewhat narrow. Flowers fertile, open in mid-season;
     stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens two or three weeks earlier than Concord, some seasons
     a few days earlier than Moore Early, does not keep well. Clusters
     medium in size, intermediate to long, below average in thickness,
     tapering, frequently not shouldered, moderately compact; peduncle
     short to medium, of fair thickness; pedicel intermediate in length,
     medium to rather slender, covered with few, small warts; brush
     above average length, slender, tinged with red. Berries not very
     uniform in size, averaging medium, roundish, purplish-black,
     slightly glossy, covered with rather heavy blue bloom, persistent,
     firm. Skin intermediate in thickness and toughness, adheres
     slightly to the pulp, contains a moderate amount of reddish
     pigment, astringent. Flesh greenish, translucent, juicy, somewhat
     tough, slightly aromatic, sweet at skin but slightly acid at
     center, inferior in quality. Seeds do not separate easily unless
     fully ripe, one to four, average three, intermediate in size,
     length, and breadth, notched, light brown with yellowish-brown
     tips; raphe obscure; chalaza of fair size, slightly above center,
     circular to oval, rather obscure.


EARLY VICTOR.

(Labrusca, Bourquiniana?)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1877=:44. =2.= Downing, =1881=:166,
     app. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:34. =4.= _N. J. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1881=:13. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:96. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Cat._, =1883=:26. =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:103, 105. =8.=
     _Rural N. Y._, =45=:622, 653. 1886. =9.= _Kan. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1886=:187. =10.= _Can. Hort._, =11=:287. 1888. =11.= _Mo. Hort.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1889=:361, 373. =12.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =36=:40. 1891. =13.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:121. =14.= _Mich. Sta.
     Bul._, =169=:170. 1899. =15.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =18=:395.
     1899. =16.= _Can. Hort._, =23=:217. 1900.

[Illustration: EARLY VICTOR]

Early Victor is especially worthy of notice because it is highest in
quality of the very early black grapes. When one tastes this variety at
the beginning of the grape season, he has no palate for Hartford,
Champion, Ives, Janesville, or even Moore Early, and he will be
conscious of defects in the flavor of many of the later grapes which are
supposed to have high quality. Early Victor is especially pleasing to
those who want a pure-flavored grape and object to the foxiness of our
native varieties so marked in Hartford and Champion but almost wholly
lacking in this variety. Were it but a few days earlier and bunch and
berry a little larger and more attractive, Early Victor might be the
grape _par excellence_ for home and market to begin the grape season.
The vines are hardy, healthy, vigorous, and productive, with growth and
foliage greatly resembling Hartford, which is probably one of its
parents, Delaware being the other. The bunches are small and compact and
somewhat variable in shape; the berries are about the size and shape of
those of Delaware. Its season is that of Moore Early and Hartford, or a
little later, though, like many black grapes, it colors before it is
ripe and is often picked much too green. Unfortunately the fruit is
susceptible to black-rot and a little inclined to shrivel after
ripening. Although introduced into American viticulture in 1881, Early
Victor is still little known and deserves far more general recognition
both by the amateur and the commercial grape-grower.

John Burr,[186] of Leavenworth, Kansas, originated Early Victor about
1871 and sent it out for testing in 1881. It was placed on the grape
list of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1883 and is
still retained. Early Victor is said to be a seedling of Delaware
pollinated by Hartford. This, however, is mere surmise, as nothing is
known positively as to its parentage, and the statement was made
frequently by the Kansas Horticultural Society, of which Burr was a
member, that it was a seedling of Concord. It was introduced, probably
about 1887, by Stayman & Black of Leavenworth.

     Vine vigorous, healthy, hardy, productive. Canes long, numerous,
     rather slender, dark brown to slightly reddish-brown, surface
     pubescent; nodes enlarged, usually not flattened; internodes long
     to medium; diaphragm nearly thin; pith intermediate in size; shoots
     pubescent; tendrils continuous, of average length, bifid to
     sometimes trifid.

     Leaf-buds of average size, short to medium, rather thick, often
     strongly compressed, nearly obtuse to conical, open in mid-season.
     Young leaves tinged lightly on upper and lower sides with
     rose-carmine. Leaves medium to above in size, rather thick; upper
     surface dark green, moderately smooth; lower surface nearly
     whitish, heavily pubescent; veins well defined; lobes three to five
     in number, terminal lobe acute; petiolar sinus intermediate in
     depth and width; basal sinus shallow and moderately wide when
     present; lateral sinus medium to above in depth, narrow to medium
     in width; teeth of average depth and width. Flowers nearly fertile
     to somewhat sterile, open in mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens with Moore Early or a little later, does not keep
     well. Clusters medium to small, below average length, variable in
     shape, cylindrical to tapering, frequently single-shouldered,
     compact; peduncle intermediate in length and thickness; pedicel
     medium to short, covered with numerous small warts; brush
     wine-colored or pinkish-red. Berries small to medium, roundish to
     slightly oblate, dark purplish-black, rather dull, covered with
     heavy blue bloom, persistent, not very firm. Skin rather thin,
     medium to tough, adheres but slightly to the pulp, contains much
     red pigment, astringent. Flesh greenish-white, nearly opaque,
     fine-grained, of medium toughness, aromatic, slightly vinous, not
     foxy, sweet at skin but slightly acid at center, good in quality.
     Seeds do not separate easily from the pulp unless the fruit is
     thoroughly ripe, one to four, average three, of medium size, broad,
     notched, below mean length, usually somewhat blunt, dark brown;
     raphe obscure; chalaza of fair size, slightly above center,
     circular, somewhat obscure.


EATON.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1879=:161. =2.= _Ib._, =1880=:231.
     =3.= _Gar. Mon._, =27=:335. 1885. =4.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._,
     =1887=:633. =5.= _Rural N. Y._, =48=:639, 641. 1889. _fig._ =6.=
     _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =9=:326. 1890. =7.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =36=:42. 1891. =8.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:254. 1893. =9.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:123. =10.= _Mass. Hatch Sta. Bul._, =37=:11,
     14. 1896. =11.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:529, 548, 552, 559.
     1898. =12.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:39, 42, 44, 45, 50, 54, 76. 1899.

     EATON'S SEEDLING (1, 2).

[Illustration: EATON]

Eaton is a pure-bred seedling of Concord which it surpasses in
appearance but does not equal in flavor. In appearance of bunch it is
one of the handsomest of our native grapes but as a table grape it ranks
low. Its flesh is tough and stringy and, though sweet at the skin, is
acid at the seeds. It has the same foxiness that characterizes Concord
but with more juice and less richness than its parent so that it is well
described as a "diluted Concord". The skin is very similar to that of
Concord, neither thicker nor thinner, and the fruit packs, ships and
keeps about the same, though if any thing less well because of the
greater amount of juice. The season is a few days earlier than Concord.
The vine is healthy, vigorous, hardy and productive and very similar in
all botanical characters to its parent. The grapes ripen unevenly, the
flowers are self-sterile and in some locations it is a shy bearer. Eaton
has been grown for nearly forty years and has not found favor with
either the grower or the consumer and is being less and less grown,
remaining in our viticulture only as a handsome exhibition grape and an
interesting seedling of Concord.

This mammoth Concord, the Eaton, originated with Calvin Eaton of
Concord, New Hampshire, about 1868 from seed of Concord. Mr. Eaton
states that this was the best vine out of a lot of two thousand
seedlings. The new variety was purchased by John B. Moore & Son of
Concord, Massachusetts, in 1882, and was introduced by them in 1885.
Owing to Mr. Moore's death it soon passed into the hands of the T. S.
Hubbard Company, of Fredonia, New York. It at once attracted much
attention on account of its fine appearance and for a time was very
popular, its popularity declining chiefly because of the poor quality of
the fruit.

     Vine vigorous, healthy, hardy, usually productive. Canes
     intermediate in length and number, thick to medium, light brown
     changing to darker brown at the nodes, covered with a small amount
     of blue bloom; nodes enlarged, slightly flattened; internodes short
     to medium; diaphragm of average thickness; pith large to medium;
     shoots pubescent; tendrils continuous, rather long, bifid to
     trifid.

     Leaf-buds medium to below in size, short, of nearly mean thickness,
     conical to pointed, open in mid-season. Young leaves lightly tinged
     on under side and along margin of upper side with carmine. Leaves
     healthy, large, often roundish, thick; upper surface dark green, of
     average smoothness; lower surface tinged with bronze, heavily
     pubescent; veins distinct; lobes three when present, with terminal
     lobe acute; petiolar sinus medium to shallow, rather wide; basal
     sinus usually lacking; lateral sinus shallow, narrow, often
     notched; teeth shallow to medium, not very wide. Flowers partly
     fertile to somewhat sterile, open early; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens slightly before Concord, keeps and ships only fairly
     well. Clusters large to medium, short to above medium, often very
     broad, blunt, slightly tapering, usually single-shouldered but
     sometimes double-shouldered, compact to medium; peduncle short to
     medium, thick; pedicel medium to rather long, thick, nearly smooth,
     wide at point of attachment to berry; brush slender, pale green.
     Berries rather uniform in size, averaging large, roundish, black,
     not glossy, covered with heavy blue bloom, persistent, firm. Skin
     intermediate in thickness, rather tough, adheres considerably to
     the pulp, contains much purplish-red pigment, slightly astringent.
     Flesh greenish, translucent, juicy, rather tough, slightly stringy
     and foxy, nearly sweet at skin but quite acid at center, fair in
     quality, ranking below Concord. Seeds rather adherent, one to four
     in number, average two or three, above mean size, inclined to
     broad, notched, intermediate in length, plump, somewhat blunt,
     light brown; raphe buried in a rather wide, shallow groove; chalaza
     nearly large, slightly above center, irregularly circular to oval,
     obscure.


(I) ECLIPSE.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1899=:216. =2.= _Ib._, =1904=:228.
     =3.= _Rural N. Y._, =65=:852. 1906. =4.= _Ib._, =66=:24, 344, 412.
     1907.

     RIEHL'S NEW EARLY GRAPE (3). RIEHL'S NO. 10 (1, 2). _Riehl's No.
     10_ (4).

There are two grapes bearing the name Eclipse, the origin and history of
both of which are briefly set forth below. Of the two, Riehl's Eclipse
alone is deemed worthy of general discussion, the other, a green variety
of this name, having passed out of cultivation if it were ever grown in
New York.

[Illustration: ECLIPSE]

The grape under consideration, known for some years as _Riehl's No. 10_,
is a comparatively new candidate for pomological honors, not having been
named and introduced as Eclipse until 1906. It has not been grown
largely in New York and the East and we can therefore say but little of
it other than to describe it as it grows on the Station grounds and to
state that in the West, Illinois in particular, it is most highly
recommended. At Geneva the Eclipse is very like the Concord, one of its
grandparents, it being a seedling of Niagara, differing chiefly in being
earlier and of better quality. Bunches and berries are a little smaller
than Concord. The vines are hardy, healthy and productive, promising
well for commercial plantations. In Illinois it is said to hang on the
vines long after it is ripe without deterioration and not to crack in
wet weather. The color-plate and the description given below show the
Eclipse as it grows at this Station and if the grape-grower wishes a
variety answering to the general characters so depicted, the Eclipse is
certainly worthy a trial in New York.

E. A. Riehl of Alton, Illinois, is the originator of Eclipse, the date
of its origin being about 1890. He states that this is one of the
seedlings from a lot of Niagara seed which was probably cross-pollinated
by other varieties. The variety was introduced in 1906 by the Stark
Brothers Nurseries and Orchards Company, Louisiana, Missouri.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, productive. Canes medium to above in length
     and number, intermediate in size, rather dark reddish-brown; nodes
     slightly enlarged; internodes of average length; diaphragm thick;
     pith large to medium; shoots pubescent; tendrils continuous,
     somewhat long, bifid.

     Leaf-buds medium to nearly small, short, inclined to slender,
     pointed to conical, open in mid-season. Young leaves colored on
     lower side only, prevailing color pale green with slight
     rose-carmine tinge. Leaves medium to large, of average thickness;
     upper surface dark green, intermediate in smoothness; lower surface
     whitish with slight bronze tinge, heavily pubescent, veins well
     defined; lobes none to three with terminal lobe acute to acuminate;
     petiolar sinus deep, medium to narrow; basal sinus usually lacking;
     lateral sinus of average depth, rather narrow, often notched; teeth
     medium to shallow, nearly narrow. Flowers sterile, open in
     mid-season; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens slightly earlier than Concord, keeps fairly well.
     Clusters intermediate in size, below average length, medium to
     rather broad, tapering to cylindrical, frequently
     single-shouldered, moderately compact; peduncle nearly short, thick
     to medium; pedicel short, somewhat thick, covered with numerous
     small warts; brush long, pale green. Berries large to medium,
     slightly oval, rather dull black, covered with abundant blue bloom,
     persistent, firm. Skin intermediate in thickness, tender, adheres
     but slightly to the pulp, contains a small amount of wine-colored
     pigment, somewhat astringent. Flesh pale green, translucent, juicy,
     tender, rather fine-grained, foxy, sweet next the skin to agreeably
     tart at center, resembles Concord very closely in flavor, good in
     quality. Seeds separate very easily from the pulp, one to four,
     average two or three, of mean size, somewhat short, broad to
     medium, distinctly notched, rather blunt, brownish; raphe buried in
     a deep groove; chalaza of average size, slightly above center to
     nearly central, circular to nearly pear-shaped, distinct.


(II) ECLIPSE.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1889=:372. =2.= _Ib._, =1892=:269.
     =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:123. =4.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:139.
     1898. =5.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:39. 1899.

This Eclipse was produced by John Burr of Leavenworth, Kansas, about
1880, from mixed seed. It attracted some attention in the Middle West,
where the fruit was exhibited at various meetings but failed to attain
favor in the vineyard. It is now practically obsolete.

     Vine vigorous, injured in severe winters, variable in
     productiveness, somewhat susceptible to mildew. Canes long to
     medium, of average number, thick; internodes long; tendrils
     continuous to intermittent, bifid to sometimes trifid. Leaves not
     healthy, large to medium, of average greenness; lower surface
     grayish-white. Flowers partly sterile; stamens upright. Fruit
     ripens a little later than Diamond, keeps well. Clusters medium to
     small, of average length, frequently single-shouldered, medium to
     broad, compact to medium. Berries large to medium, roundish to
     oblate, light green often with tinge of yellow, covered with thin
     gray bloom, persistent. Skin thin, of average toughness, covered
     with scattering, small, reddish-brown dots. Flesh tender, vinous,
     sprightly, less sweet than Niagara, good to very good in quality.
     Seeds separate easily from the pulp, one to four, average three,
     above medium in size, intermediate in length and width; raphe
     obscure.


ELDORADO.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:33. =2.= _Rural N. Y._, =45=:622.
     1886. =3.= _Ib._, =51=:681, 726. 1892. =4.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =11=:621. 1892. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:123. =6.= _Col Sta.
     Bul._, =29=:22. 1894. =7.= _Rural N. Y._, =56=:822. 1897. =8.= _N.
     Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:530, 541, 544, 548, 554. 1898. =9.= _Ib._,
     =18=:375, 387, 396. 1899. =10.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1902=:224.

Eldorado is one of the best flavored of all early green grapes but
unfortunately it has defects which have kept it from becoming popular
and it is now rapidly passing from cultivation. It is delicately
flavored, with a very distinct aroma and taste; the flesh is tender,
melting and sweet from skin to seeds, all qualities rarely found in an
early grape. The season is about that of Moore Early, a time when there
are few other really good white grapes. Eldorado is a full sister of
Lady Washington and is if anything better flavored than that most
excellent variety. These two grapes are secondary hybrids of Labrusca
and Vinifera, Concord being the native parent. The vines inherit most of
the good qualities of Concord but Eldorado does not inherit Concord's
ability to set fruit well; even with cross-pollination it sometimes
fails to bear and is not worth growing unless planted in a mixed
vineyard. The clusters are so often small and straggling under the best
possible conditions that the variety cannot be highly recommended to the
amateur yet its delightful flavor and its earliness may commend it to
some.

J. H. Ricketts of Newburgh, New York, produced Eldorado some time about
1870 from seed of Concord fertilized by Allen's Hybrid. It was
introduced by the originator about 1881 and is still offered for sale by
a few nurserymen. Eldorado has been somewhat commonly grown in gardens
and collections in the East but does not succeed in the West.

     Vine usually a strong grower, hardy except in severe winters, an
     uncertain bearer. Canes long, not very numerous; tendrils
     intermittent to rarely continuous, bifid to trifid. Leaves below
     medium to large, irregularly roundish, dark green, rugose on older
     leaves; lower surface tinged with bronze, pubescent. Flowers
     sterile, open medium late; stamens reflexed. Fruit ripens earlier
     than Concord, keeps well. Clusters do not always set perfectly and
     are quite variable in size, frequently single-shouldered, not
     uniform in compactness. Berries large to medium, roundish,
     yellowish-green changing to a golden yellow, covered with thin gray
     bloom. Flesh tender, slightly foxy, sweet from skin to center,
     mild, high flavored, good to very good in quality. Seeds
     intermediate in size and length, blunt.


ELSINBURGH.

(Vinifera, Aestivalis.)

     =1.= _Amer. Farmer_, =9=:221. 1827. =2.= Prince, =1830=:176. =3.=
     Downing, =1845=:255. =4.= Elliott, =1854=:245. =5.=
     _Horticulturist_, =12=:458. 1857. =6.= Phin, =1862=:254. =7.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1862=:90. =8.= Husmann, =1866=:120. =9.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:38. =10.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:94. =11.=
     _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =13=:603. 1894. =12.= _Ib._, =17=:530, 548,
     554. 1898.

     _Blue Elsingburg_ (2). _Elsenburgh_ (2). _Elsinboro_ (4, 10, 11).
     ELSINGBURG (7). _Elsinburg_ (6). ELSINBOROUGH (6). _Elsinborough_
     (2, 3, 4). _Missouri Bird's Eye_ (8). _Smart's Elsinburgh_ (3, 4).
     _Smart's Elsingborough_ (2, 10, 11).

Elsinburgh dates back nearly a century and is now rarely cultivated,
having long since been replaced by better varieties. It is certainly not
known in New York now and it is doubtful if it was ever much grown as it
fruits very sparingly in the North and is but half hardy in the latitude
of this State. In quality it is one of the best of the Aestivalis
grapes, having a pure, rich, vinous, spicy flavor without a trace of
foxiness. It would undoubtedly add variety to any amateur's vineyard
and might prove of value in grape-breeding, otherwise it is not worth
growing; it undoubtedly makes a very good red wine.

The origin of Elsinburgh is very uncertain. It was named after the
township, Elsinborough, Salem County, New Jersey. In this neighborhood
it was much raised at an early day. From here it was sent to various
parts of the country. Whether it originated in this section or whether
it was introduced at a still earlier date from elsewhere is unknown. It
was brought into notice by a Dr. Hulings. Although Elsinburgh has long
since ceased to be of importance, it is still offered for sale by an
occasional nurseryman. It was placed on the grape list in the American
Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1862 and removed in 1891.
Elsinburgh is of especial interest as being the probable parent of
Delaware. The variety shows Bourquiniana or Aestivalis in flavor and
texture of fruit, in texture and pubescence of leaf, and the bloom on
young canes; its tenderness and susceptibility to mildew suggest
Vinifera.

     Vine weak to moderately vigorous, not very hardy, produces light
     crops. Canes short to medium, slender, covered with thin blue
     bloom; tendrils intermittent, bifid to trifid. Leaves small to
     medium, variable in color; lower surface hairy and slightly
     pubescent. Flowers nearly fertile, open very late; stamens upright.
     Fruit ripens early in October. Clusters medium to large, usually
     single-shouldered, loose to medium. Berries small, roundish, black,
     covered with blue bloom, contain but little pulp. Flesh vinous,
     sweet, quality good. Seeds few, small.


ELVICAND.

(Candicans, Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _An. Hort._, =1892=:176. =2.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:123. =3.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1897=:19. =4.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1149,
     1156. 1898. =5.= _Ib._, =56=:276. 1900.

Introduced some twenty years ago, Elvicand has not found a place in the
viticulture of the North. It is interesting because of its parentage,
having in it the blood of three species: Riparia, Labrusca and
Candicans, and might prove valuable in breeding work, as starting a new
and somewhat distinct group of grapes. There has been much complaint of
this variety being unproductive but Munson states that this is due to
short pruning and that it will bear heavily with very long pruning. It
is too late in season for New York.

The variety was originated by T. V. Munson of Denison, Texas, from seed
of Elvira accidentally fertilized by pollen of _Vitis candicans_. It was
introduced by the originator in 1893, and was placed on the grape list
in the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1897, where it has
since been retained. It was dropped from the originator's catalog eight
years ago.

     Vine vigorous and hardy. Shoots and under side of leaves showing
     much white cottony pubescence. Leaves large to medium, shallowly
     three-lobed. Flowers self-fertile. Clusters small, rather open.
     Berries of medium size, round, dark purple, somewhat sweet to
     subacid with slight Candicans flavor. Seeds large. Season late. Not
     a table grape.


ELVIRA.

(Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1873=:53. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1875=:40, 67. =3.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1880=:237. =4.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:38. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1881=:24.
     =6.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:75. =7.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:97. _col. pl. and fig._ =8.= Husmann, =1895=:83, 93, 175.
     =9.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:530, 548, 555, 559. 1898. =10.=
     _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:270. 1900. =11.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1902=:82. =12.= _Ib._, =1906=:65, 66, 67.

Though it has never attained great popularity in New York or in the
North, Elvira, soon after its introduction in Missouri about thirty-five
years ago, was carried to the very pinnacle of popularity as a wine
grape. The qualities which commended it were its great productiveness,
in which character it is hardly surpassed in favorable locations by any
other of our native grapes; its earliness, ripening in the North with
Concord; its exceedingly good health, being almost free from cryptogamic
diseases and having almost no touch of black-rot in the average season
even in the Southwest; its great vigor as shown by a strong stocky
growth and ample foliage; and, lastly, almost perfect hardiness even as
far north as Canada. Its good qualities are offset by one or two defects
which have caused it to lose in popularity as time has gone by until now
it is not as widely grown as some of its seedlings. The most noticeable
of its defects is its thin skin which bursts easily, thus wholly
debarring it from distant markets. Beside this, its flavor and
appearance, as it grows here, are not sufficiently good to make it a
table grape and it can be used only for wine for which purpose it is
much valued, though its habit of cracking in the bunch is sometimes much
against it as a wine grape. The wine made from Elvira is light,
containing comparatively little alcohol, and by those wine-makers who do
not dislike a slight foxiness in flavor, it is considered very good,
improving with age and being well adapted for blending with more highly
flavored wines.

At the beginning of the reconstruction period in France, Elvira was used
more or less as a resistant stock and somewhat as a direct producer but
within a few years it was condemned and abandoned for either purpose and
is now known in France[187] only in varietal vineyards.

Elvira is a seedling of Taylor, a Riparia-Labrusca hybrid, and shows
well the peculiarities and general characters of the group of which
Taylor is supposed to be the parent. Of the numerous hybrid Riparia
grapes, Elvira seems to have given the best coign of vantage for
breeding work and is the parent of a number of worthy pure-bred and
cross-bred varieties. While it is to the species to which Elvira belongs
that we must look for our hardiest grapes, this variety and most of its
progeny are not suited to northern conditions, not because of tenderness
to cold, but because they must have a long season for maturity and to
attain their best quality. Riparia is largely used as a resistant stock
in combating phylloxera, and Elvira and other similar hybrid offspring
are almost proof against this pest.

Elvira was originated by Jacob Rommel of Morrison, Missouri, from seed
of Taylor which some say was pollinated by Martha. It was planted in
1863 and fruited for the first time in 1869. Bush & Son & Meissner
introduced the variety in 1874. It was placed on the grape list of the
American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1881 where it is still
retained. Its great popularity in Missouri was largely due to the energy
with which it was advertised by certain prominent viticulturists, they
having been most favorably impressed with it because of its withstanding
the severe cold of the winter of 1873 without protection. Husmann, in
particular, spoke of Elvira in the highest terms and recommended its
cultivation. Its popularity spread from Missouri to the islands and the
Ohio shore of Lake Erie but scarcely reached New York. In all of these
regions its culture is now on the wane.

[Illustration: ELVIRA]

     Vine vigorous, hardy, healthy, produces very heavy crops, more
     productive than Concord. Canes of average length, numerous, medium
     to below in thickness, rather dark brown, deepening in color at the
     enlarged and flattened nodes; internodes short to medium;
     diaphragm rather thin; pith intermediate in thickness; shoots
     slightly pubescent; tendrils continuous, of average length, trifid
     to bifid.

     Leaf-buds nearly medium in size, short to medium in length, thick,
     conical to nearly obtuse, open in mid-season. Young leaves tinged
     faintly with carmine on the lower side only. Leaves rather large,
     medium to somewhat thin; upper surface light green, older leaves
     dull but younger leaves glossy, smooth to medium; lower surface
     pale green, slightly pubescent, hairy. Veins rather distinct; lobes
     none to three with terminus acute to acuminate; petiolar sinus deep
     to medium, inclined to narrow, sometimes closed and overlapping;
     basal sinus usually lacking; lateral sinus shallow, often notched;
     teeth medium to rather deep, somewhat wide. Flowers fertile or
     nearly so, open moderately early; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens about with Concord, does not keep well. Clusters
     intermediate in size, above medium to short, of average breadth,
     cylindrical, usually single-shouldered, compact; peduncle short to
     medium, rather thick; pedicel not long, of average thickness,
     nearly smooth; brush short, greenish-yellow with brownish tinge.
     Berries average medium in size, roundish to slightly oblate, often
     misshapen on account of compactness, greenish with yellow tinge,
     rather dull, covered with a fair amount of gray bloom, not always
     persistent, rather firm. Skin very thin, tender, adheres slightly
     to the pulp, contains no pigment, somewhat astringent. Flesh
     greenish, juicy, fine-grained, tender, slightly foxy, sweet, not
     acid at the center, somewhat flat in flavor, of fair quality. Seeds
     separate easily from the pulp, one to four, average three, medium
     to nearly large, medium to broad, intermediate in length, blunt,
     often plump, medium to dark brown; raphe obscure or nearly so;
     chalaza of average size, slightly above center, pear-shaped, rather
     distinct. Must 88 deg..


EMPIRE STATE.

(Riparia, Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:66. =2.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1882=:227. =3.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1882=:46. =4.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1883=:99. =5.= _Gar. Mon._, =26=:272, 364. 1884. =6.= _W.
     N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =31=:110. 1886. =7.= _Rural N. Y._,
     =46=:20, 495. 1887. =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1887=:97, 125. =9.=
     _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1887-8=:85, 169. =10.= _Mo. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1889=:370. =11.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1889=:24. =12.= _N.
     Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =13=:603. 1894. =13.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:125.
     =14.= _Col. Sta. Bul._, =29=:22. 1894. =15.= _Ohio Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1894-5=:11. =16.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:180. 1896.
     =17.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:530, 541, 544, 548, 552. 1898.

Empire State competes with Niagara, Diamond and Pocklington for
supremacy among green grapes in commercial vineyards, probably taking
fourth place the country over. The variety is equally vigorous in
growth, just as free from predaceous parasites, whether fungi or
insects, and upon vines of the same age it is as productive but is a
little less hardy and the grapes are not as attractive in appearance as
the other varieties named. In particular the clusters are small in some
localities, a defect which can be overcome only by severe pruning or by
thinning. The quality is very good, much better than Niagara, somewhat
better than Pocklington and nearly as good as Diamond. It approaches the
flavor of the Old World grapes, its slight wild taste suggesting one of
the Muscats rather than the foxiness of the Niagara. Empire State is
esteemed for the table wherever known and is in demand for wine-making,
the wine from it being most excellent for champagne according to reports
from the Keuka champagne-makers. Empire State ripens a little earlier
than Niagara, hangs long upon the vine and keeps well after picking and
without losing flavor. The variety is quite distinct in its
horticultural as well as its botanical characters.

This somewhat remarkable white grape was originated by James H. Ricketts
of Newburgh, New York. The variety was fruited for the first time in
1879. The originator says that it came from seed of Hartford pollinated
by Clinton but this parentage has been questioned by many viticulturists
as it does not show characters of either of the reputed parents. A very
general supposition is that the variety is a hybrid between Clinton and
some variety of Vinifera, the characters of the fruit in particular
indicating such breeding. Empire State was bought from the originator by
George A. Stone of Rochester for $4,000, a record price for an American
grape. It was introduced about 1884 and was placed on the grape list of
the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1889, where it still
remains.

     Vine a fair to good grower, usually healthy, in some locations
     appears somewhat tender, moderately productive to productive. Canes
     short, medium to few, nearly slender, brownish; nodes slightly
     enlarged, not flattened; internodes short to medium; diaphragm of
     average thickness; pith of medium size; shoots pubescent; tendrils
     intermittent, intermediate in length, bifid.

     Leaf-buds small to medium, of average length, rather slender,
     pointed to conical, open moderately late. Young leaves tinged with
     faint trace of red on under side, prevailing color greenish. Leaves
     small to medium, of fair thickness; upper surface light green,
     slightly glossy, smooth to somewhat rugose; lower surface tinged
     with bronze, heavily pubescent; veins distinct; lobes three to five
     when present, with terminal lobe acuminate; petiolar sinus medium
     to deep, narrow, often closed and overlapping; basal sinus variable
     in depth and width; lateral sinus deep, narrow to medium, often
     distinctly enlarged at base; teeth medium to deep, above average
     width. Flowers fertile, open moderately late; stamens upright.

[Illustration: EMPIRE STATE]

     Fruit somewhat variable in season of ripening averaging a few days
     earlier than Niagara, keeps well. Clusters large to below medium,
     long, rather slender, cylindrical to slightly tapering, frequently
     single-shouldered, medium to compact; peduncle variable, often
     characteristically long, rather thick; pedicel not uniform in
     length, slender, covered with numerous small warts; brush short,
     light green. Berries variable in size averaging medium to below,
     inclined to roundish, pale yellowish-green, covered with some gray
     bloom, persistent, moderately firm. Skin medium to thick, variable
     in toughness, adheres but slightly to the pulp, contains no
     pigment, with slight astringency. Flesh pale yellowish-green,
     translucent, very juicy, fine-grained, rather tender, sweet next
     the skin but somewhat acid at center, agreeably flavored, good to
     very good in quality. Seeds adhere slightly to the pulp, one to
     four, average two, small, broad, notched, rather short, blunt,
     plump, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza small, roundish to ovate,
     slightly above center, distinct.


ESSEX.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1864=:127, 136. =2.= _Mass. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1865=:40. =3.= Strong, =1866=:341. =4.= _Am. Jour. Hort._,
     =3=:146. 1868. =5.= _Horticulturist_, =24=:126. 1869. =6.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1869=:42. =7.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:181. 1869. =8.=
     _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:254. 1893. =9.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:530, 548, 555. 1898.

     ROGERS' NO. 41 (1, 2, 3, 4). _Rogers' No. 41_ (5, 6, 7).

When well grown Essex is so similar to Barry, Wilder and Herbert, all
being Rogers' hybrids, that it is doubtful if it is worth cultivation
more especially as it is not as easily grown as the above sorts. Its
fruit is almost identical with Barry, though the bunches do not equal
that variety in size, but the vine is not as desirable, being only
half-hardy, not productive, with sterile flowers and not setting fruit
well even in mixed vineyards.

For an account of the origin and parentage of Essex see "Rogers'
Hybrids." Essex, then known as _Rogers' No. 41_, is first mentioned
separately from the other hybrids about 1865. There appears to have been
some confusion in the numbers, as some of the early describers speak of
the grape as red, others black. The name Essex was given by Mr. Rogers
in 1869, in honor of Essex County, Massachusetts. The same year it was
placed on the grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit
catalog, where it was retained until 1895, when it was dropped. It is
still to be found in many varietal vineyards but is now offered for sale
by but few nurserymen.

     Vine vigorous, not always hardy, produces good crops. Canes
     vigorous, intermediate in number and thickness; tendrils continuous
     to intermittent, trifid to bifid. Leaves medium to above in size,
     irregularly roundish; lower surface thinly pubescent. Flowers
     sterile or nearly so, open in mid-season or slightly later; stamens
     reflexed. Fruit ripens about with Concord or slightly later, an
     excellent keeper, in good condition some seasons until February.
     Clusters medium to nearly large, broad with a rather small, short,
     single shoulder, usually compact. Berries large to above medium,
     roundish to oval, frequently compressed, dark purplish-black,
     covered with abundant blue bloom, not firm. Flesh moderately tender
     and soft, vinous, sweet next the skin to acid at center, agreeable
     in flavor, good to very good in quality. Seeds large, long, often
     with enlarged neck; chalaza small, frequently with shallow,
     radiating furrows, strongly above center.


ESTER.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _An. Hort._, =1889=:101. =2.= _Rural N. Y._, =51=:686, 863.
     1892. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:125. =4.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =14=:279. 1895. =5.= _Ib._, =17=:530, 548, 555. 1898. =6.= _Mich.
     Sta. Bul._, =194=:57. 1901. =7.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:239. 1902.

Ester is a white seedling of Concord, whether pure-bred or cross-bred is
not known, which resembles its parent in vine and in flavor of fruit. It
has several defects which make it less valuable than many other better
known white grapes and is therefore not recommended for New York. Its
defects appear in the description given below.

The variety was originated by E. W. Bull of Concord, Massachusetts, from
seed of Concord. It was introduced by George S. Josselyn of Fredonia,
New York, in 1889. Bull named this variety in honor of his mother who
spelled her name Ester, in the old New England way, and not "Esther" as
commonly found in grape literature.

     Vine variable in vigor and productiveness, usually hardy. Canes
     short to medium, slender, covered with considerable pubescence;
     tendrils continuous, rarely intermittent, bifid to trifid. Leaves
     small, light green; lower surface tinged with bronze, pubescent.
     Flowers nearly fertile, open in mid-season; stamens upright. Fruit
     ripens about with Concord, not a good keeper. Clusters medium to
     above in size and compactness. Berries medium to large, roundish,
     pale yellowish-white, covered with thin gray bloom, inclined to
     drop considerably from pedicel. Skin covered with scattering brown
     dots, thin, somewhat tender, inclined to crack. Flesh moderately
     tender and vinous, sweet, variable in flavor and quality ranging
     from fair to very good.


ETTA.

(Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:33. =2.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1883=:43. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:98. _fig._ =4.= _Kan. Hort.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1890=:23, app. =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =10=:496.
     1891. =6.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:263. 1893. =7.= _Ark. Sta. Bul._,
     =39=:30. 1896. =8.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:530, 545, 547, 555,
     559. 1898. =9.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1149, 1156. 1898. =10.=
     _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =177=:44. 1899. =11.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:43.
     1901. =12.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:244. 1902.

     _Elvira Seedling No. 3_ (3). ROMMEL'S ETTA (4, 12). _Rommel's No.
     3_ (1).

In appearance, taste and texture of flesh Etta is very similar to Elvira
of which it is a seedling. The small yellowish clusters which
characterize Elvira are almost exactly reproduced in Etta differing
chiefly in often having a shoulder quite as large as the main bunch
itself, and in having, for most palates, a better flavor, lacking the
slight foxiness of Elvira. The vine is very vigorous, hardy, and
productive to a fault. The fruit ripens late, at the time of Catawba,
and too late to make the variety of value for New York. Etta is not a
good table grape and, as with its parent, makes only a fair grade of
white wine but this can be produced in such quantity as to give the
variety value in producing a wine for blending with more highly flavored
products.

The tendency of Elvira to crack and overbear caused the originator of
that variety, Jacob Rommel of Morrison, Missouri, to try for a grape
without these faults and the result was Etta from seed of Elvira. It was
first exhibited in 1879 as _Elvira Seedling No. 3_ and was awarded the
premium as a seedling wine grape at the Mississippi Valley Horticultural
Society meeting in St. Louis in 1880. It has never become popular in the
East, probably on account of its late ripening. In Missouri Etta is
generally considered to be, all characters taken into account, a better
grape than Elvira, falling below it in but one particular, resistance to
black-rot.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, hardy except in severe winters,
     productive. Canes long, rather numerous, about average size, nearly
     light to medium dark brown; tendrils continuous, bifid. Leaves
     healthy, above medium to large, thickish; upper surface dark green,
     slightly glossy, nearly smooth; lower surface pale green, somewhat
     cobwebby; veins rather distinct. Flowers fertile or nearly so, open
     medium early; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens late, two or three weeks after Concord, keeps fairly
     well. Clusters medium to small, rather short and broad, irregularly
     cylindrical, usually with a short, medium-sized single shoulder
     but sometimes so heavily shouldered as to form a double bunch, very
     compact. Berries medium to small, roundish to frequently compressed
     on account of compactness of cluster, rather pale green, sometimes
     with a faint yellow tinge, dull, covered with thin gray bloom,
     shatter considerably when overripe, firm. Skin thin, tender,
     contains no pigment. Flesh juicy, fine-grained, somewhat tough and
     stringy, slightly foxy, neither rich nor high-flavored, sweet at
     skin to tart at center, mild, intermediate in flavor and quality.
     Seeds separate from the pulp quite easily, medium to above in size
     and width, long to medium, somewhat plump and blunt, brownish;
     raphe buried in a broad, shallow groove; chalaza of medium size,
     oval, nearly central, moderately distinct.


EUMELAN.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Aestivalis.)

     =1.= _Rec. of Hort._, =1866=:38. =2.= Mead, =1867=:220. =3.=
     Fuller, =1867=:241. =4.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =8=:144, 299. 1870.
     =5.= Barry, =1872=:418. =6.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1872=:543,
     555. =7.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1875=:393. =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Cat._, =1875=:24. =9.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:99. _fig._ =10.= _Wis.
     Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:174. =11.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =36=:43. 1891. =12.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:134. 1898. =13.= _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:530, 545, 546, 548, 549, 552. 1898. =14.=
     _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:271. 1900.

     WASHINGTON (1). _Washington_ (3).

Eumelan was introduced about forty years ago, with the general opinion
among the leading viticulturists of the time that it was one of the best
black grapes that had been brought to the notice of grape-growers. It
seems now, as one studies its characters, to show an association of as
great a number of valuable good qualities and as few objectionable ones
as almost any other of our black grapes, yet the variety is now but
little grown. Briefly summarized, its good qualities are: Vines above
the average in vigor, hardiness and productiveness, remarkable for their
short-jointed wood; clusters and berries well-formed, of good size and
the latter a handsome black with fine bloom, making a very attractive
cluster of grapes; flesh tender, seemingly dissolving into wine-like
juice under slight pressure; the flavor is pure without a trace of
foxiness, rich, sweet, and vinous, making a very delicious and
refreshing fruit, though the large seeds are somewhat objectionable.
Eumelan makes a very good red wine. The season of ripening is such that
the variety may be called early, yet it keeps much better than most of
the other grapes maturing with it and becomes, therefore, a mid-season
and late grape as well as an early one. It neither cracks nor shells
badly, and ships very well.

[Illustration: EUMELAN]

It is more difficult to name its defects. So far as we can discover,
these are susceptibility to mildew, sterile flowers, and difficulty in
propagation. Unquestionably the latter character has greatly hindered
its culture, as the vines can be had only at extra expense and
nurserymen are loath to grow it at all. Eumelan can at least be
recommended to amateur growers and for the garden and it is well worth
further trial by grape-growers.

Eumelan is a chance seedling which grew from seed about 1847 in the yard
of a Mr. Thorne at Fishkill Landing, New York. About 1860 it fell into
the hands of Dr. C. W. Grant of Iona Island and was introduced by him in
1867. By some it is supposed to be a seedling of Isabella. Bush gives
the species as Aestivalis. Munson states, however, that he can see
nothing in it but Labrusca and Vinifera. Labrusca seems to be indicated
very plainly by the texture of the fruit and by the seeds, Vinifera
possibly by a general appearance of the vine difficult to define and
also by the tendency to mildew. Besides this, however, there are the
bluish bloom on shoots and canes, the pigment beneath the skin, the
spicy taste in the berries, and the difficulty of propagation from
cuttings, all of which are difficult to account for except by
recognizing the presence of Aestivalis or Bicolor blood.

     Vine vigorous to medium, hardy, medium to productive, inclined to
     mildew. Canes intermediate in length, numerous, of average
     thickness, covered with considerable blue bloom; nodes enlarged,
     flattened; internodes short to medium; diaphragm thick; pith about
     medium size; shoots glabrous; tendrils intermittent, rather long,
     trifid to bifid.

     Leaf-buds large, long, rather thick, conspicuous, obtuse to
     conical, open in mid-season. Young leaves heavily tinged on under
     side and lightly tinged along margin of upper side with bright
     carmine. Leaves medium to large, of average thickness; upper
     surface rather dark green, glossy, smooth to medium; lower surface
     pale green, not pubescent; veins distinct; lobes usually three in
     number with terminal lobe acute to acuminate; petiolar sinus medium
     to deep, variable in width; basal sinus usually lacking; lateral
     sinus shallow to medium, rather narrow or often a mere notch; teeth
     inclined to shallow, usually above medium in width. Flowers
     sterile, open in mid-season; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens before mid-season, keeps frequently until late winter.
     Clusters of average size, long to medium, rather slender, slightly
     tapering to cylindrical, often with a long, loose, single shoulder,
     variable in compactness; peduncle medium to long, of average size;
     pedicel somewhat short, rather slender, covered with few small
     warts, wide at point of attachment to fruit; brush short, stubby,
     pale green. Berries medium in size, roundish to frequently
     compressed, black, glossy, covered with abundant blue bloom,
     persistent, firm. Skin intermediate in thickness, tough, rather
     adherent to the pulp, contains a moderate amount of wine-colored
     pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh somewhat dark green, juicy,
     fine-grained, nearly tender, stringy, not foxy, rather spicy and
     aromatic with Aestivalis flavor, sweet, ranks good or higher in
     quality. Seeds adhere slightly to the pulp, one to four, average
     three, above medium to large, rather wide, intermediate in length,
     somewhat blunt, plump, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza oval to
     circular, slightly above center, rather distinct. Must 93 deg.-100 deg..


(=I=) =EUREKA.=

(Labrusca.)

=1.= _Mag. Hort._, =27=:6. 1861. =2.= _Gar. Mon._, =6=:371. 1864. =3.=
_Mag. Hort._, =33=:205. 1867. =4.= _Am. Hort. An._, =1871=:80. =5.=
_Bush. Cat._, =1883=:98.

BOGUE'S EUREKA (2).

No good descriptions of this variety are extant, and it does not appear
to have been widely tested. Eureka resembles the Isabella very closely
in both fruit and vine. The fruit ripens about two weeks earlier, is
somewhat more tender in pulp, more compact in the bunch, and with the
vine of greater vigor.

Eureka was originated by S. Folsom of Attica, Wyoming County, New York,
some time in the fifties, and was introduced a few years later by Bogue
& Son, nurserymen, of Genesee County. It is said to be a seedling of
Isabella, resembling the parent very closely, except for being earlier
in ripening. It is now practically out of cultivation, and was never
superior to its reputed parent in desirable characters.


(=II=) =EUREKA.=

(Bourquiniana, Labrusca, Vinifera.)

=1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1889=:372. =2.= _Ib._, =1890=:156. =3.=
_Ib._, =1891=:128. =4.= _Ib._, =1892=:268. =5.= _Am. Gard._, =13=:85.
1892. =6.= Husmann, =1895=:33.

The second variety to receive the name Eureka is said to be a seedling
of Delaware raised by Dr. Stayman some time about 1880. It does not
appear ever to have been disseminated except to a few of Dr. Stayman's
personal friends. It is very rare in varietal vineyards and hardly known
to nurserymen. The variety as it grows in New York is surpassed by its
parent in practically all desirable horticultural characters.

     Vine a strong grower, usually rather tender, produces medium to
     good crops. Canes long, numerous, slender; tendrils intermittent,
     bifid to trifid. Leaves medium to above in size, variable in
     color; lower surface pale green; pubescence often distributed in
     flecks. Fruit ripens soon after Concord, does not keep well.
     Clusters above medium to medium in size and length,
     single-shouldered to sometimes double-shouldered, of average
     compactness. Berries intermediate in size, roundish, attractive
     dark red, covered with heavy lilac or slightly blue bloom, inclined
     to shell somewhat from pedicel. Skin thin, rather tender, inclined
     to crack. Flesh moderately juicy and tough, aromatic, nearly sweet
     next the skin to acid at center, vinous, desirable in flavor, good
     in quality. Seeds small to medium, of average width and length,
     nearly sharp-pointed.


EXCELSIOR.

(Vinifera, Labrusca.)

=1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1880=:237. =2.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:100.
=3.= _Miss. Sta. An. Rpt._, =3=:36. 1890. =4.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._,
=48=:1150, 1156. 1898.

According to the originator, James H. Ricketts, Excelsior was "the
finest grape in his collection." The grapes are delicious, having the
flavor of Black Hamburg; the flesh characters are good, the pulp being
melting and juicy yet holding together and having sugar enough to give
keeping quality; neither seeds nor skins are objectionable; the grapes
are handsome in appearance; but unfortunately the variety ripens too
late to make it of much value in New York. At best it is suitable only
for the amateur and, as with all of the varieties which Ricketts sent
out, it is adapted to few localities and must have the best care in all
respects.

Excelsior came from seed of Iona fertilized with pollen of some unknown
Vinifera. The variety was introduced in the autumn of 1882. Excelsior is
to-day rather rare in varietal vineyards and is apparently not offered
for sale by any nurserymen.

     Vine moderately vigorous, not always hardy, medium to productive.
     Canes long, numerous, rather thick; tendrils intermittent, bifid.
     Leaves large to below medium, sometimes rugose; lower surface
     pubescent. Fruit ripens later than Concord, keeps well. Clusters
     unusually large, long, broad, frequently with a heavy double
     shoulder, loose. Berries large to medium, oval to nearly roundish,
     dark red covered with thin lilac bloom, very persistent, rather
     soft. Skin thick, tough, adheres considerably to the pulp. Flesh
     very juicy, rather soft, granular, sweet and sprightly, high in
     flavor, good to best in quality, closely resembling Black Hamburg
     in many characters. Seeds medium in size, rather blunt, sometimes
     with a short enlarged neck.


FAITH.

(Riparia, Labrusca.)

=1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:164. =2.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:100.
=3.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:43. =4.= _Rural N. Y._, =45=:622,
640. 1886. =5.= _Ind. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1889=:85. =6.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
Rpt._, =11=:623. 1892. =7.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:263. 1893. =8.=
_Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:180. 1896. =9.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
=17=:530, 548, 555. 1898.

Though spoken of as a desirable grape in many other regions Faith is of
little or no value in New York. It is very unattractive in appearance as
it grows in this State, both in cluster and in berry, the clusters being
small and variable and the berries small and of unattractive color. The
quality of the fruit is not high and there are many other white sorts
which surpass it as a table grape, more especially Diamond which ripens
at the same time. If it has any preeminently good character for this
region it is productiveness but this cannot offset its mediocre
characters. Another fault is that the blossoms put forth so early that
they often suffer from spring frosts.

Faith is of the same breeding and from the same originator, Jacob Rommel
of Morrison, Missouri, as Etta, both having come from seed of Elvira.
This seedling was introduced to the public about 1881 and though an
excellent grape it is hardly the equal of Etta and has never been able
to compete with that variety. It was named in honor of Jacob Faith, a
prominent Missouri viticulturist.

     Vine medium to vigorous, hardy except in severe winters, usually
     healthy, variable in productiveness. Canes long to medium,
     numerous; tendrils continuous, bifid. Leaves large to medium, dark
     green; lower surface grayish-green, thinly pubescent. Flowers
     sterile to partly fertile, open medium early; stamens upright.
     Fruit ripens about with Diamond or slightly earlier, does not keep
     well. Clusters above medium to small, variable in length, usually
     slender, often heavily single-shouldered, loose. Berries quite
     small, roundish, dull green, frequently with yellow tinge changing
     to pale amber, covered with abundant gray bloom, persistent, rather
     soft. Flesh moderately juicy, nearly tender, agreeably flavored,
     sweet next the skin to somewhat tart at center, fair to good in
     quality. Seeds numerous, of average size, broad.


FERN MUNSON.

(Lincecumii, Vinifera, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:623. 1892. =2.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:127. =3.= Husmann, =1895=:130. =4.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._,
     =73=:182, 184. 1897. =5.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1897=:206. =6.=
     _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:134. 1898. =7.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1150,
     1157. 1898. =8.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:530, 548, 555. 1898.
     =9.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1899=:29. =10.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._,
     =56=:277. 1900. =11.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:247. 1902. =12.= _Mo.
     Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1904=:302, 305.

     _Admirable_ (11). FERN (2, 5). _Fern Munson_ (2). _Hilgarde_ (4).
     _Munson's No. 76_ (4).

Fern Munson is not adapted to northern regions, forty degrees north
latitude being its limit of adaptation according to Munson,[188] its
originator. Nevertheless when it has ripened in New York the fruit has
shown some very good characters, as attractive appearance, agreeable
quality, and unobjectionable seeds and skin. The vines are vigorous and
productive but the foliage is not remarkably healthy in the Station
vineyard though it has been very abundant.

This variety was originated by T. V. Munson of Denison, Texas, from seed
of Post-oak which has been variously stated to have been pollinated by
Triumph, mixed pollen of Triumph and Herbemont, and by Catawba. Which of
these is correct we cannot say. The seed was planted in 1885 and the
variety was introduced by the originator in 1893. It was placed on the
grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1899,
where it still remains. Dickens, of Kansas, states that this variety was
formerly disseminated under the name of Admirable but this appears to be
a mistake as Admirable is invariably given as having recurved stamens
while the stamens of Fern Munson are erect.

     Vine vigorous, not always hardy, usually produces as good or
     sometimes better crops than Concord. Canes long, medium or above in
     number, medium to thick, rather dark brown with faint red tinge;
     tendrils intermittent, bifid. Leaves large and thick; upper surface
     rugose and often heavily wrinkled; lower surface dull, pale green
     with slight bronze tinge, faintly pubescent; veins quite obscure.
     Flowers semi-fertile, open very late; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens later than Concord, appears to keep well. Clusters
     medium to large, not very long, variable in width, irregularly
     tapering to rather cylindrical, usually single-shouldered, variable
     in compactness, often with many abortive fruits. Berries medium to
     large, roundish to slightly flattened, dark purplish-black, rather
     glossy, covered with thin blue bloom, strongly persistent, firm.
     Skin thin, tough, contains a small amount of wine-colored pigment,
     rather astringent. Flesh juicy, tough and solid, becoming tender as
     it reaches maturity, fine-grained, vinous, briskly sub-acid to
     acid, ranking good in quality when properly ripened. Seeds adhere
     somewhat to the pulp, medium in size, rather broad, of average
     length; raphe shows as a small cord; chalaza central to slightly
     above center, obscure.


FLORENCE.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Bourquiniana?)

=1.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:127.

The fact that the Florence here described has been discarded by all
vineyardists is presumptive evidence that the variety has little
intrinsic value and this proves to be the case in New York. Neither
fruit nor vine characters are such that the Station can recommend it. It
is doubtful if the variety is longer worthy of preservation.

Florence is one of the productions of A. J. Caywood of Marlboro, New
York, from seed of Niagara pollinated by Dutchess. But little is known
of its time of origin or of its introduction. It is very rare in
varietal vineyards and not known to nurserymen.

     Canes medium to above in length, often somewhat slender, slightly
     roughened and pubescent; tendrils intermittent, bifid. Stamens
     upright. Fruit ripens slightly earlier than Niagara, does not keep
     well. Clusters above medium in size, rather long to medium,
     sometimes slightly single-shouldered, loose. Berries large to above
     medium, roundish, green often with tinge of yellow, covered with
     thin gray bloom, nearly persistent. Flesh slightly tough and solid,
     aromatic, agreeably sweet next the skin to rather tart at center,
     good to very good in quality. Seeds few, intermediate in size and
     length, plump.


GAERTNER.

(Vinifera, Labrusca.)

=1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1863=:548. =2.= _Horticulturist_, =24=:126.
1869. =3.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =5=:263. 1869. =4.= _Bush. Cat._,
=1894=:127. =5.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:180. 1896. =6.= _Va. Sta.
Bul._, =94=:137. 1898. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:530, 548, 555,
559. 1898.

ROGERS' NO. 14 (1). _Rogers' No. 14_ (2, 3, 4, 5).

When at its best Gaertner is probably surpassed in appearance and in
quality by no other one of Rogers' hybrids. Fruit and clusters are large
and handsomely colored making a showy grape which attracts attention
wherever shown and which sells in fancy fruit stores at the highest
price. The plant is vigorous, productive, and as hardy as any of the
primary hybrids between Labrusca and Vinifera. In view of its good
qualities Gaertner has not received the attention it deserves from
either the amateur or the commercial grape-grower, probably because it
is more capricious as to soils than some others of its related hybrids
and that to have it in perfection it must have the very best care. As a
market grape it has the faults of ripening somewhat unevenly and of
shipping rather poorly because of a thin tender skin. As with nearly all
of the hybrids of its kind it keeps well and this, with the desirable
qualities above noted, makes it a splendid grape for the home vineyard
where in favorable situations it may be expected to bear annual crops of
most excellent grapes. Gaertner is often compared with Massasoit, the
two varieties being very similar in fruit characters, but Gaertner is of
distinctly better quality than Massasoit.

Gaertner was originated by E. S. Rogers of Salem, Massachusetts, and the
early history of the variety will be found under "Rogers' Hybrids." It
was first mentioned separately from the other seedlings of Rogers about
1865 under the name _Rogers' No. 14_. In 1869, at the request of the
Lake Shore Grape Association, Rogers gave names to certain of his
productions which had previously been known by numbers only. One of the
varieties then named was Gaertner, in honor of the German botanist of
this name. It has never been as popular as some of the other Rogers'
hybrids and is to-day offered for sale by but few nurserymen.

     Vine medium to vigorous, usually hardy except in severe winters,
     produces fair to good crops. Canes rather long; intermediate in
     number, medium to below in size, vary in color from dark
     reddish-brown to ash-gray tinge, surface covered with thin blue
     bloom; tendrils continuous, bifid to trifid. Leaves medium to above
     in size, often rather roundish; upper surface moderately dark
     green, intermediate in thickness; lower surface pale green,
     pubescent; veins distinct. Flowers sterile, open moderately late;
     stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens about with Concord, matures unevenly, keeps only
     fairly well. Clusters above medium to medium in size, short to
     medium, cylindrical to slightly tapering, usually with a fair-sized
     single shoulder but sometimes double-shouldered, rather loose, with
     many abortive fruits. Berries large to below medium, roundish to
     sometimes slightly oval, light to dark red, rather glossy, covered
     with a moderate amount of lilac bloom, persistent, intermediate in
     firmness. Skin medium to thin, inclined to tender, contains no
     pigment. Flesh very pale green, juicy, fine-grained, somewhat
     tough, slightly stringy, agreeably vinous, sweet at skin to tart at
     center, good to very good in quality. Seeds separate from the pulp
     rather easily, large to above medium, intermediate in length, broad
     to medium, distinctly notched, sometimes with a very short enlarged
     neck, brownish; raphe obscured in a deep groove; chalaza of average
     size, above center to nearly central, oval to roundish, somewhat
     obscure.


GENEVA.

(Vinifera, Labrusca.)

=1.= _An. Hort._, =1889=:101. =2.= _Rural N. Y._, =48=:49, 50, _fig._,
165. 1889. =3.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =35=:180. 1890. =4.= _N. Y.
Sta. An. Rpt._, =9=:330. 1890. =5.= _Rural N. Y._, =50=:691. 1891. =6.=
_Ib._, =51=:607, 655. 1892. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:623. 1892.
=8.= _Rural N. Y._, =52=:71, 122, 655. 1893. =9.= _Bush. Cat._,
=1894=:128. =10.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:530, 548, 555. 1898. =11.=
_Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:170. 1899.

Jacob Moore's Geneva is another secondary hybrid between Labrusca and
Vinifera in which the Labrusca blood predominates. In quality it is
somewhat below any of the other grapes put out by Moore and is surpassed
by so many other grapes of its season that it has never become popular
though it has much to recommend it. Thus it is vigorous, though not
quite hardy, only fairly productive, with ample foliage which is very
healthy. The berries and clusters are attractive. The color is more
nearly transparent than any other of our grapes and there is so little
bloom that the grapes are a beautiful lustrous green often becoming
iridescent in sunlight. It is pure in flavor but somewhat insipid. The
berries cling well to the stem and the fruit keeps exceptionally well.

Geneva was originated by Jacob Moore, Brighton, Monroe County, New York,
from seed planted in 1874 of a hybrid vine fertilized by Iona. The
maternal vine was from seed of a wild Labrusca fertilized with Muscat
Alexandria. The variety was introduced by the R. G. Chase Company, of
Geneva. It is still quite commonly found in varietal vineyards and is
listed by a few grape nurserymen. Geneva seems to have succeeded
somewhat better to the south of New York and is notably better in
quality when grown in lower latitudes.

     Vine moderately vigorous to vigorous, not very hardy, healthy,
     produces smaller crops than Concord. Canes intermediate in length
     and number, covered with slight blue bloom; tendrils intermittent
     to continuous, bifid to trifid. Leaves medium in size, light
     green; lower surface grayish-white, pubescent. Flowers nearly
     sterile to partly fertile, open medium late; stamens upright. Fruit
     ripens soon after Niagara, ships well and keeps into the winter.
     Clusters medium to above in size, of average width, often blunt at
     ends, usually not shouldered, intermediate in compactness, with
     many abortive fruits. Berries medium to large, slightly oval or
     obovate, dull green changing to a faint yellow tinge, covered with
     thin gray bloom. Flesh pale green, tender and soft, vinous, nearly
     sweet at skin to tart at center, fair to good in quality but not
     equal to some other white grapes of the same season. Seeds
     intermediate in size and length.


GLENFELD.[189]

(Labrusca.)

=1.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:624. 1892. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
=1897=:19. =3.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:530, 548, 555. 1898.

Grown in the Station vineyard since 1889, Glenfeld has made a somewhat
favorable impression because of its excellent quality but it seems not
to have been well received throughout the State and it is doubtful if it
has more than a local reputation about the place of its origin. It is
equaled or surpassed, however, by many other varieties of its season in
vine characters and there is therefore little need that it should be
longer perpetuated, though it may be worthy a place in the garden.

Glenfeld was found on the place of George J. Magee of Watkins, New York.
Mr. Magee reports that the vine was on the place when he purchased it
and the former owner knew nothing of it. The variety was locally
supposed to be a seedling of Concord. It was sent to this Station for
testing in 1889. For some reason it was placed upon the grape list of
the American Pomological Society fruit catalog for 1897. Such action was
hardly justified, as the variety had never been tested except in one or
two neighborhoods, and it was taken off at the next meeting.

     Vine vigorous, hardy except in severe winters, produces good crops.
     Canes long, numerous to medium, intermediate in thickness; tendrils
     continuous to intermittent, bifid to trifid. Leaves often very
     large, variable in color, medium to thick; lower surface tinged
     with bronze, strongly pubescent. Flowers nearly fertile, open in
     mid-season or earlier; stamens upright. Fruit ripens early in
     October, keeps fairly well. Clusters large to below medium,
     variable in shape, usually with a medium-sized single shoulder,
     not uniform in compactness. Berries nearly large to below medium,
     roundish, unique in color being a rather dull olive green covered
     with ash-gray bloom, somewhat inclined to shatter. Flesh tender,
     vinous, with an agreeable flavor, sweet at skin to tart at center,
     good in quality. Seeds medium to below in size, broad.


GOETHE.

(Vinifera, Labrusca.)

=1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1860=:86. =2.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
=1861=:68. =3.= _Horticulturist_, =18=:98, 99. 1863. =4.= _U. S. D. A.
Rpt._, =1867=:160. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1867=:44. =6.=
_Horticulturist_, =24=:126. 1869. =7.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =5=:261. 1869.
=8.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:43, 150, 180, 239, 241, _fig._, 242, 296. 1869.
=9.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:38, 162. =10.= _Bush. Cat._,
=1883=:101, _fig._, 102. =11.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1150, 1157. 1898.
=12.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:39, 43, 44, 45, 50, 54. 1899. =13.= _Miss.
Sta. Bul._, =56=:14. 1899.

ROGERS' NO. 1 (1, 2, 3, 4, 5). _Rogers' No. 1_ (6, 7, 8, 10).

Of all Rogers' hybrids Goethe shows most of the Vinifera characters,
resembling in appearance to a marked degree the White Malaga of European
fame and not falling far short of the best Old World grape in quality.
This is when it is well grown; but here lies the fault with Goethe, for
it is most difficult to grow well especially in the North where the
seasons are usually not long enough for its full maturity. When it does
ripen in northern latitudes it is unsurpassed in flavor by any other of
the grapes of its class. The vine is hardy in New York; vigorous to a
fault, for in very rich soils it makes too great a growth; it does best
in sands or gravels; it is fairly immune to mildew, rot and other
diseases; and where it succeeds often bears so freely that thinning
becomes a necessity. Added to its high quality, which makes it a
splendid table grape, Goethe keeps well, lasting long into the winter.
It is excellent for wine though it is too difficult to grow to make it
profitable for this purpose. Unfortunately this variety ripens so late
that it cannot be recommended for New York. The accompanying color-plate
does not do the variety full justice as good specimens could not be
obtained for illustration in the unfavorable season of 1907. Neither
size, nor shape of cluster, nor color of fruit are quite as we should
like to have them shown.

[Illustration: GOETHE]

E. S. Rogers of Salem, Massachusetts, produced Goethe as one of his
famous Labrusca-Vinifera hybrids and for its early history the reader is
referred to "Rogers' Hybrids." It is first mentioned separately from
others of these productions in 1858 under the name _Rogers' No. 1_. It
was placed upon the grape list of the American Pomological Society
fruit catalog in 1867, where it still remains. In 1869 Mr. Rogers named
the grape Goethe after the great German poet and naturalist. While
highly esteemed in the North, it succeeds better and is therefore more
commonly grown in the Middle and South Atlantic States and in the
valleys of the Ohio and of the lower Missouri.

     Vine vigorous to medium, hardy, variable in productiveness,
     somewhat subject to mildew in unfavorable locations. Canes above
     medium to short, of average number and thickness, rather dark
     brown; nodes enlarged, slightly flattened; internodes very short;
     diaphragm thick; pith below medium in size; shoots strongly
     pubescent; tendrils continuous with tendency to intermittent,
     rather long, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds intermediate in size, length and thickness, conical to
     nearly obtuse, open very late. Young leaves tinged lightly on under
     side and along margin of upper side with rose-carmine. Leaves
     variable in size, irregularly roundish, medium to somewhat thin;
     upper surface light green, glossy, of average smoothness; lower
     surface pale green to bronze, pubescent, veins very distinct; leaf
     usually not lobed, with terminus broadly acute; petiolar sinus of
     average depth, narrow, closed and frequently overlapping; basal
     sinus usually lacking; lateral sinus shallow, often a mere notch;
     teeth shallow to medium, rather narrow. Flowers partly fertile,
     open in mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens considerably later than Concord, keeps unusually well.
     Clusters intermediate in size, short to medium, rather broad,
     widely tapering, frequently single-shouldered, usually two bunches
     to a shoot, intermediate in compactness; peduncle short to medium,
     of average thickness; pedicel nearly long, thick, covered with
     numerous, conspicuous warts, wide at point of attachment to berry;
     brush long, slender to stout, pale green to yellowish-brown.
     Berries very large to above medium, oval to nearly roundish, pale
     red, covered with thin gray or slightly lilac bloom, persistent, of
     average firmness. Skin thin, tender to medium, adheres slightly to
     the pulp, contains no pigment, faintly astringent. Flesh pale
     green, translucent, inclined to tenderness, rather coarse, nearly
     sweet at skin but decidedly tart at center, with some Vinifera
     sprightliness, ranking good to very good in quality, does not reach
     its best flavor in many localities in this State. Seeds separate
     from the pulp with difficulty unless fully ripe, one to three,
     average two, large, long, of average thickness, very slightly
     notched, inclined to bluntness, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza of
     fair size, decidedly above center, pear-shaped, distinct. Must 78 deg..


GOFF.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Aestivalis.)

During the quarter century the New York Agricultural Experiment Station
has been in existence, the breeding of grapes has been one of the chief
lines of horticultural work. Professor E. S. Goff, the first Station
horticulturist, began this work as early as 1885 and produced a number
of seedling grapes which were numbered but not named. In continuing this
work, Professor S. A. Beach, successor to Professor Goff, planted seed
from some of the original seedlings and from one of these came a
somewhat remarkable grape to which we have given the name Goff. This new
variety first bore fruit in 1898 and at once attracted attention. In
1901 it was awarded a silver medal as a meritorious seedling at the
Pan-American Exposition. Specimens of it sent to several viticultural
experts were highly spoken of and in the years it has been in fruit on
the Station grounds it has made a most excellent record.

Unfortunately the pedigree of this grape can never be known. Not only
were the parents of the original seedling unknown, but the immediate
parent was open to cross-pollination in a vineyard of many varieties.
All who have examined the fruit and vines of Goff are well agreed that
the variety shows very distinctly Labrusca and Vinifera characters and
some maintain that there are indications of Aestivalis as well. As to
the proportion of these three species, if all be present, no one would
care to hazard a guess.

The general appearance of Goff is well shown in the accompanying
color-plate though the cylindrical shape and enlarged lower end of the
bunch are more pronounced than in typical specimens. Because of the
peculiar shape of both bunch and berry the fruit cannot be called
handsome though the color is sufficiently attractive. The quality of
Goff is of the highest, being hardly surpassed by any of the commonly
grown grapes of this country. The flavor is sweet, rich and vinous and
the pulp, while firm, is tender and readily parts from the seeds. In
general the flavor is that of a Labrusca-Vinifera hybrid though there is
a spiciness in it that suggests an admixture of Aestivalis; the flesh
characters are better than those of the average hybrid of the two first
named species, being less pulpy and coarse. Probably the most valuable
character of Goff is the long keeping quality of the fruit in which
respect it far surpasses the several commercial varieties of this State
and equals the best keeping American grapes known. In a test during the
winter of 1907-08 of the keeping qualities of 255 varieties of grapes
from the Station vineyards, kept in eight-pound baskets in common
storage, unwrapped, Goff was one of the four best keepers, Canandaigua,
Wilder and Vergennes being the other three. These four varieties kept in
very good condition until April 16, and under circumstances not
altogether favorable.

[Illustration: GOFF]

The vine characters of Goff are exceptionally good on the Station
grounds. The vines are vigorous, hardy, very productive, and the foliage
is healthy. All of the above characters are developed to an extent
seldom found in a variety showing the specific blood indicated in the
Goff. In these respects, taking all of them, this variety surpasses any
of Rogers' hybrids, grapes with which it can be best compared. The
variety is now distributed for testing in the various grape regions of
the State and if the reports of its behavior are satisfactory, it will
be generally distributed within a few years.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, hardy, very productive. Canes
     medium to long, numerous, often rather thick, dark brown with
     slight reddish tinge; nodes enlarged, flattened; internodes
     intermediate in length; diaphragm thick to medium; pith of average
     size; shoots pubescent; tendrils continuous, sometimes
     intermittent, long, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds intermediate in size and thickness, short to medium,
     plump, conical to roundly obtuse, open in mid-season. Young leaves
     tinged on lower side and along margin of upper side with light
     rose-carmine. Leaves healthy, medium to large, of average
     thickness; upper surface light green; smooth to rugose, dull; lower
     surface pale green, slightly cobwebby; veins fairly distinct; lobes
     three to five in number with terminal lobe obtuse to acute;
     petiolar sinus deep, narrow; basal sinus medium to shallow, rather
     wide; lateral sinus deep, wide; teeth shallow, of average width.
     Flowers fertile, open in mid-season or later, sometimes on plan of
     six; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens a little later than Concord, keeps unusually well.
     Clusters variable in size, long to medium, frequently very slender,
     cylindrical, surface of cluster often irregular with blunt end
     larger than the part above, usually not shouldered, or with a small
     single shoulder, compact; peduncle usually short, intermediate in
     thickness; pedicel rather short, of average thickness, covered with
     few, if any warts, wide at point of attachment to fruit; brush
     short, slender, pale green with faint brown tinge. Berries variable
     in size, averaging about the size of Concord, frequently misshapen,
     strongly flattened, not uniform, dark reddish-purple, covered with
     heavy lilac or bluish bloom, persistent, firm. Skin thick,
     intermediate in toughness, adheres slightly to the pulp, with
     bright red pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh pale green,
     translucent, juicy, tender, a little coarse, somewhat vinous, sweet
     from skin to center, very good in quality. Seeds separate easily
     from the pulp, one to five, average three, intermediate in size,
     variable in breadth, of medium length, rather sharp-pointed, light
     brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza of fair size, above center,
     distinct.


GOLD COIN.

(Aestivalis, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =28=:162. 1891. =2.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._,
     =28=:264. 1893. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:128. =4.= Husmann,
     =1895=:129. =5.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =73=:183. 1897. =6.= _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Cat._, =1899=:28. =7.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:267, 277. 1900.
     =8.= _Rural N. Y._, =61=:722. 1902.

Gold Coin is at the head of Munson's "Gold Coin Family"[190] having been
produced by crossing Norton and Martha. Unfortunately the variety is
only of general interest in New York as it does not succeed so far
north, the summer seasons being too short. Where it succeeds it is a
handsome market variety of very good quality and makes an excellent
white wine. The vines are productive and are reported to be unusually
free from attacks of fungal diseases.

As indicated in the preceding paragraph, this variety was originated by
T. V. Munson of Denison, Texas. It sprung from seed of Cynthiana or
Norton[191] pollinated by Martha which was planted in 1883 and was
introduced by the originator in 1894. Gold Coin was placed on the grape
list of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1899.

     Vine medium to vigorous, hardy, produces heavy crops. Canes
     intermediate in length and number, rather slender; tendrils
     continuous and sometimes intermittent, trifid to bifid. Leaves
     medium to above in size, moderately light green, slightly rugose;
     lower surface pale green, tinged with bronze, heavily pubescent.
     Flowers nearly fertile; stamens upright. Fruit ripens after
     mid-season, keeps long in good condition. Clusters medium to small,
     not very long, usually single-shouldered, variable in compactness.
     Berries large to below medium, roundish to slightly oval,
     yellowish-green with a distinct trace of reddish-amber, covered
     with a medium amount of gray bloom, usually persistent. Skin
     covered with small scattering brown dots, thin, inclined to
     toughness. Flesh somewhat tough, faintly aromatic, tart from skin
     to center, good in quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp,
     somewhat numerous, above medium to medium in size, not notched;
     raphe shows as a distinct cord.


GOLDEN DROP.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Montreal Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1880=:112. =2.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:102. _fig._ =3.= Barry, =1883=:447. =4.= _W. N. Y. Hort.
     Soc. Rpt._, =28=:17. 1883. =5.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:44, 51. 1901.

Golden Drop is an early white grape now nearly lost to cultivation but
once somewhat popular because of its high quality. Its hardiness and
earliness might make it a valuable grape for northern latitudes where
more commonly cultivated varieties do not mature with certainty. It is
somewhat susceptible to fungal diseases, mildew especially, and needs
more than ordinary care.

This variety was originated by C. G. Pringle of Charlotte, Vermont, from
seed of Adirondac fertilized with Delaware, planted in 1869 and
introduced by B. K. Bliss of New York, about 1880. It has never been
popular but is still sold by an occasional nurseryman.

     Vine vigorous to weak, not productive, inclined to mildew. Canes
     long to medium, numerous, dark brown; tendrils continuous to
     intermittent, bifid. Leaves intermediate in size, light green;
     lower surface pale green, very slightly pubescent. Flowers sterile
     or nearly so, open in mid-season; stamens upright. Fruit ripens
     shortly before Niagara, keeps well. Clusters small, of medium
     length, slender, rather cylindrical, loose. Berries medium to
     small, roundish to slightly oval, light green with dull
     yellowish-red tinge in the sun, covered with thin gray bloom,
     persistent. Flesh tender and soft, not foxy, sweet, very mild, good
     in quality. Seeds medium to small, short.


GREEN EARLY.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1902=:223. =2.= _Ib._, =1905=:296.

Green Early is a white grape coming in season with Winchell which
surpasses it in most characters, quality in particular. This variety is
not to be confused with "Chas. A. Green," also a white grape, which was
originated by F. W. Loudon of Janesville, Wisconsin, and was introduced
by Chas. A. Green of Rochester. We have not been able to get a complete
description of the latter variety.

Green Early was found growing by the side of a ditch near a Concord
vineyard, on land belonging to O. J. Greene of Portland, Chautauqua
County, New York. The vine was transplanted into a nursery in 1887. The
parentage of the variety is unknown but it is credited to Concord owing
to its resemblance to that variety. It was introduced in the late
nineties by J. H. Greene of Portland, New York, and H. W. Blowers of
Westfield, New York.

     Vine medium to very vigorous, usually hardy, productive. Canes
     variable in length and thickness, dark-reddish brown; tendrils
     continuous, sometimes intermittent, bifid to trifid. Leaves
     variable in size, medium green; lower surface pale green,
     pubescent; stamens upright. Fruit ripens about with Moore Early or
     with Concord in some locations, does not keep long and is only a
     fair shipper. Clusters variable in size, length and breadth,
     sometimes single-shouldered, variable in compactness. Berries above
     medium to nearly small, oval to slightly roundish, light green
     tinged with yellow, covered with thin gray bloom, moderately
     persistent, rather soft. Skin nearly thin, tender, inclined to
     crack. Flesh slightly tough and aromatic, almost sweet at skin to
     acid at center, fair flavor and quality. Seeds medium to below in
     size, intermediate in length and breadth, sharp-pointed.


GREIN GOLDEN.

(Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:33. =2.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1881=:162, 164. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:103. =4.= _Kan. Hort.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1889-90=:20. app. =5.= _Gar. and For._, =3=:290, 490,
     599. 1890. =6.= _Ala. Sta. Bul._, =10=:10. 1890. =7.= _Ill. Sta.
     Bul._, =28=:264. 1893. =8.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =15=:294. 1896.
     =9.= _Ib._, =17=:531, 548, 555. 1898.

     _Grein's No. 2_ (3).

Grein Golden ranks with Missouri Riesling as the best of Nicholas
Grein's several seedlings of Taylor, both being improvements over the
parent variety. It is very similar to Missouri Riesling but is, on the
Station grounds, and in general, a much stronger grower. For a variety
of the Taylor group, both cluster and berry are large and uniform,
which, with the attractive golden color of the berries, make it a most
handsome fruit. But as the variety grows in New York the flavor is not
at all pleasing, being an unusual commingling of sweetness and acidity
quite disagreeable to most palates; and so while its habit of growth,
hardiness, health of vine and productiveness are such as would make the
variety acceptable the quality of the fruit condemns it for table use.
In fact the last remark applies in a greater or less degree to all of
the varieties of the Taylor group for this State--they fall so far short
in quality that they can never be of value as market or table grapes.
All are suitable for wine and Grein Golden in particular is said to make
a very good white wine. The fruit of this variety cracks badly in wet
weather and does not keep nor ship well, skin and flesh being very
tender.

[Illustration: GREIN GOLDEN]

Nicholas Grein of Hermann, Missouri, produced Grein Golden over thirty
years ago. It is generally supposed to be from seed of Taylor. Grein
states that he planted seed of the European Riesling and of Taylor at
the same time, and that the Taylor did not germinate but that the
European Riesling did, one of the seedlings being Grein Golden. As the
Grein Golden shows Riparia very plainly, with no trace of Vinifera, it
is generally supposed that the seeds were mixed and that Grein Golden is
a Taylor seedling. The variety has been and still is a commercial sort
in the wine districts of the middle West.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, productive. Canes long to medium, numerous,
     somewhat slender, rather dark reddish-brown; nodes slightly
     enlarged, usually flattened; internodes long to medium; diaphragm
     of average thickness; pith intermediate in size; shoots pubescent;
     tendrils intermittent, of fair length, trifid to sometimes bifid.

     Leaf-buds of average size, short to medium, intermediate in
     thickness, conical to pointed, open in mid-season. Young leaves
     faintly tinged on lower side only with faintest rose carmine.
     Leaves large to medium, thick; upper surface dark green, dull,
     moderately smooth; lower surface pale green, slightly pubescent;
     veins not conspicuous; lobes none to three with terminus acute;
     petiolar sinus deep, medium to narrow; basal sinus usually lacking;
     lateral sinus shallow, wide, frequently obscure; teeth medium to
     deep, of average width. Flowers sterile, open in mid-season;
     stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens about with Niagara, does not keep nor ship well.
     Clusters large, long to medium, somewhat broad, tapering,
     irregular, often heavily single-shouldered, loose to moderately
     compact; peduncle above average length, thickish; pedicel
     intermediate in length and thickness, covered with few,
     inconspicuous warts; brush slender, medium in length, pale green.
     Berries uniform in size, rather large, roundish, attractive light
     green often with tinge of golden yellow or pinkish-yellow, glossy,
     covered with thin gray bloom, persistent, intermediate in firmness.
     Skin very thin, tender, often inclined to crack, does not adhere to
     the pulp, contains no pigment. Flesh greenish, translucent, very
     juicy, tender, vinous, slightly sweet next the skin but decidedly
     acid at center, medium to good in quality, better than Elvira.
     Seeds separate easily from the pulp when mature, two to four in
     number, average two and three, above medium in size, broad,
     intermediate in length, plump, light to dark brown; raphe shows as
     a small but prominent cord; chalaza rather large, at center or
     slightly above, oval, usually distinct.


HARTFORD.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =18=:114. 1852. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1856=:36, 165. =3.= _Mag. Hort._, =24=:131. 1858. =4.=
     _Horticulturist_, =13=:122, 166. 1858. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1862=:90. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1862=:136, 140. =7.= _Ib._,
     =1881=:117, 119, 123, 136, 138, 153, 154, 158, 162, 168. =8.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:103. =9.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =9=:327.
     1890. =10.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:135. 1898. =11.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =17=:531, 541, 544, 548, 552, 555. 1898. =12.= _Mo. Sta.
     Bul._, =46=:39, 42, 44, 46. 1899.

     HARTFORD PROLIFIC (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8). _Steele's Seedling_ (4).

For many years Hartford was looked upon as one of the standard early
black grapes, if not the standard. It is now being very largely
superseded, and greatly to the betterment of viticulture, by other
grapes of its season of better quality, though it is still quite
commonly grown in New York at least. It is probable that for many years
there will be locations in which Hartford may be profitably cultivated
(some in which it alone will be worth growing), and purposes for which
it may be recommended. The many good characters of the vine make it a
desirable grape for breeding work.

The vine of Hartford can be well characterized by its good qualities but
the fruit is best described through its faults. The plants are vigorous,
prolific, healthy, and the fruit is borne early in the season, ripening
from a week to two weeks in advance of the Concord. After Concord the
Hartford is one of the most fruitful of American grapes. The canes are
remarkable for their stoutness and for the crooks at the joints. The
bunches are not unattractive (the color-plate fails to do them justice
as to size and color), but the quality of the fruit is low, even for an
early grape where the highest quality is hardly expected. The flesh is
pulpy and unpleasant to eat while the flavor is both too insipid and too
foxy to be good. Because of its poor quality, now that there are so many
really good early grapes, Hartford should be discarded. But there is
another reason for ceasing its culture. The berries shell badly either
on the vine or when packed for shipping, so that the fruit neither
ships, packs, nor keeps well. The competition of the southern states
from which later and better varieties can be shipped to northern cities
to compete with Hartford is still another reason for the passing of this
variety from commercial cultivation. Still other faults are that it
colors a long while before it is ripe; and it is only partly
self-fertile so that in seasons when there is bad weather during
blooming time the clusters are usually loose and straggling.

[Illustration: HARTFORD]

The original vine of Hartford was a chance seedling in the garden of
Paphro Steele of West Hartford, Connecticut. It fruited for the first
time in 1849. This seedling was supposed by those familiar with the
surroundings at the time to be a cross of Isabella and the wild fox
grape. It was named Hartford Prolific by the Hartford County
Horticultural Society. The American Pomological Society placed it in
their fruit catalog in 1862 and it has never been removed. The word
"Prolific" appears to have been dropped from this name by common consent
about 1890.

     Vine medium to vigorous, injured in severe winters, very productive
     as an early grape. Does not require as close pruning as many other
     varieties. Canes above medium in length, intermediate in number,
     not thick, dark brown, covered with considerable pubescence; nodes
     enlarged, flattened; internodes medium to short; diaphragm medium
     to below in thickness; pith of average size; shoots very pubescent;
     tendrils continuous, long, bifid.

     Leaf-buds of average size, short, thick to medium, obtuse to
     conical. Leaves nearly large, thick; upper surface dark green,
     dull, rugose; lower surface pale green, often with trace of bronze,
     thinly pubescent; veins indistinct; lobes variable with terminus
     blunt to acute; petiolar sinus medium to deep, narrow; basal sinus
     usually lacking; lateral sinus shallow, narrow, often a mere notch;
     teeth shallow, of average width. Flowers fertile, open in
     mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens early, does not keep well. Clusters above average
     size, nearly long, slender except when shouldered, slightly
     tapering, irregular, often with a long, large, single shoulder,
     loose; peduncle long to medium, of fair size; pedicel short,
     intermediate in thickness, covered with few small warts; brush
     greenish with dull tinge of reddish-brown. Berries regular in size
     averaging above medium, roundish to oval, black, not glossy,
     covered with blue bloom, drop badly from pedicel, of average
     firmness. Skin thick, tough, adheres considerably to the pulp,
     contains much purplish-red pigment, somewhat astringent. Flesh
     greenish, translucent, juicy, toughish, stringy and foxy, rather
     sweet at skin but somewhat tart at center, resembles Concord but
     ranks below that variety in flavor and quality. Seeds separate
     rather easily, one to four, average three or four, intermediate in
     size, almost broad, of fair length, dark brown; raphe obscure;
     chalaza intermediate in size, at center or slightly above,
     irregularly circular, rather distinct. Must 71 deg..


HAYES.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _Gar. Mon._, =21=:340. 1880. =2.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:106.
     _fig._ =3.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, Pt. 1, =1884=:22, 23. =4.=
     _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885-6=:169. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1889=:24. =6.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =9=:331. 1890. =7.= _Rural
     N. Y._, =53=:616, 645. 1894. =8.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:531,
     541, 548, 552. 1898.

     F. B. HAYES (7). FRANCIS B. HAYES (3, 4). _Francis B. Hayes_ (2,
     6). _Moore's No. 31_ (2).

In 1880 the Massachusetts Horticultural Society awarded a first class
certificate of merit to Hayes and it was very favorably spoken of by
many expert grape-growers in New England and the East. These
recommendations brought it prominently before grape-growers and for a
time it was a somewhat popular variety, but as it became better known
several defects became apparent and its popularity waned. The vine is
hardy and vigorous but the growth is slow and in New York at least the
variety is a shy or precarious bearer and both bunches and berries are
too small and variable to make it an attractive grape. Besides it comes
at a time, a week or ten days earlier than Concord, when there are many
other really good green grapes. Excellent though it is in quality, it is
hardly worth giving a place in this State for any purpose. The foliage
is tender to the heat of summer and the variety is not therefore adapted
to southern or western localities.

John B. Moore of Concord, Massachusetts, is the originator of Hayes. It
is said to be a seedling of Concord and one of the same lot of seedlings
as Moore Early. It was first fruited in 1872 and was exhibited at Boston
two years later. The variety was not introduced, however, until the fall
of 1884. It is a somewhat remarkable seedling of Concord for it shows no
foxiness of flavor and has tender, delicate flesh, which taken together
make it of high quality. Hayes illustrates well the fact mentioned under
Concord that the light colored seedlings of that variety are usually of
high quality. The intermittent tendrils and certain characters of the
seeds indicate that there is some species present besides Labrusca,
probably Vinifera.

     Vine variable in vigor and productiveness, usually hardy and
     healthy. Canes intermediate in length, numerous, rather slender;
     tendrils intermittent, bifid to trifid. Leaves not uniform in size,
     nearly dark green; lower surface considerably pubescent. Flowers
     almost sterile, open medium late; stamens upright. Fruit ripens
     from a week to ten days earlier than Concord, keeps well. Clusters
     variable in size and length, often single-shouldered, not uniform
     in compactness. Berries above medium to small, roundish,
     greenish-yellow to slightly golden yellow, covered with thin gray
     bloom, persistent. Skin thin, tender, covered with few small
     reddish-brown dots. Flesh fine-grained, tender, vinous, sweet at
     skin to agreeably tart at center, rather mild, good in quality.
     Seeds few, of average size, medium to short, often plump.


HEADLIGHT.

(Vinifera, Labrusca, Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Rural N. Y._, =60=:637. 1901. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1903=:82. =3.= _U. S. D. A. Yr. Bk._, =1903=:276. _col. pl._ =4.=
     _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1904=:301, 306.

Headlight is one of the most promising of Munson's many valuable grapes.
Possibly it is more valuable for southern vineyards than for northern
ones, yet it is worthy of trial in the North. Its meritorious characters
are: Productiveness, outyielding Delaware with which it would compete in
New York; disease-resistant foliage and vines little affected by mildew
and rarely attacked by black-rot even in the South; more than average
vigor of vine, though it has fallen short of expectations in this
respect in the Station vineyard; high quality of the fruit, being almost
the equal of Delaware in flavor and having tender melting pulp which
readily parts from the seeds; and earliness, ripening before Delaware
and hanging on the vines or keeping after being picked for some time
without deterioration in either quality or appearance. Though a southern
grape it has proved perfectly hardy here and were it not that it must
compete in the North with many other good grapes, Delaware in
particular, it might take high place in northern viticulture. Even with
such competition it is well worth a trial in either the amateur or
commercial vineyards of New York. It would seem that for the South its
resistance to disease should make it a valuable commercial variety.

The originator of Headlight, T. V. Munson, states in a personal letter
that it came from Moyer seed fertilized by Brilliant. The seed from
which the variety came was planted in 1895 and the new grape was
introduced in 1901 by the producer. While Headlight is as yet
comparatively little known, it is being tested in many of the grape
regions of the country and its value should soon be known. Such reports
of its behavior as have been made are in the main very favorable.

     Vine at this Station medium to weak, hardy, very productive. Canes
     short to medium, few in number, slender, dark brown to
     reddish-brown with small amount of bloom at nodes, which are
     enlarged and usually not flattened; internodes short; diaphragm
     thick; pith below medium to nearly small; shoots more or less
     pubescent; tendrils continuous, short, bifid, very persistent.

     Leaf-buds small and short, inclined to slender, pointed to conical,
     open late. Young leaves heavily tinged on under side and lightly on
     the upper side with bright carmine. Leaves medium to small, thick;
     upper surface light green, dull, smoothish; lower surface pale
     green, with some pubescence; veins obscure; lobes none to three
     with terminus obtuse to acute; petiolar sinus intermediate in depth
     and width; basal sinus usually lacking; lateral sinus shallow,
     narrow; teeth shallow, of average width. Flowers sterile, open in
     mid-season; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens before Delaware, keeps well. Clusters small, short, of
     average breadth, tapering, frequently single-shouldered, compact;
     peduncle short to medium, slender; pedicel short, slender, covered
     with a few small, inconspicuous warts; brush yellowish-brown.
     Berries medium to very small, roundish, dark red to almost
     purplish-black, not glossy, covered lightly with blue bloom,
     persistent, very firm. Skin of average thickness, tough, adheres
     slightly to the pulp, contains more or less light-red pigment,
     astringent. Flesh greenish, translucent, very juicy, tender,
     fine-grained, vinous, sweet from skin to center, good to very good
     in quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp, one to three,
     average two, below medium in size, intermediate in length, light
     brown; raphe obscure; chalaza above center, circular, distinct.


HERBEMONT.

(Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Amer. Farmer_, =6=:369. 1825. =2.= _Ib._, =10=:211, 324.
     1828. =3.= Prince, =1830=:154. =4.= Ib., =1830=:154, 339. =5.=
     _Mag. Hort._, =9=:373. 1843. =6.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._,
     =1845=:937, 940. =7.= Downing, =1845=:258. =8.= _Horticulturist_,
     =1=:98. 1846. =9.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1847=:464, 465, 469.
     =10.= _Horticulturist_, =12=:459. 1857. =11.= Downing, =1857=:339.
     =12.= _Horticulturist_, =20=:40. 1865. =13.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1867=:44. =14.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:17, 59, 69, 98, 173, 179, 257,
     _fig._, 258, 260, 296, 302. 1869. =15.= _Ib._, =2=:76, 181, 195,
     266. 1870. =16.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:39. =17.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1883=:104, 105. _fig._ =18.= Husmann, =1895=:183. =19.=
     _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:181, _fig._, 182, 195. 1896. =20.=
     _Tex. Farm and Ranch_, Feb. 8, =1896=:11. =21.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._,
     =48=:1150, 1157. 1898. =22.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:39, 43, 45, 46,
     50. 1899. =23.= _Traite gen. de vit._, =6=:256. 1903.

     _Bottsi_ (20,?23). _Brown French_ (20, 23). _Dunn_ (20). HERBEMONT
     MADEIRA (4, 5, 6). _Herbemont's Madeira_ (10, 11, 14, 17, 19, 20,
     23). _Hunt_ (1). _Kay's Seedling_ (20). _McKee_ (20, 23). _Neal
     grape_ (11, 23). _Neil grape_ (17, 19, 23). WARREN (2, 7, 10).
     _Warren_ (2, 4, 6, 11, 14, 17, 19, 20, 23). _Warrenden_ (6).
     WARRENTON (1, 2, 3, 5). _Warrenton_ (4, 10, 11, 14, 17, 19, 20,
     23). _White Herbemont_ (20).

[Illustration: HEADLIGHT]

In the South Herbemont has the same relative rank among cultivated
grapes that the Concord holds in the North. The variety is injured by
cold below zero or thereabouts and cannot be grown north of the Ohio
River and fails somewhat in Missouri and Arkansas because of its
tenderness. It requires, too, a long season for perfect maturity.
Herbemont is also fastidious as to soil and its cultivation is somewhat
limited by this factor. It requires a well-drained warm soil and one
which is abundantly supplied with humus; though the variety often
thrives on the comparatively poor hill-land of the South. Despite these
limitations, this variety is grown in an immense territory, extending
from Virginia and Tennessee to the Gulf and westward through Texas. The
synonyms given above are many of them allusions to the localities in
which it has been grown, while most of the others pertain to its origin,
but all show to some extent the wide dissemination of this grape and
indicate in a measure its merit.

Herbemont is known and widely grown in Europe as well as in the southern
United States. In southwestern France where the demands of the variety
seem to be particularly well fulfilled, it is firmly established and is
highly regarded as a direct producer. In northern and central France,
however, the winters are too cold and the seasons too short for its
profitable culture. Its use as a stock in France is limited for it has
been found to be but medium in its resistance to phylloxera; does not
grow well from cuttings and is therefore propagated with difficulty; the
wood does not bear grafts well and is worked with difficulty in either
field or bench grafting; and lastly the French find it very subject to
chlorosis, especially in calcareous soils.

The vine is, according to all accounts, a remarkably vigorous, rapid and
healthy grower, being hardly surpassed in these characters by any of our
native grapes. The wood is strong, abundant and very hard, the latter a
serious difficulty in grafting. The fruits are attractive because of the
size of the bunch and the glossy black of the berries, which are small
as compared with northern grapes. Fruit is borne abundantly and with
certainty year in and year out in suitable localities. The flesh
characters of the fruit are good for a small grape, neither flesh, skin
nor seeds being especially objectionable in eating; the pulp is tender
and juicy; rich, sweet and highly flavored, the combination of flesh and
flavor characters giving a grape of high quality. Herbemont is greatly
esteemed as a table grape and is said to make a very good light red
wine. The ample, lustrous green foliage makes the variety one of the
attractive ornamental plants of the South.

Herbemont has been much used in grape-breeding and to advantage, for
probably no other species offers as many desirable characters for the
South and Southwest as the one to which this variety belongs and best
represents. There are now several pure-bred seedlings of Herbemont under
cultivation and a greater number in which it is one of the parents. Of
the former Black Herbemont and the Onderdonk are good representatives
and Jaeger, Delicious, Muench, Vinita, Perry, Mrs. Munson and Neva
Munson, all from Munson of Texas, are Herbemont cross-breeds.

The history of Herbemont, as it must be written from such information as
can now be obtained, is scarcely more than a collection of mythical
stories. The variety is known to have been in cultivation in Georgia
before the Revolutionary War, when it was generally known under the name
of Warrenton or Warren. In the early part of the last century it came to
the hands of Nicholas Herbemont of Columbia, South Carolina, who gave it
the name Madeira under a temporary supposition that it came from the
island of that name. This name was generally changed to Herbemont's
Madeira. Herbemont made the variety known to the public, sending it to
William R. Prince of Flushing, Long Island, and Nicholas Longworth of
Cincinnati, the two most prominent viticulturists of that time who, in
turn, aided in its distribution.

There have been many contradictory accounts of the origin of the grape,
crediting it to Georgia, the Carolinas, or Europe. None is supported by
sufficient evidence to make it creditable and most of them arose at so
late a date that it was impossible for the writers to know anything
about the facts of the case except by hearsay evidence. The early idea
of many that it is a Vinifera was soon dropped. Later this variety and
others of its class were known as southern Aestivalis; however, it was
admitted that they were unlike other southern Aestivalis. Munson gave
these grapes the name Bourquiniana, a name that has been accepted as a
convenient designation for the group by some who do not accept his
account of its origin. The Herbemont and Lenoir are the two varieties
commonly referred to as typical of this so-called species.

The history of the culture of Herbemont in the North has been the same
everywhere. It was early introduced around Cincinnati, Ohio, and
Hermann, Missouri, and for a time the growers had high hopes of its
value. It winter-killed slightly but they overcame this by covering the
vines; then the variety showed itself susceptible to rot and its culture
was soon dropped. In 1867 the Herbemont was placed on the grape list of
the American Pomological Society fruit catalog and it has never been
removed.

We have no vines of Herbemont growing in the Station vineyard and the
following description has been collected from a variety of sources.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous. Canes rather long and strong,
     bright green, with more or less purple, with considerable
     bluish-white bloom; internodes short; tendrils intermittent, of
     medium size, bifid or trifid. Leaves large, roundish, sometimes
     entire, or three- to seven-lobed, nearly glabrous above and below;
     upper surface clear green; lower surface lighter green, slightly
     glaucous; veins prominent and covered with rather abundant hair.
     Flowers self-fertile. Fruit ripens very late. Clusters large, long,
     tapering to cylindrical, prominently shouldered, compact; peduncle
     long and strong; pedicels somewhat short with few rather large
     warts; brush pinkish. Berries round, below medium in size, uniform,
     reddish-black or brown with abundant blue bloom. Skin thin, rather
     tough, with considerable pigment below. Flesh tender, very juicy;
     juice colorless or slightly pink; rather sweet, sprightly to
     slightly acid. Seeds two to four, usually two, small,
     reddish-brown, slightly glossy; chalaza round, prominent; raphe
     distinct.


HERBERT.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =31=:106. 1865. =2.= _Horticulturist_, =24=:126.
     1869. =3.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:180, 182. 1869. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Cat._, =1869=:42. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:32, 43, 121,
     123, 136. =6.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:109. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =11=:625. 1892. =8.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:260. 1893. =9.=
     _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:531, 548, 549, 555. 1898.

     ROGERS' NO. 44 (1). _Rogers' No. 44_ (2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7).

Although Rogers' hybrids have not made a great impression upon the
commercial grape culture of the country, all will agree that they are
hardly surpassed for the home vineyard and, among them, at least none of
the black varieties is superior for this purpose to Herbert. Barry
equals it and possibly surpasses it to the taste of most grape
connoisseurs in delicacy of flavor but Herbert is the handsomer fruit,
is a little earlier and if anything its vine characters are somewhat
better. When at its best, Herbert, and Barry too, nearly equal Black
Hamburg in the characters that constitute high quality. They lack the
richness of the Old World variety but they are more sprightly and
refreshing and do not cloy the appetite as does the Vinifera variety. In
all that constitutes a fine table grape Herbert is about as near
perfection as we have yet reached in the evolution of American grapes.
As is the case with most black grapes the fruit colors long before it is
ripe and when thus picked there is an astringency in its taste that
wholly disappears when the fruit is fully ripe. For a Vinifera-Labrusca
hybrid the Herbert is vigorous, hardy and fruitful ranking in these
respects above many pure-bred Labruscas. While the fruit ripens with
Concord it keeps long after and is a very good winter grape. It keeps,
packs and ships well. It is unable to fertilize itself and must be set
near other varieties. Herbert is well deserving attention from
commercial growers who supply a discriminating market and its many good
qualities will give it a high place in the esteem of grape connoisseurs.

For an account of the origin and early history of Herbert the reader is
referred to "Rogers' Hybrids." The Herbert is first mentioned separately
from the rest of Rogers' seedlings in 1865, under the designation
_Rogers' No. 44_. In 1869 Rogers gave names to several of his seedlings
and the _Rogers' No. 44_ received the name Herbert. The same year it was
placed on the grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit
catalog. It has never been cultivated extensively but has always been a
favorite with amateur growers. The differences in the descriptions
furnished by different growers leads one to suspect that there are two
or more varieties passing under this name.

     Vine medium to very vigorous, injured in severe winters,
     productive. Canes very long, numerous, unusually thick, dark brown;
     nodes enlarged, somewhat flattened; internodes long to medium;
     diaphragm thick; pith medium to large; shoots pubescent; tendrils
     intermittent, long, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds above medium in size, shortish, plump, obtuse, open
     early. Young leaves strongly tinged on under side and along margin
     of upper side with bright carmine. Leaves very large to medium,
     roundish, of average thickness; upper surface dark green, dull,
     smooth; lower surface pale green with some pubescence; veins
     numerous and quite prominent; leaf not lobed, with terminus obtuse;
     petiolar sinus very deep, narrow, closed and overlapping; basal and
     lateral sinuses lacking; teeth shallow to medium. Flowers sterile,
     open in mid-season; stamens reflexed.

     [Illustration: HERBERT]

     Fruit comes in season with Concord, keeps unusually well. Clusters
     medium to large, variable in length, rather broad, slightly
     tapering, two or three clusters per shoot, often heavily
     single-shouldered, loose to medium; peduncle of average length,
     thick; pedicel intermediate in length, thick, covered with small
     russet warts; brush yellowish-green. Berries irregular in size but
     usually above medium, roundish to slightly flattened, rather dull
     black, covered with thick blue bloom, persistent, moderately firm.
     Skin variable in thickness and toughness, adheres somewhat to the
     pulp, contains a small amount of wine-colored pigment, astringent.
     Flesh light green, translucent, juicy, tender, fine-grained, with a
     little foxiness or muskiness, nearly sweet at skin but quite acid
     at center, quality good to very good. Seeds separate from the pulp
     with difficulty, three to six in number, average three, large,
     broadish, notched, quite long, with swollen neck, blunt, light
     brown with yellowish tips; raphe obscure; chalaza intermediate in
     size, decidedly above center, circular to pear-shaped, distinct.


HERCULES.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:625. 1892. =2.= _Ill. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1893=:89. =3.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =12=:620. 1893. =4.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:135. =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:531,
     548, 555. 1898.

Hercules is characterized by its extremely large berries, the size being
as great, if not greater, than that of any of our native grapes, and
approaching that of the largest Old World grapes. The fruit is
handsomely colored and the cluster, when at its best, is large and
well-formed with a striking resemblance to Black Hamburg. The flavor,
while not of the best, is good. But large size, handsome appearance, and
good flavor cannot make up for the several defects of the variety. The
fruit drops and cracks badly and the pulp is too tough and adheres too
firmly to the seed for a dessert grape. These faults are so marked as to
make Hercules almost worthless except for breeding purposes. Added to
the desirable characters of the fruit given above, the vines are hardy,
vigorous and productive so that this variety offers an unusual array of
valuable qualities for the grape-breeder.

At one time it was claimed that Hercules was a seedling of a California
grape but later it was said to have come from seed of one of Rogers'
hybrids. This opinion was based solely upon the characters of the plant,
as the originator, the late G. A. Ensenberger of Bloomington, Illinois,
gave no satisfactory account of the parentage of the grape. Hercules was
exhibited at the Columbian Exposition at Chicago, where, on account of
its large size and showy appearance, it attracted much attention. It is
unfortunate that the parentage of this grape is not known as it is
likely to be used not a little in the grape-breeding of the future in
producing large-fruited varieties.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, hardy except in extreme winters,
     very productive. Canes long to medium, intermediate in number and
     thickness, brown or dark reddish-brown; nodes slightly enlarged,
     flattened; internodes medium to long; diaphragm thick; pith large
     to medium; shoots slightly pubescent; tendrils continuous, of
     average length, bifid.

     Leaf-buds medium in size, short, thickish, pointed to conical, open
     in mid-season. Young leaves lightly tinged on lower side and along
     margin of upper side with rose carmine. Leaves large, intermediate
     in thickness; upper surface light green, slightly glossy,
     smoothish; lower surface grayish-green, pubescent; veins distinct;
     lobes none to three, with terminus acute; petiolar sinus deep to
     medium, intermediate to narrow; basal sinus usually absent; lateral
     sinus shallow to a mere notch; teeth medium to shallow,
     intermediate in width. Flowers sterile, open in mid-season; stamens
     reflexed.

     Fruit comes in season about with Concord, somewhat subject to rot,
     keeps fairly well. Clusters attractive, somewhat resembling Black
     Hamburg, very large to medium, of average length, broad to medium,
     slightly tapering to nearly cylindrical below the single shoulder,
     one to three clusters per shoot, medium to rather compact; peduncle
     short and thick; pedicel inclined to shortness, thickish, much
     enlarged at point of attachment to the fruit; brush of average
     length, pale green. Berries unusually large but somewhat variable,
     roundish, black, glossy, covered with more or less blue bloom, not
     persistent, firm. Skin cracks badly in some seasons, intermediate
     in thickness and toughness, adheres slightly to the pulp, contains
     some wine-colored pigment, astringent. Flesh decided green,
     slightly translucent, juicy, very tough, coarse, stringy, somewhat
     foxy, sweet near skin but acid at center, fair to good in quality.
     Seeds very adherent to the pulp, one to five in number, average
     three, large to medium, above usual length, broad to medium, deeply
     notched, blunt, brownish; raphe buried in a broad, deep groove;
     chalaza small, plainly above center, circular to oval, distinct.


HERMANN.

(Aestivalis, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1868=:168. =2.= _Grape Cult._,
     =1=:17, 104, fig., 105, 239, 260, 326, 330. 1869. =3.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1883=:107. _fig._ =4.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:41.
     =5.= _Ib._, =1891=:128. =6.= Husmann, =1895=:174. =7.= _Tex. Sta.
     Bul._, =48=:1150, 1157. 1898. =8.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:39, 43,
     45. 1899. 9. _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:246. 1902.

Hermann is a southern grape, a true Aestivalis in all characters, and is
not adapted to the North. When the variety was introduced, fifty or more
years ago, it was considered a valuable addition to the list of wine
grapes but it has not grown in favor nor popularity nor been extensively
planted in any of the grape regions of the South. It is said to be
vigorous, hardy and productive; to defy all attacks of phylloxera; and
to make a very superior wine. But the berries are very small, ripen
very late, in some localities crack badly and in others rot.

[Illustration: HERCULES]

The variety was originated by F. Langendoerfer of Hermann, Missouri,
from seed of Norton planted in 1860. The first fruit was borne in 1863.
At one time it was considerably planted in Missouri as a wine grape but
it did not become popular nor spread from varietal vineyards to any
extent on account of its lack of quality for either the table or wine.
It is of interest chiefly as a seedling of Norton and for its very good
vine characters. The following description has been taken from a number
of sources, chiefly from the _Bushberg Catalogue_:

     Vine vigorous, somewhat tender, resembling Norton in foliage except
     that the leaves are of a lighter color and somewhat more deeply
     lobed. Stamens erect. Clusters long and narrow, rather compact,
     rarely shouldered. Berries small, round, black with blue bloom;
     pulp tender, juicy, and of the characteristic spicy Aestivalis
     flavor. Must heavy and very fragrant, brownish-yellow making a wine
     the color of Brown Sherry or Madeira, of great body and fine
     flavor; registers 94 deg.-105 deg..


HICKS.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1898=:46. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1899=:89. =3.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1904=:228. =4.= _Iowa
     Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1904=: 228, 240, 241. =5.= _Mich. Sta. Sp.
     Bul._, =30=:11. 1905.

Hicks has proved itself a remarkably good grape in the vineyard of this
Station, and were it not for the fact that the fruit is almost identical
with that of Concord, ripening with it or but a little earlier, there
certainly would be a place for it in the viticulture of the State. The
fact that it was introduced some years ago and has not found great favor
with growers is assumptive evidence that it cannot make headway against
Concord with which it must compete. On the Station grounds it is more
prolific than Concord and its vines are of stronger growth. The variety
is well worthy a trial.

The origin of the Hicks is apparently unknown. It was introduced in 1898
by Henry Wallis of Wellston, Missouri, who states that it is a chance
seedling sent from California about 1870 to Richard Berry, a well-known
nurseryman of St. Louis County, Missouri. After Berry's death it passed
into the hands of Wallis, who named it Hicks. It is supposed from its
characters to be of Concord parentage.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, hardy, very productive. Canes
     medium to long, numerous, of average thickness, moderately dark
     brown to reddish-brown, surface covered with thin blue bloom;
     tendrils continuous, bifid to trifid. Leaves large, medium to
     thick; upper surface dark green, slightly glossy, of average
     smoothness; lower surface whitish, changing to a rather heavy
     bronze, strongly pubescent; veins well defined. Flowers fertile or
     nearly so, open early; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens with Concord or slightly earlier, keeps fairly well.
     Clusters large to medium, long to medium, broad, tapering, often
     single-shouldered, medium in compactness. Berries large, roundish,
     dark purplish-black to black, covered with heavy blue bloom,
     inclined to shatter somewhat when overripe, firm. Skin intermediate
     in thickness, tender, contains a small amount of very dark
     wine-colored pigment. Flesh greenish, juicy, rather tough,
     fine-grained, faintly foxy, sweet at skin to acid at center, mild
     when fully ripe, good in quality. Seeds somewhat adherent, above
     medium in size, short, broad, blunt, brownish; raphe buried in a
     rather broad groove; chalaza of average size, slightly above
     center, oval to circular.


HIDALGO.

(Vinifera, Labrusca, Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Rural N. Y._, =60=:637. 1901. =2.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1904=:306.

Hidalgo is a comparatively recent addition to the list of grapes for
table use. While it has not been tried generally, and is not widely
known as yet, it is accorded a color-plate and a full description in
this work chiefly because of its remarkably fine quality. It is rich and
sweet, delicately flavored, yet sprightly, and with color, size and form
of berry and bunch so well combined as to make it a singularly handsome
fruit. The skin is thin but firm and the variety keeps well and ships
well. The vine characters for this State are not well known. On the
grounds of this Station it is doubtfully hardy, variable in vigor, and
not always fruitful. While Hidalgo may not prove of value for the
commercial vineyard, in favorable situations it may be expected to give
a supply of choice fruit for the amateur.

The parentage of Hidalgo as given by its originator, T. V. Munson, is
Delaware, Goethe and Lindley. The variety was introduced by the
originator in 1902 and is now being tested in various parts of the
country. The reports that come from those who have seen or grown Hidalgo
agree in the main with the characterization given above and bespeak for
it a high degree of popularity, at least as a table grape for the garden
and possibly for the vineyard.

[Illustration: HIDALGO]

     Vine variable in vigor, not always hardy, somewhat uncertain in
     bearing. Canes intermediate in length and number, above average
     thickness, dark reddish-brown; nodes enlarged and flattened;
     internodes of fair length; diaphragm thick; pith medium to below in
     size; shoots slightly pubescent to nearly glabrous; tendrils
     intermittent to continuous, intermediate in length, bifid to
     trifid.

     Leaf-buds rather small and short, medium to slender, conical to
     pointed, open late. Young leaves faintly tinged on the under side
     only with rose-carmine. Leaves medium to large, often irregularly
     roundish, thick; upper surface light green, dull, medium to
     slightly rugose; lower surface pale green to bronze, heavily
     pubescent; veins distinct; lobes three when present with angle at
     terminus variable; petiolar sinus not uniform in depth, narrow,
     sometimes closed and overlapping; basal sinus usually none; lateral
     sinus shallow, narrow, often a mere notch; teeth very shallow,
     narrow to medium. Flowers semi-fertile, open after mid-season;
     stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens about with Concord, keeps and ships well. Clusters
     large but smaller than Niagara, long to medium, inclined to
     slender, cylindrical to slightly tapering, often blunt, usually not
     shouldered, one to two bunches per shoot, medium to compact;
     peduncle long and slender; pedicel long, moderately slender,
     covered with numerous small warts; brush of average size, not
     thick, yellowish-green with brown tinge. Berries above medium in
     size, inclined to oval, attractive greenish-yellow, rather glossy,
     covered with thin gray bloom, persistent, firm. Skin thin to
     medium, tough, adheres slightly to the pulp, contains no pigment,
     astringent. Flesh greenish-white, somewhat transparent, juicy,
     tender and melting, aromatic, sweet from skin to center, very good
     to best. Seeds separate easily from the pulp, two to four in
     number, average two, above medium in size, intermediate in length
     and breadth, plump, light brown; raphe obscure; chalaza large,
     slightly above center, irregularly circular, distinct.


HIGHLAND.

(Vinifera, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Gar. Mon._, =16=:375. 1874. =2.= _Horticulturist_, =29=:329.
     1874. =3.= _Gar. Mon._, =21=:149. 1879. =4.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =27=:29. 1882. =5.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1882-3=:46.
     =6.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:109. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =11=:626. 1892. =8.= _Ib._, =17=:531, 548, 552. 1898. =9.= _Kan.
     Sta. Bul._, =110=:241. 1902.

     RICKETTS' NO. 37 (2). _Ricketts' No. 37_ (1, 6).

Highland has been on trial in New York for at least thirty years but has
not become widely distributed, though few varieties of black grapes
surpass it or equal it in appearance or in quality. The chief trouble
has been that the variety is too late for New York, ripening with, or a
little later than Catawba. When given good care and under favorable
conditions the bunches are unusually large and handsome in appearance,
sometimes attaining a weight of two pounds and having beautiful
bluish-black berries with something of the fine flavor and tender
texture of the Jura Muscat, one of its parents. The flesh is solid, and
while the skin is thin, yet it is firm and the fruit keeps and ships
well. The vine is fairly vigorous but doubtfully hardy and productive to
a fault. In all localities where the climate is sufficiently temperate
and the season sufficiently long for vine and fruit of Highland to
develop perfectly, it is one of the choicest of grapes for the amateur.

This fine grape was originated at about the close of the Civil War by
James H. Ricketts of Newburgh, New York, from seed of Concord fertilized
by Jura Muscat. It was introduced by Messrs. Asher Hance & Sons, who
bought it of the originator. It is very common in varietal vineyards but
it has not become popular as a commercial sort; it is a popular grape
for exhibitions where, when well grown, it is hardly surpassed in
appearance by any other American grape.

     Vine variable in vigor, productive, healthy, often inclined to
     overbear. Canes long, numerous, medium to thick, light and dark
     brown, often with a dull, ash-gray tinge, covered with thin bloom;
     nodes strongly enlarged, not flattened; internodes medium to very
     long; diaphragm thick; pith large to medium; shoots usually
     pubescent; tendrils intermittent, of average length, bifid to
     trifid.

     Leaf-buds large to medium, rather short and thick, obtuse to
     conical. Leaves large, intermediate in thickness, upper surface
     often dark green, dull, medium to rugose; lower surface
     grayish-green, pubescent; veins rather indistinct; lobes none to
     five, with terminal lobe acute to obtuse; petiolar sinus rather
     deep, variable in width; basal sinus shallow, narrow; lateral sinus
     of average depth and width, sometimes a mere notch; teeth rather
     deep and wide. Flowers fertile or nearly so, open in mid-season;
     stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens with Catawba or after, keeps fairly well. Clusters
     large, rather long and broad, tapering, usually single-shouldered
     but sometimes with a double shoulder, usually two bunches per
     shoot, intermediate in compactness; peduncle of average length and
     thickness; pedicel long to medium, moderately thick, nearly smooth;
     brush below average length, green with yellowish-brown tinge.
     Berries large, roundish-oval, dark purplish-black to bluish-black,
     rather dull, covered with dark lilac or slightly blue bloom,
     persistent, moderately firm. Skin intermediate in thickness, tough,
     nearly free from the pulp, contains little, if any, pigment, not
     astringent. Flesh greenish, translucent, juicy, somewhat tender,
     slightly vinous, good in quality. Seeds separate rather easily from
     the pulp, one to six, average three, above medium to large, nearly
     long, intermediate in breadth, slightly notched with a one-sided
     tendency, riper seeds brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza of average
     size, above center, variable in shape, not distinct.

[Illustration: HIGHLAND]


HOSFORD.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Can. Hort._, =11=:287. 1888. =2.= _Rural N. Y._, =49=:737,
     _fig._, 739, 856. 1890. =3.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1892=:264. =4.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:138. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1894=:75.
     =6.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:171. 1899. =7.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._,
     =53=:45. 1901.

     HOSFORD'S MAMMOTH SEEDLING (2). HOSFORD'S SEEDLING (1).

Hosford is an offspring of Concord, differing from the parent chiefly in
the greater size of bunch and berry and in being less fruitful. The
variety is surpassed by Worden and Eaton, of the same type, and is
probably not worth cultivation. It is claimed by some that this variety
is identical with Eaton. It is true that Hosford has a marked
resemblance to Eaton but there are noticeable differences in both vine
and fruit characters and the pure seedlings of the two varieties are
entirely different, those of Eaton being much darker in color and more
vigorous. Hosford was sent out several years before Eaton. The vine of
this variety looks very much like Concord except that the indentations
along the margins of the leaves are deeper.

As a rule the black seedlings of Concord which have been introduced are
larger in cluster and berry than the parent and either not as high in
quality or no higher, differing materially from Concord's light-colored
seedlings, which are usually smaller in bunch and berry, or at least not
larger, and of distinctly better quality. Hosford is a typical black
seedling in the above respects.

This variety originated in the garden of George Hosford of Ionia,
Michigan. It was found by the owner about 1876 as a chance seedling
growing between two Concord vines.

     Vine not very vigorous, nearly hardy, unproductive. Canes short,
     few in number, rather slender; tendrils continuous, bifid to
     trifid. Leaves medium to below in size, intermediate in thickness;
     lower surface grayish-white to bronze, heavily pubescent. Flowers
     semi-fertile, open in mid-season; stamens upright. Fruit ripens
     shortly before Concord, does not keep very well. Clusters medium to
     large, tapering, slightly shouldered, moderately compact. Berries
     large to medium, roundish to slightly oval, dull black covered with
     abundant blue bloom, persistent. Skin medium to thick, tender.
     Flesh very pale green, unusually juicy, fine-grained, rather
     tender, vinous, sweet, good in quality. Seeds not numerous, nearly
     large, very broad, blunt, plump.


HYBRID FRANC.

(Vinifera, Rupestris.)

     =1.= _Am. Vines_, =1903=:190.

     FRANC'S HYBRID (1).

Hybrid Franc is illustrated and described in full in _The Grapes of New
York_ because it is the best known cross between Rupestris and Vinifera.
It is one of the few varieties used in Europe as a resistant stock now
recommended for a direct producer. The vine characters are seemingly all
good,--hardy, vigorous and very productive. The fruit is fit only for
wine being too acid for a table grape. The coloring matter in the fruit
is very intense and it might be used for giving color to wines. Hybrid
Franc is of much interest to the grape-breeder, and experiments with it
as a parent are desirable for New York. The variety is of French origin.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, productive. Canes variable in length,
     numerous, thick to medium, light brown, covered with slight blue
     bloom; nodes enlarged, roundish; internodes very short; diaphragm
     thin; pith unusually large; shoots glabrous; tendrils intermittent,
     often rather long, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds large to medium, short, above average thickness, obtuse
     to conical, open moderately late. Young leaves tinged on upper and
     lower sides with carmine; the tips of the buds in opening show
     strongly the leaf serrations. Leaves very small to medium, rather
     thin; upper surface light green, decidedly glossy, smooth; lower
     surface greenish, showing Riparia characters, quite hairy along
     ribs and larger veins; lobes usually three to five with terminal
     lobe acute to acuminate; petiolar sinus intermediate in depth,
     narrow to medium, sometimes closed and overlapping; basal sinus of
     average depth and width; lateral sinus medium in depth to a mere
     notch; teeth intermediate in depth and width. Flowers semi-fertile,
     open early; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens before mid-season, does not always keep well. Clusters
     medium to below in size, short, intermediate in breadth, tapering
     to cylindrical, usually single-shouldered, average three bunches
     per shoot, medium to compact; peduncle below medium length, rather
     slender; pedicel long, slender, covered with few, small,
     inconspicuous warts; brush short, wine-colored. Berries below
     medium to small, uniform, slightly oblate to roundish, black,
     glossy, covered with thick, blue bloom, persistent, firm. Skin
     thin, tender, does not adhere to the pulp, contains a very dark
     wine-colored pigment, not astringent. Flesh pale green, often with
     a slight reddish tinge, translucent, juicy, fine-grained, somewhat
     tender, spicy, tart to acid, fair in quality. Seeds separate easily
     from the pulp, one to five, average three and four, medium to
     small, rather short, intermediate in breadth, light brown; raphe
     obscure; chalaza of average size, slightly above center, oval to
     pear-shaped, distinct.

[Illustration: HYBRID FRANC]


IDEAL.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Kan. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1886=:187. =2.= _Mo. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1890=:155. =3.= _Ib._, =1891=:128. =4.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:140. =5.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1897=:16. =6.= _Va. Sta.
     Bul._, =94=:137. 1898. =7.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:39, 42, 44, 46,
     55. 1899. =8.= Budd-Hansen, =2=:380. 1902.

     _Burr No. 9_ (1).

Ideal is a handsome seedling of the Delaware, from which it differs
chiefly in being much larger in bunch and berry, attaining in both of
these characters nearly the size of Catawba. In Kansas and Missouri it
is most highly recommended, not only for the high quality of the fruit,
ranking with Delaware in quality, but because of vigorous, healthy,
productive vines. But in New York, on the Station grounds at least, the
vines are precariously hardy and not sufficiently fruitful, healthy nor
vigorous to warrant a very high recommendation for the variety. Were the
variety of recent introduction it might be recommended for trial but it
has been grown for more than twenty years and has, therefore, been well
tried and has not proved of general value. It may be worth planting for
home use.

Originated by John Burr of Leavenworth, Kansas, over thirty years ago
from seed of Delaware, the attention of the public was attracted to
Ideal about 1890, first by glowing descriptions of the variety from the
originator and his friend and co-worker, Dr. Stayman, and later by
reports from various persons who had tested the variety. It does not
appear to have ever been regularly introduced but was sent to various
persons for testing by whom it was distributed. It is now found only in
the occasional variety vineyard and apparently not offered for sale by
any nurserymen. Ideal is better known, and possibly succeeds better in
the West than in the East.

     Vine medium to vigorous, not always hardy, productive, but yielding
     smaller crops than Concord; tendrils intermittent, bifid to trifid.
     Canes long, numerous, rather slender. Leaves medium to large,
     variable in color; lower surface pale green, slightly pubescent and
     cobwebby. Fruit ripens about with Delaware, keeps only fairly well.
     Clusters large to above medium, long to medium, often rather broad
     and heavily shouldered, intermediate in compactness. Berries large,
     roundish, attractive dark red, covered with abundant lilac bloom,
     often with tinge of blue, usually persistent, firm. Flesh greenish,
     moderately tender, aromatic, nearly sweet next the skin to acid at
     center, good to very good in quality. Seeds adherent, large, plump.


IMPERIAL.

(Vinifera, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Horticulturist_, =29=:328. 1874. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1875=:114. =3.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1891=:45. =4.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1894=:140.

     _No. 93 A_ (1).

Although introduced nearly forty years ago, Imperial is still little
known and does not appear to have especial value. Perhaps its most
valuable character is hardiness as it is reputed to be as hardy as
Concord which, for a grape having its proportion of Vinifera blood, is
the exception. In appearance and quality Imperial is very good and were
its vine characters better, and were there not so many excellent green
grapes of its season with which it must compete, the variety would be
more generally cultivated.

Imperial is a seedling of Iona fertilized by Sarbelle Muscat and was
raised by J. H. Ricketts of Newburgh, New York, over thirty years ago.
The following description has been compiled from various sources:

     Vine vigorous, healthy, hardy. Leaves large, attractive green.
     Fruit ripens late. Clusters large, symmetrical, slightly
     shouldered, rather compact. Berries large, greenish-white, covered
     with considerable bloom. Flesh tender, juicy, vinous, sprightly,
     not high in flavor but agreeable, good to very good in quality.
     Seeds small, not numerous.


IONA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Horticulturist_, =18=:313. 1863. =2.= _Mag. Hort._, =29=:420.
     1863. =3.= Grant, _Descript. Cat._, =1864=:8, 9, 18, 19, 21, 32.
     =4.= Grant, _Grape Vines_, =1864=:1, 2, 3, 5, 11, 12. =5.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1867=:44. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1867=:105.
     =7.= _Iowa Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1867=:108. =8.= _Am. Jour. Hort._,
     =5=:15, 187, 298, 299. 1869. =9.= _Horticulturist_, =25=:186. 1870.
     =10.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1871=:69. =11.= _Horticulturist_,
     =29=:20, 245. 1874. =12.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1875=:355. =13.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:39. =14.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1881=:222. =15.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =31=:120. 1886. =16.=
     _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =9=:328. 1890. =17.= _Col. Sta. Bul._,
     =29=:21. 1894. =18.= _Bush. Cat._, 1894:140. =19.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =17=:531, 548, 552, 555, 559. 1898. =20.= _Va. Sta. Bul._,
     =94=:137. 1898. =21.= _Miss. Sta. Bul._, =56=:15. 1899. =22.= _Mo.
     Sta. Bul._, =46=:39, 43, 44, 45, 51, 76. 1899.

[Illustration: IONA]

Iona is probably surpassed in delicacy and sprightliness of flavor, in
keeping quality, and for making certain wines, as champagne, by few, if
any, other American grapes. In spite of these several good qualities it
has never been very generally grown, chiefly for the reason that it
requires more care than commercial grape-growers are willing to give
grapes, though, beside requiring the best of care, its cultivation is
hindered by several serious faults. Iona rivals Delaware as the
standard in quality of American grapes, though if flavor alone be
considered, grape connoisseurs generally agree that it surpasses
Delaware and is the finest flavored of all our grapes.

In flavor Iona has a rare combination of sweetness and acidity, pure,
delicate and vinous. The flesh is transparent, melting, tender, juicy,
and of uniform consistence quite to the center. The seeds are few and
small and part readily from the flesh. The color is a peculiar dark-red
wine with a tint of amethyst, somewhat variable and not always
attractive. The bunch, at its best, is large but rather loose with
berries varying somewhat in size and ripening unevenly. It cannot be
called a particularly handsome grape. The fruit does not decay readily
and may be kept in a good fruit room until late winter without loss of
flavor and with the berries adhering to the bunch. Beside being a most
excellent table grape, it is much sought for by wine-makers for
champagne and for making finely-flavored white wines.

The vine characters of Iona are not nearly as good as those of the
fruit. To do well it must have a soil exactly suited to its wants.
Seemingly it does best in deep, dry, sandy or gravelly clays and cannot
be grown in damp, rich, black soils on the one hand nor poor sands or
gravels on the other. Vergil's lines as to the treatment of soils for
vines are especially applicable to the Iona.

    "A free loose earth is what the vines demand,
     Where wind and frost have help'd the lab'rer's hand,
     And sturdy peasants deep have stirr'd the land."

This variety does especially well when trained against walls or
buildings, attaining under such conditions rare perfection. It is not
hardy in any but favored localities in New York and in many parts of the
State must have careful winter protection. The vines are not vigorous
and are inclined to overbear, to remedy which it must have close
pruning, or be grafted on a strong growing stock. In localities where
mildew and rot thrive Iona is badly attacked by these diseases. The
vines bear early and the fruit ripens at mid-season or shortly after.
Iona is a grape for the amateur and for the careful vineyardist. Few
varieties are more desirable or satisfactory for the garden when
planted in soils to which it is adapted, when given good care, properly
protected from cold, and the vines restrained from overbearing.

Iona was originated by Dr. C. W. Grant[192] of Iona Island, Westchester
County, New York, and the name commemorates the scene of the
viticultural labors of one of the founders of American viticulture.
Grant states that Iona is from seed of Diana planted in 1855, the plant
from which fruited for the first time four years later. Caywood,
however, says that Grant informed him that it was found growing as a
chance seedling under a Catawba vine. Since Diana is a seedling of
Catawba there is too little difference in the character of the older
varieties to enable one to tell from which Iona came. This variety[193]
was awarded the Greeley prize of $100, offered by Horace Greeley during
the Civil War for a grape adapted to general cultivation in the Eastern
and Middle States. The requirements which a variety had to possess to
secure this prize were certainly sufficiently high; it was asked that
the vine should be as hardy, healthy and vigorous as the strongest
American vine and the fruit of a quality equal to the best European.
Such a grape would be a boon to European as well as to American
grape-growers. Though the prize went to Iona it must not be thought that
it meets these requirements.

Iona was introduced by the originator in 1864. It was overpraised,
extensively advertised, and for some time the prices of vines were kept
at an exorbitant figure from which there was a reaction detrimental to
the variety. It was placed on the grape list of the American Pomological
Society fruit catalog in 1867. Probably no American variety has been the
subject of more caustic discussions than this one and it is only within
the last few years that its merits could be impartially estimated. Iona
was extensively tried in all the grape regions of America but has been
generally dropped as a commercial grape. It is still to be found in all
varietal vineyards, in occasional commercial plantings and somewhat
commonly in gardens.

     Vine medium to weak, precariously hardy, unproductive, often
     susceptible to attacks of mildew. Canes short to medium, of average
     number and size, light brown; nodes enlarged, roundish; internodes
     short; diaphragm thick; pith nearly intermediate in size; shoots
     show some pubescence; tendrils intermittent, of average length,
     bifid.

     Leaf-buds about medium in size, short to medium, thick, conical to
     pointed, open very late. Young leaves tinged on under side and
     along margin of upper side with carmine; often heavily coated with
     thick, whitish pubescence. Leaves of average size, thick; upper
     surface light green, dull, smooth to medium; lower surface
     grayish-green, heavily pubescent, somewhat cobwebby; veins
     indistinct; lobes three to five with terminal lobe acute; petiolar
     sinus intermediate in depth and width; basal sinus shallow, medium
     to wide; lateral sinus shallow, wide; teeth not deep, of average
     width. Flowers nearly fertile, open late; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens later than Concord, keeps well. Clusters above medium
     to small, sometimes double-shouldered, intermediate in length,
     somewhat slender, slightly tapering to conical, medium to loose;
     peduncle short and slender; pedicel intermediate in length,
     slender, nearly smooth, enlarged at point of attachment to fruit;
     brush of average length, not thick, pale green. Berries
     intermediate in size, uniform, oval to nearly roundish, dull, light
     and dark red, covered with thin lilac bloom, persistent, firm. Skin
     of medium thickness, tough, adheres considerably to the pulp,
     contains no pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh greenish,
     translucent, juicy, fine-grained, tender and melting, vinous, very
     good in quality. Seeds separate easily, one to four in number,
     average three, small and broad, plump, brownish; raphe usually
     obscure but sometimes distinct; chalaza small, nearly central,
     circular, distinct. Must 88 deg.-100 deg..


IRONCLAD.

(Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1882-3=:131. =2.= _Gar. and For._,
     =5=:597. 1892. =3.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:254. 1893. =4.= _Gar.
     and For._, =7=:509. 1894. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:140.

     _Ash_ (1, 4, 5). _Diogenes_ (5). PEARSON'S IRONCLAD (4). _Pearson's
     Ironclad_ (5). _Scott_ (4, 5).

Ironclad is of interest because of its history, and because of its
possible value for breeding purposes. If the history given below is
correct, this variety is one of the oldest of our cultivated grapes.
From the accounts of those who have grown it, Ironclad is as free from
mildew and rot, in fruit at least, as any of our cultivated native
grapes. It is also very resistant to phylloxera and has been used
somewhat in France and Spain as a resistant stock for Vinifera. It is
also extremely vigorous and hardy and is very productive. The fruit is
not of sufficiently high quality nor attractive enough in appearance to
make a good table grape but it is said to make very excellent wine, the
juice having color and body enough to make it of value for adding color
to lighter colored musts. Ironclad is a very capricious bearer and
especially so on rampant growing vines, one of the faults of the variety
being that it makes too rank a growth.

The history of this grape, as given by A. W. Pearson of Vineland, New
Jersey, is as follows: In 1873 Pearson secured from Colonel Scott, then
president of the Pennsylvania Railroad Company, cuttings of a vine
growing on the latter's grounds, near Darby about seven miles west of
Philadelphia. Scott's gardener reported the vine to be free from rot and
Pearson, who had named the variety Scott, changed the name to Ironclad
when he found the gardener's report as to rot verified. On investigation
Pearson found that the variety was over two hundred years old, and that
it had been cultivated locally under the name of Ash, from a former
owner of the Scott place and an ancestor of Pearson. This account is not
fully corroborated by early horticultural writers but appears to be
sufficiently accurate to give the variety historical interest. Ironclad
is said to be a hybrid between Labrusca and Riparia and its botanical
characters justify such a supposition.

[Illustration: IRONCLAD]

     Vine a rank grower, hardy, productive. Canes long, numerous, thick
     to slender, dark reddish-brown; nodes of average size, flattened;
     internodes medium to long; diaphragm thin; pith large to medium;
     shoots glabrous; tendrils continuous, of fair length, bifid to
     sometimes trifid.

     Leaf-buds small, short, slender to medium, conical to pointed.
     Leaves of medium size, intermediate in thickness; upper surface
     dark green, somewhat glossy, smoothish; lower surface pale green,
     slightly pubescent; veins rather distinct; lobes none to three with
     terminal lobe acute to acuminate; petiolar sinus intermediate in
     depth and width; basal sinus usually lacking; lateral sinus
     shallow, usually wide; teeth intermediate in depth and width.
     Flowers open early; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens about with Concord but colors early, appears to keep
     well. Clusters small and short, slightly tapering, sometimes
     single-shouldered, variable in compactness; peduncle short,
     inclined to slender; pedicel short, slender to medium, covered with
     numerous inconspicuous warts; brush short, of average thickness,
     dark wine color. Berries irregular in size, averaging small,
     roundish to slightly oblate, jet-black, glossy, covered slightly
     with blue bloom, usually persistent, firm. Skin intermediate in
     thickness, tough, adheres slightly to the pulp, contains a large
     amount of dark purplish-red pigment, not astringent. Flesh
     greenish, with distinct tinge of red, rather transparent,
     moderately juicy, somewhat tender, fine-grained, spicy, sweet to
     agreeably tart at center, not good enough in quality for dessert
     purposes. Seeds separate from the pulp somewhat easily, one to four
     in number, average two, intermediate in size and breadth, short to
     medium, sharp-pointed, dark brownish; raphe buried in a shallow,
     narrow groove; chalaza large with surface roughened and warty,
     central to slightly above, irregularly pear-shaped, distinct.


ISABELLA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Amer. Farmer_, =5=:241. 1823. =2.= _Ib._, =9=:221, 294, 309,
     325. 1827. =3.= _Sou. Agr._, =2=:552. 1829. =4.= Prince,
     =1830=:165. =5.= Spooner, =1846=:13, 29, 49. =6.= _Horticulturist_,
     =6=:410, 412. 1851. =7.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1851=:48-51. =8.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1852=:54. =9.= _Horticulturist_, =15=:73.
     1860. =10.= _Gar. Mon._, =2=:156, 265. 1860. =11.= _Ib._, =5=:73,
     74. 1863. =12.= _N. Y. Agr. Soc. Rpt._, =1864=:42, 45, 141. =13.=
     _Mag. Hort._, =31=:107, 157. 1865. =14.= Husmann, =1866=:18, 79,
     122. =15.= Downing, =1869=:542. =16.= _Grape Cult._, =2=:76. 1870.
     =17.= _Ib._, =3=:67, 103. 1871. =18.= _Gar. Mon._, =14=:105, 167,
     296. 1872. =19.= _Horticulturist_, =29=:20, 245. 1874. =20.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:57, 124, 128. =21.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:110. =22.= _Rural N. Y._, =50=:418, 482. 1891. =23.= _Ill.
     Sta. Bul._, =28=:255. 1893. =24.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =44=:116. 1893.
     =25.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =15=:432, 433. 1896. =26.= _N. Y. Sta.
     An. Rpt._, =17=:531, 541, 544, 548, 552. 1898. =27.= _Ala. Sta.
     Bul._, =110=:83. 1900. =28.= _Rural N. Y._, =59=:719, 722. 1900.
     _fig._ =29.= _Traite gen. de vit._, =5=:203. 1903.

     _Alexander_ (29). _Black Cape_ (29). _Cape_ (29). _Captraube_ (29).
     _Champania_ (29). _Cherokee?_ (11). _Christie's Improved Isabella_
     (15, 21, 29). _Conckling's Wilding_ (11). _Constantia_ (29).
     DORCHESTER (1). _Framboisier_ (29). _Garber's Red-Fox_ (29).
     _Gibb's grape_ (4, 11, 18). _Hanover_ (_southern_) (11). _Hensell's
     Long Island_ (11). _Isabella_ (1). _Isabelle d'Amerique_ (29).
     _Lespeyre_ (2, 10, 11, 18). _New Hanover_ (11). _Paign's Isabella_
     (15, 21, 29). _Payne's Early_ (11, 15, 21, 29). _Raisin de Cassis_
     (29). _Raisin du Cap_ (29). _Raisin Fraise_ (29). _Raisin
     Framboise_ (29). _Sainte-Helene_ (29). _Saluda_ (11). _Sanbornton?_
     (15, 21, 29). _Schuylkill?_ (29). _Uva Fragola_ (29). _Vernet_ (6,
     11, 18). _Woodward_ (15, 21, 29).

Isabella is now of little more than historical interest yet for a half
century after its introduction, about 1816, it and Catawba were the
mainstays of American viticulture. In the early days of grape-growing in
this country Isabella was the grape of the North Atlantic and New
England States while the vineyards of the South were planted with
Catawba, the latter requiring too long a season and being too
susceptible to fungal diseases for a northern grape. Isabella has been
almost wholly replaced in the North by Concord, because the latter is
earlier, hardier and more productive, and the older variety can now
hardly be found except in the collections of experimenters and amateurs.

In appearance Isabella is quite as attractive as any of the black
grapes, having large, well-formed clusters and a deep black color with
thick bloom. The flavor is good but the thick skin and muskiness in
taste are objectionable. The fruit keeps and ships well and seldom
rattles or cracks but the variety is surpassed in vine characters by
many other standard kinds, notably Concord, which, as stated above, has
taken its place. The lustrous green, ample foliage which remains late in
the season, and the vigor of Isabella, make it an attractive ornamental,
well adapted for growing on arbors, porches and trellises. Individual
vines of this variety growing in New York, the Middle States, and New
England, realize more than any other grape that ideal of peace and
plenty for which the grape has been the symbol since the vines of Judah
and of Israel. While it is of small commercial importance, Isabella is
still worthy a place in the garden and as an ornamental.

The origin of Isabella is not certainly known. It was secured by William
Prince of Flushing, Long Island, from Mrs. Isabella Gibbs, the wife of
Geo. Gibbs, a merchant then living in Brooklyn, New York. Prince states
that he first saw this grape in 1816 and was so struck with its
appearance that he considered it worthy of a name and introduction to
the public. It was consequently named in honor of Mrs. Gibbs and
introduced shortly after 1816. In answer to a request from Prince as to
the place of its origin, Mrs. Gibbs reported that it had come originally
from the vicinity of Dorchester, South Carolina. This account of its
origin was published at the time in several agricultural periodicals and
later in Prince's _Treatise on the Vine_. The whole question was
thoroughly discussed in the agricultural press of that day but without
a satisfactory solution of the place of its nativity.

[Illustration: ISABELLA]

Nicholas Herbemont[194] who sought the history of the variety in the
neighborhood of Dorchester, South Carolina, doubted its having
originated there, as he found it known only as a cultivated sort with a
tradition of its having been introduced years before by a gentleman then
dead. There were various accounts published of its having originated in
North Carolina, Virginia, Delaware and Europe, none of which are worthy
of any credence. All that can be said is that it originated some time in
the eighteenth century, probably in one of the Carolinas and that it was
cultivated in many widely separated neighborhoods prior to 1800.

In 1852 Isabella was placed on the grape list of the American
Pomological Society fruit catalog, for general cultivation. In 1864, on
account of its susceptibility to mildew it was transferred to a list for
cultivation in special localities. It was soon, however, restored to the
original list where it still remains. After the introduction of Concord,
as noted above, the popularity of Isabella waned but it is still to be
found in many sections as one of the less planted of the market sorts
and is in practically all varietal vineyards. It was introduced into
Europe before 1830 where it was quite extensively cultivated for the
manufacture of a low grade wine, and it is quite probable that the
phylloxera, which later became such a pest, was introduced on roots of
the Isabella.

Isabella is generally classed as a pure Labrusca but there are many who
think there is a strain of Vinifera present. This is indicated by the
shape of the berries, certain characters of the seeds, the
susceptibility of the vine to mildew and of the fruit to black-rot. The
characters of Isabella can be traced in a great number of offspring
though comparatively few of them have outlived the parent in usefulness.
Pure-bred progeny of the Isabella differ but little from the parent and
are classed as strains of the original rather than as new varieties.
Hybrids of it with pure Vinifera are usually worthless, lacking in vigor
and hardiness, and so much more so than in the case of hybrids of
Vinifera and known pure American grapes as to further suggest Vinifera
blood in Isabella. Such hybrids, too, usually bear a stronger
resemblance to the Old World grape than offspring of pure-bred parents
of the two species.

     Vine vigorous to medium, usually hardy, variable in productiveness,
     but sometimes producing heavy crops, somewhat subject to mildew in
     certain locations. Canes short to above medium, numerous, covered
     with heavy pubescence, thick, light to dark brown; nodes enlarged,
     strongly flattened; internodes short to medium; diaphragm thick;
     pith intermediate to below in size; shoots covered with heavy
     pubescence; tendrils continuous, long, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds small, short, thickish, conical, open very late. Young
     leaves tinged on lower side and along margin of upper side with
     light rose carmine. Leaves intermediate in size, often roundish,
     thick; upper surface dark green, smooth to medium, glossy; lower
     surface whitish-green, heavily pubescent; veins distinct; lobes
     three when present with terminal lobe obtuse to acute; petiolar
     sinus shallow to medium, narrow, often closed and overlapping;
     basal sinus usually none; lateral sinus shallow, narrow, frequently
     notched; teeth shallow, medium to wide. Flowers usually strongly
     self-fertile, open in mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit usually ripens with Catawba or earlier, keeps and ships well.
     Clusters large to medium, intermediate in length, nearly
     cylindrical to conical, frequently single-shouldered, variable in
     compactness; peduncle short to medium, thick; pedicel variable in
     length, slender, almost smooth, much enlarged at point of
     attachment to fruit; brush long, yellowish-green. Berries variable
     in size, medium to large, oval, deep black, color long before ripe,
     covered with considerable blue bloom, usually persistent, soft.
     Skin thick to medium, very tough, adheres considerably to the pulp,
     contains no pigment, astringent. Flesh pale green, sometimes with
     yellowish tinge, translucent, juicy, fine-grained, tender but
     meaty, somewhat stringy, inclined to foxiness, sweet to agreeably
     tart at center, slightly astringent when not mature, ranks good in
     quality. Seeds separate from the pulp with some difficulty unless
     fully ripe, one to three in number, average two, large to medium,
     broad, distinctly notched, above medium to short, brownish with
     yellow tips; raphe obscure; chalaza small, above center, circular,
     rather distinct. Must 60 deg.-79 deg..


ISABELLA SEEDLING.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:636. 1892. =2.= _Ib._, =13=:604.
     1894. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:141. =4.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:531, 548, 555, 559. 1898.

Isabella Seedling is an early, vigorous, productive offspring of
Isabella. In fruit characters it greatly resembles its parent but is
much earlier, ripening shortly after Moore Early, and has a more compact
bunch. Like its parent, the fruit is of good quality and keeps
remarkably well for so early a grape. It is now grown in New York more
than Isabella and while not of any considerable commercial importance,
is far more deserving attention as a market grape than some of the
poorly flavored kinds more generally grown.

There are several varieties under this name. Two are mentioned by
Warder; one of Ohio and one of New York origin. The Isabella Seedling
here described was originated by G. A. Ensenberger, Sr., of Bloomington,
Illinois, who sent it to this Station for testing in 1889. Full details
of the origin and history of this grape are not known, Mr. Ensenberger
having died soon after its dissemination, without leaving a record of
his work.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, usually hardy, healthy, productive.
     Canes long to medium, intermediate in number, thickish, dark brown,
     often with a tinge of red, surface covered with thin bloom;
     tendrils intermittent to continuous, bifid. Leaves healthy, medium
     to large, rather thick; upper surface medium green, dull, of
     average smoothness; lower surface pale green or grayish-green,
     occasionally with tinge of bronze, pubescent; veins distinct.
     Flowers nearly fertile; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens early but later than Moore Early, keeps well. Clusters
     large to medium, long, slender to medium, cylindrical to slightly
     tapering, usually single-shouldered, loose to medium but more
     compact than Isabella. Berries large to medium, distinctly oval,
     often pear-shaped, dull black, covered with a moderate amount of
     blue bloom, persistent, rather soft. Skin medium to thick,
     intermediate in toughness, contains some red pigment. Flesh pale
     green, juicy, somewhat tender, slightly coarse, vinous, sweet next
     the skin to acid at center, good in quality. Seeds numerous,
     separate rather easily from the pulp, inclined to large, of medium
     length, broad, notched, plump, dark brown; raphe buried in a groove
     of average width; chalaza large, above center, circular to slightly
     oval, somewhat obscure.


ISRAELLA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _Horticulturist_, =18=:313, 314. 1863. =2.= Grant, _Descript.
     Cat._, =1864=:5, 8, 18, 19, 21, 32. =3.= Grant, _Grape Vines_,
     =1864=:1, 2, 13. =4.= _Mag. Hort._, =33=:70, 148, 337. 1867. =5.=
     Fuller, =1867=:225. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1867=:44. =7.=
     _Mag. Hort._, =34=:6, 103, 138, 140, 309, 350. 1868. =8.= _Grape
     Cult._, =1=:42, 116, 262, 302, 326. 1869. =9.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1881=:40. =10.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:111. =11.= _Tex. Sta.
     Bul._, =48=:1150, 1158. 1898. =12.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:45. 1901.

Israella came from Dr. C. W. Grant contemporaneously with Iona, and was
heralded far and wide as the earliest good grape in cultivation. For
several years after its introduction it was widely tried and almost
everywhere discarded because of the poor quality and unattractive
appearance of the fruit and lack of vigor, hardiness and productiveness
of the vine.

Dr. Grant grew the Israella from seed of Isabella planted in 1855. In
1859 or 1860, Peter B. Mead, then editor of the _Horticulturist_,
selected this variety from several thousand seedlings of the same
parentage and named it in honor of Dr. Grant's wife. The first fruit was
borne in 1859. It was placed on the grape list of the American
Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1867 and was dropped from their
list in 1881. It has been gradually dropped from cultivation although it
is still to be found in many varietal vineyards and is listed for sale
by an occasional nurseryman.

     Vine intermediate in vigor, usually hardy, hardly productive. Canes
     of average length, not numerous, slender, medium to dark brown;
     tendrils continuous, bifid. Leaves large to medium, intermediate in
     thickness; upper surface light green, dull, medium to rugose; lower
     surface pale green to grayish-green, faintly pubescent. Stamens
     upright.

     Fruit ripens a little later than Concord, appears to keep well.
     Clusters above average size, intermediate in length and breadth,
     strongly tapering, often single-shouldered, usually compact,
     frequently with many abortive fruits. Berries small to medium,
     roundish to oval, black or purplish-black, not glossy, covered with
     a fair amount of bloom, inclined to drop somewhat from the pedicel,
     not firm. Skin thick, tough, contains a large amount of
     purplish-red pigment. Flesh pale green, juicy, tender, stringy,
     mild, sweet from skin to center, appears to lack character, not so
     good in flavor or quality as Concord, ranks no more than fair in
     quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp, medium to below in
     size, intermediate in length, broad to medium, decidedly notched,
     blunt, light brown, seed-coat often covered with numerous grayish
     warts; raphe buried in a shallow, wide groove; chalaza small, at
     center or above, irregularly circular, obscure.


IVES.

(Labrusca, Aestivalis?)

     =1.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1856=:433. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1858=:176. =3.= _Horticulturist_, =21=:327. 1866. =4.= _Grape
     Cult._, =1=:10, 12, 42, 80, 116. 1869. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1869=:42. =6.= _Grape Cult._, =2=:171, _fig._, 172, 297. 1870.
     =7.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1875=:403. _fig._ =8.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:111, 112. _fig._ =9.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =22=:166. 1889.
     =10.= _Ala. Sta. Bul._, =10=:10. 1890. =11.= _Va. Sta. Bul._,
     =30=:100, 108. 1893. =12.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:39, 42, 45, 46,
     54, 76. 1899. =13.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =28=:289, 291. 1895. =14.=
     _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:182. 1896. =15.= _Traite gen. de vit._,
     =6=:183. 1903.

     _Ives' Madeira_ (6, 8, 15). _Ives' Madeira Seedling_ (3). _Ives'
     Seedling_ (1, 3, 4, 7). _Ives' Seedling_ (6, 8, 14, 15). _Ives'
     Seedling Madeira_ (15). _Kittredge_ (3, 6, 8, 15).

[Illustration: IVES]

A number of years ago Ives attained a high reputation as a grape for the
making of red wines and was held to be surpassed only by Norton for
this purpose. It is hardy, healthy, vigorous, and fruitful, but poor in
quality as a table grape, not ranking above Hartford, with which it
sometimes competes in the market though wrongfully, as it is a much
later grape. Ives colors long before it is ripe and is often sent to
market before sufficiently matured, at which stage of development it is
barely edible. Even when ripe it has a foxy odor objectionable to nearly
all; moreover, its flesh is tough and pulpy. The bunches are compact
with well-formed, jet-black grapes, which make it an attractive fruit.
It is easily propagated and is adapted to any good grape soil. It is so
rampant in growth that it is difficult to manage in the vineyard. The
good characters of the vine, as well as one or two of the fruit,
indicate that Ives might be desirable for breeding purposes, but its
special value is for the making of red wines of the claret type, in
which it is said to have a fine red color but a foxy taste and odor
which, however, improve with age. Ives is hardly as widely grown as
formerly, having been most popular at the time when the Catawba along
the Ohio River was succumbing to fungal diseases and a more healthy and
productive grape was wanted. It has never been very largely grown
elsewhere.

Ives was grown by Henry Ives from seed planted in 1840 in his garden in
Cincinnati, Ohio. It was exhibited in 1844 before the Cincinnati
Horticultural Society. Ives insisted that it came from seed of Madeira
grapes which had been sent him from abroad. As the variety is evidently
largely, if not wholly Labrusca, it has always been supposed that his
Madeira seedlings became accidentally mixed with a chance seedling.
Because of some of its characters the parentage of Ives has been
variously credited to Isabella, Alexander, Hartford and others, but
nothing is positively known as to this phase of its origin. It was
placed on the grape list in the American Pomological Society fruit
catalog in 1869 where it is still retained. Ives was awarded in 1868 the
premium offered by the Longworth Wine House of Cincinnati for the best
wine grape for the United States. It is still cultivated to a
considerable extent although not nearly so popular as forty years ago.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, healthy, productive to very productive. Canes
     long to medium, of average number, thick, dark brown to
     reddish-brown, surface covered with thin blue bloom; nodes
     enlarged, slightly flattened; internodes short; diaphragm thick;
     pith medium to below in size; shoots pubescent; tendrils
     continuous, of average length, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds medium to large, short, thick, obtuse to conical,
     sometimes strongly compressed. Leaves large to medium, of average
     thickness; upper surface dark green, dull, medium to slightly
     rugose; lower surface very pale green, pubescent; veins distinct;
     lobes three to five when present, with terminal lobe acute to
     acuminate; petiolar sinus deep, narrow, sometimes closed and
     overlapping; basal sinus shallow, medium in width; lateral sinus of
     average depth, rather narrow; teeth shallow to medium, intermediate
     in width. Stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens about with Concord or slightly later, keeps well.
     Clusters of fair size, intermediate in length and breadth, tapering
     to nearly cylindrical, three or four bunches per shoot, frequently
     single-shouldered, compact to medium, often with numerous abortive
     berries; peduncle long to medium, of average thickness; pedicel
     above medium in length, slender, covered with numerous, small
     warts; brush short, slender, pale green with reddish-brown tinge.
     Berries intermediate in size, oval to roundish, jet-black, covered
     with a moderate amount of blue bloom, very persistent, firm. Skin
     of medium thickness, tough, adheres slightly to the pulp, contains
     a fair amount of wine-colored pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh
     pale green, translucent, juicy, fine-grained, very tough, foxy,
     sweet at skin to tart at center, hardly good in quality. Seeds
     separate with difficulty from the pulp, one to four, average three,
     below medium to small, often abortive, medium to broad, rather
     short, usually blunt and plump, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza a
     small circular depression, nearly central, usually obscure. Must
     80 deg..


JAEGER.

(Lincecumii, Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1890=:117. =2.= _Va. Sta. Bul._,
     =30=:107. 1893. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:137, _fig._, 138. =4.=
     _Rural N. Y._, =55=:591. 1896. =5.= _Ark. Sta. Bul._, =39=:31.
     1896. =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1897=:20. =7.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._,
     =48=:1150, 1158. 1898. =8.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:39, 43, 45, 76.
     1899. =9.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:277. 1899. =10.= _Ala. Sta.
     Bul._, =110=:83. 1900.

     HERMANN JAEGER (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10). _Jaeger_ (3). JAEGER,
     _Hermann_ (6). _Munson No. 81_ (2).

Jaeger is a large-clustered, small-berried grape from Munson of
Texas.[195] It is said to be very successful in the South and Southwest
both as a table and a wine grape. Its meritorious qualities are
vigorous, productive vines with foliage free from mildew and rot, and
well-flavored, tender-fleshed berries with thin tough skins. It requires
too long a season for maturity for successful cultivation in New York.

[Illustration: JAMES]

Munson grew Jaeger from seed of a selected wild Post-oak vine pollinated
by Herbemont. The seed was planted in 1885 and the variety was
introduced by the originator in 1890. The culture of Jaeger seems to be
slowly spreading. It was placed on the grape list of the American
Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1897 and is still retained there.

     Vine vigorous, doubtfully hardy, an uncertain bearer in New York on
     account of winter injury but yielding good crops farther south.
     Canes variable in length, intermediate in number and thickness,
     covered with considerable blue bloom; tendrils intermittent, bifid
     to trifid. Leaves large, not uniform in color; lower surface
     grayish-green, slightly pubescent; stamens upright. Fruit ripens
     soon after Concord, matures evenly, keeps and ships well. Clusters
     medium to large, frequently single-shouldered, strongly compact.
     Berries below medium to small, roundish, frequently compressed on
     account of compactness of cluster, attractive black, covered with
     abundant blue bloom, persistent. Skin thin, tough. Flesh medium
     juicy, fine-grained, tender, spicy, somewhat tart from skin to
     center, good in quality. Seeds separate very easily from the pulp,
     not numerous, long, intermediate in size, sometimes with enlarged
     neck.


JAMES.

(Rotundifolia.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1889=:136. =2.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:178. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1899=:30. =4.= _Ga. Sta.
     Bul._, =53=:45. 1901. =5.= _N. C. Sta. Bul._, =187=:61. 1903. =6.=
     _S. C. Sta. Bul._, =132=:16, 18. 1907.

James is the only variety of Rotundifolia possible to illustrate in this
work. The accompanying color-plate, while not wholly satisfactory, yet
shows characteristic fruit and foliage somewhat reduced in size. James
is one of the largest of the Rotundifolia grapes and probably the best
general purpose variety of this species. It cannot be grown north of
Maryland.

The variety was originated by J. Van Lindley of Pitt County, North
Carolina. It was introduced about 1890 and was placed on the grape list
of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1899. It is not
known in the North but is cultivated more or less throughout the habitat
of _Vitis rotundifolia_ in the South.

The following description of the variety is a compilation:

     Vine vigorous, healthy, productive. Flowers open very late; stamens
     reflexed. Fruit ripens late, hangs on the vines for three weeks,
     keeps well. Clusters small, containing from four to twelve berries,
     irregular, loose. Berries large, three-fourths to one and
     one-quarter inches in diameter, roundish, black or blue-black. Skin
     very thin. Pulp juicy, sweet, good to best in quality.


JANESVILLE.

(Labrusca, Riparia.)

     =1.= _Rec. of Hort._, =1868=:45. =2.= _Horticulturist_, =24=:52,
     203. 1869. _fig._ =3.= _Montreal Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1879=:65. =4.=
     _Wis. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1881-2=:141. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1883=:26. =6.= _Rural N. Y._, =45=:622. 1886. =7.= _Wis. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =5=:161. 1888. =8.= _Mass. Hatch Sta. Bul._, =2=:20. 1888.
     =9.= _Wis. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1889=:117. =10.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =10=:496. 1891. =11.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:143. =12.= _Del.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =7=:135, 138. 1895. =13.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:531, 545, 547, 555. 1898.

Endowed with a constitution which enables it to withstand a degree of
cold to which most other varieties of grapes would succumb, Janesville
has made a place for itself in far northern localities. Moreover, it
ripens very early, being one of the first to color though not ripe until
some time after fully colored; and earliness is another requisite for a
northern location. The vine, too, is generally healthy, vigorous and
productive. But the fruit is worthless where better sorts can be grown.
The clusters and berries are small, or of only medium size, while the
grapes are pulpy, tough, seedy, with a thick skin and a disagreeable
acid taste. Janesville has so many good vine characters that it may be
of value for breeding purposes. It is fit for cultivation only in
northern localities where better grapes cannot be grown or where fruit
for a cheap red wine is wanted.

[Illustration: JANESVILLE]

Janesville was grown by F. W. Loudon, of Janesville, Wisconsin, from
seed secured at the Rock County Fair in 1858. It fruited for the first
time in 1861 and was introduced several years later by C. H. Greenman of
Milton, Wisconsin, who had bought the variety from the originator for
$1000. It was named by the Wisconsin Horticultural Society in 1868.
Janesville was placed on the grape list in the American Pomological
Society fruit catalog in 1883 and is still retained. It is said by many
to be a cross of Hartford and Clinton but this is a surmise and nothing
is positively known as to its parentage. Its botanical characters are
plainly those of a Labrusca-Riparia cross but with what admixture of the
two species cannot be told. The early blooming season, and sometimes
intermittent tendrils, indicate _Vitis riparia_, while foliage and
fruit show both this species and _Vitis labrusca_.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, healthy, hardy, productive to very
     productive. Canes spiny, intermediate in length, numerous, medium
     to below in size, dark brown; nodes flattened; internodes long to
     medium; diaphragm thick; pith intermediate in size; shoots thinly
     pubescent; tendrils intermittent to continuous, long, bifid to
     trifid.

     Leaf-buds medium to below in size, short, thick, conical,
     prominent, open early. Young leaves tinged on under side and
     faintly along margin of upper side with rose carmine. Leaves small
     to medium, somewhat thin; upper surface variable in color, glossy
     and smooth; lower surface pale green, slightly pubescent; veins
     indistinct; leaf usually not lobed with terminus acute; petiolar
     sinus intermediate in depth, narrow, often closed and overlapping;
     basal and lateral sinuses lacking; teeth shallow, of average width.
     Flowers fertile, open very early; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens slightly earlier than Concord although it colors much
     earlier, keeps well. Clusters medium to small, short, of average
     breadth, cylindrical to tapering, usually single-shouldered,
     compact; peduncle short, slender; pedicel short, slender, covered
     with small scattering warts; brush dark wine color. Berries
     intermediate in size, roundish to slightly oval, dull black,
     covered with rather heavy blue bloom, usually persistent, firm.
     Skin thick, medium to nearly tough, adheres slightly to the pulp,
     contains considerable dark wine-colored pigment, astringent. Flesh
     pale reddish-green, translucent, juicy, very tough, rather coarse,
     vinous, sweet next the skin but quite acid at the center, fair in
     quality. Seeds adhere to the pulp, one to six, average three, above
     medium in size, broad, often angular, rather blunt, dark brown;
     raphe obscure; chalaza large, ovate, moderately distinct.


JEFFERSON.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Gar. Mon._, =21=:362. 1879. =2.= _Ib._, =22=:142, 176, 191.
     1880. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:33, 44. =4.= Downing,
     =1881=:167 app. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1881=:24. =6.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:83, 103, 105. =7.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1885-6=:171. =8.= _Gar. and For._, =3=:178, 290. 1890. =9.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1894=:143. _fig._ =10.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:531,
     548, 552. 1898. =11.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:137. 1898. =12.= _Kan.
     Sta. Bul._, =110=:239. 1902.

Jefferson is the offspring of Concord crossed with Iona, resembling in
vigor, productiveness and healthiness the Concord, though not equal to
it; and in color and quality of fruit the Iona. It falls considerably
short of being an Iona fruit on a Concord vine, however, which would
have made it one of the most valuable of American grapes. The vine
produces its fruit two weeks later than Concord and is not nearly as
hardy, faults that debar it from taking high rank as a commercial grape
in New York. In its botanical characters and in immunity from diseases
it is almost identical with Concord. Fortunately the vines yield readily
to "laying down" for winter protection so that even in commercial
plantations it is not difficult to cover the vines and so prevent winter
injury.

The fruit of Jefferson is handsomer than that of Iona and of almost
equal quality. The accompanying color-plate shows the large,
well-formed, compact bunch, with berries of uniform size and color,
which, taken together, make it one of the most attractive of red grapes.
The flesh is firm, yet tender and juicy with a rich, vinous flavor and a
delicate aroma which persists even after the berries have dried into
raisins. The fruit ships and keeps well, the berries adhering to the
cluster and the fruit retaining its freshness into late winter. The vine
characters, with the exceptions of late bearing and tenderness to cold,
are in the main good.

Jefferson is widely distributed and is well known by viticulturists in
eastern America. It is not particular as to localities, if the season be
long and the climate temperate, and thrives in nearly all grape soils
though it does not flourish in a soil strongly impregnated with lime.
This variety is deserving greater recognition as a commercial grape than
it now receives. In a discriminating market it should command a
sufficiently high price to make it a profitable variety to grow in this
State despite its need of protection. Few grapes, and probably no red
grape, are more desirable inhabitants of the garden than Jefferson; it
not only furnishes an abundance of the best long-keeping fruit, but is
also very ornamental throughout the season.

This variety is one of J. H. Ricketts'[196] grapes from seed of
Concord pollinated with Iona. It fruited for the first time in 1874
and was introduced about 1880. In 1881 it was placed on the grape list
of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog and has never been
removed. Of all the remarkable seedlings raised by Ricketts the
Jefferson is best known and most widely disseminated. The variety won
for its originator the Wilder silver medal and as grown by him seldom
failed to take premiums at exhibitions where shown. It is greatly to be
regretted that the variety does not have all of the characters requisite
to adapt it to culture in commercial vineyards.

     Vine normally vigorous, healthy, not always hardy, medium in
     productiveness. Canes short, numerous, about medium in thickness,
     light to dark brown; nodes enlarged, roundish; internodes short;
     diaphragm thick; pith medium to below in size; shoots heavily
     pubescent; tendrils intermittent, medium to short, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds small, short, slender, pointed to conical, open very
     late. Young leaves tinged on under side and along margin of upper
     side with rose carmine. Leaves healthy, above medium to small, of
     average thickness; upper surface light green, medium to rugose on
     older leaves; lower surface very pale green, strongly pubescent;
     veins distinct; leaf usually not lobed with terminus acute;
     petiolar sinus of mean depth, narrow to wide, sometimes closed and
     overlapping; basal sinus usually absent; lateral sinus shallow,
     often a mere notch; teeth regular, shallow, of average width.
     Flowers nearly fully self-fertile, open late; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens late, usually about with Catawba, keeps and ships
     well. Clusters large to medium, intermediate in length and width,
     cylindrical to slightly tapering, usually single-shouldered, but
     sometimes double-shouldered, medium to compact; peduncle short,
     slender; pedicel medium to short, slender, covered with a few,
     small, inconspicuous warts, enlarged at point of attachment to
     fruit; brush rather long, slender, pale yellowish-green. Berries
     medium in size, oval to nearly roundish, light and dark red,
     glossy, covered with a moderate amount of lilac bloom, persistent,
     very firm. Skin somewhat thick, tough, nearly free from pulp,
     contains no pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh light
     yellowish-green, translucent, very juicy, coarse-grained, tender,
     vinous, sweet at skin to agreeably tart at center, good to best in
     quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp, one to four, average
     three, intermediate in size, broad, medium to short, blunt, usually
     plump, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza of medium size, slightly
     above center, circular to pear-shaped, distinct.


JESSICA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Gar. Mon._, =24=:339. 1882. =2.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =29=:19. 1884. =3.= _Can. Cen. Exp. Farms Rpt._, =1891=:135. =4.=
     _Col. Sta. Bul._, =29=:22. 1894. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:144.
     =6.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:531, 548, 552. 1898. =7.= _Mich.
     Sta. Bul._, =169=:171. 1899. =8.= _Ont. Fr. Exp. Stas. Rpt._,
     =8=:10, _fig._, 48. 1901. =9.= _Can. Hort._, =24=:447. 1901. _fig._

Jessica is an early, hardy green grape from Canada. In flavor it is very
good for so early a variety, being sweet, rich yet sprightly and almost
free from foxiness. But the fruit lacks in attractiveness and keeping
quality, and shells badly when overripe. The clusters and berries are
small, and the color is too green and the cluster too loose for a good
grape. Jessica may be commended for earliness and hardiness and is
therefore desirable, if at all, in northern regions.

William H. Read of Port Dalhousie, Ontario, grew Jessica from seed
planted some time between 1870 and 1880. It was introduced in 1884 by D.
W. Beadle of St. Catharines, Ontario. Jessica has been quite thoroughly
tested in different parts of the United States but has never become
popular and is to be found only in varietal vineyards. The parentage of
the variety is unknown but it is generally considered to be of mixed
Labrusca and Vinifera blood, the tendrils, foliage, fruit characters and
the weaknesses of the grape all showing a Vinifera hybrid.

     Vine medium in vigor, usually healthy, hardy, variable in
     productiveness. Canes medium to long, numerous, thickish,
     moderately dark brown with red tinge changing to ash-gray on some
     canes; tendrils continuous to intermittent, bifid or trifid. Leaves
     small to medium, intermediate in thickness; upper surface medium to
     dark green, glossy, often somewhat rugose; lower surface pale
     green, very pubescent; veins indistinct. Flowers nearly fertile,
     open in mid-season; stamens upright.

[Illustration: JEWELL]

     Fruit ripens among the earliest of the white grapes, keeps only
     fairly well. Clusters medium to small, not long, slender, tapering,
     usually single-shouldered, intermediate in compactness. Berries
     small to medium, roundish, light green, often tinged with yellow,
     covered with thin grayish-white bloom, rather persistent unless
     overripe, moderately soft. Skin rather thin, of average toughness,
     adheres but slightly to the pulp, contains no pigment, faintly
     astringent. Flesh pale green, almost transparent, juicy, tender,
     soft, sprightly, sweet, good to above in flavor and quality. Seeds
     adhere somewhat to the pulp, about average in size and length,
     medium to broad, notched, brownish; raphe buried in a narrow
     groove; chalaza small, above center, circular, nearly distinct.


JEWEL.

(Labrusca, Bourquiniana, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:78. =2.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1885=:280. =3.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885-6=:128. =4.= _Kan.
     Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1886=:187. =5.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1886-7=:205. =6.= _Rural N. Y._, =46=:607. 1887. _fig._ =7.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1887=:98. =8.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1888-9=:107. =9.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1889=:373. =10.= _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:627. 1893. =11.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:144.
     =12.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:531, 548, 555. 1898. =13.= _Mo.
     Sta. Bul._, =46=:39, 42, 46, 51, 76. 1899.

     BURR'S EARLY (1, 2). _Burr No. 1_ (4). _Jewell_ (2).

Jewel has much to recommend it, yet it has been grown since 1874 without
having become widely distributed or well known. Its strong characters
are earliness and high quality, though as compared with Delaware, its
parent, it is not lacking in vigor, health, or hardiness, the vine
characters that contribute most to a desirable variety. For a grape of
this parentage, it is remarkably free from fungal diseases. In form and
size of bunch and berry it closely resembles Delaware but is a deep
black in color. The flesh characters and flavor are much like those of
Delaware, the pulp being tender, yet firm, and the flavor having the
same rich, sprightly, vinous taste found in the parent, though it can
hardly be said to equal the Delaware in the characters which make high
quality. The seeds are few and small. The skin is thin but tough, and
the fruit, considering the tenderness of the flesh, ships remarkably
well. It keeps long and does not shell, and though an early grape, will
hang until frost if the robins, one of the worst pests of the
grape-grower, can be kept from them.

Jewel is a most excellent little grape, almost worthy the place among
black grapes that Delaware has among red ones. In particular it is
recommended for its earliness and for those localities to the North
where standard varieties, as Concord, do not ripen. Our list of early
grapes is large, but most of them are poor in quality, while Jewel is
deserving in this respect to stand well toward the head of the list.

John Burr of Leavenworth, Kansas, grew Jewel from seed of Delaware
planted about 1874. The blossoms being open to cross-pollination, the
male parent is unknown. It was introduced in 1887 by Stayman & Black of
Leavenworth. Jewel has been quite widely tested in varietal vineyards
but has never become popular and in the East, in particular, is hardly
known.

     Vine medium to vigorous, healthy, hardy except in exposed
     locations, medium to productive. Canes intermediate in length and
     number, slender, light to dark reddish-brown; nodes enlarged,
     flattened; internodes medium to short; diaphragm thickish; pith
     medium to below in size; shoots thinly pubescent; tendrils
     continuous, of average length, bifid.

     Leaf-buds of medium size, short, thick, conical, open early. Young
     leaves heavily tinged on under side and along margin of upper side
     with rose-carmine. Leaves scant, intermediate in size, thick; upper
     surface light green, dull, medium to rugose; lower surface tinged
     with bronze, heavily pubescent; veins well defined; lobes three
     when present, with terminus acute; petiolar sinus of average depth,
     narrow to medium; basal sinus usually lacking; lateral sinus
     shallow, wide; teeth shallow, of ordinary width. Flowers sterile,
     open in mid-season or somewhat earlier; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens about with Moore Early, keeps and ships well. Clusters
     medium to small, slender to medium, tapering to cylindrical,
     single-shouldered, medium to compact; peduncle inferior in length,
     of average size; pedicel short to medium, slender; brush short,
     wine-colored. Berries medium in size, roundish to oval, dark
     purplish-black, dull, covered with heavy, blue bloom, persistent,
     moderately firm. Skin inclined to thin, tough, adheres to the pulp,
     contains dark, wine-colored pigment, not astringent. Flesh pale
     green, translucent, juicy, fine-grained, usually tender, sprightly,
     vinous, sweet from skin to center, not foxy, good to very good in
     quality. Seeds do not separate readily from the pulp, one to four,
     average two, intermediate in size and breadth, frequently
     one-sided, blunt, light brown; raphe hidden in a deep groove;
     chalaza small, above center, circular to oval, distinct.


KENSINGTON.

(Vinifera, Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Can. Cen. Exp. Farms Rpt._, =1891=:135. =2.= _Bush. Cat._,
     1894:144. =3.= _Can. Cen. Exp. Farms Rpt._, =1897=:63. =4.= _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =18=:395. 1899.

Kensington is chiefly interesting as a cross between Riparia and
Vinifera, though it has several very meritorious fruit and vine
characters.

[Illustration: KENSINGTON]

It resembles Clinton, its Riparia parent, in vigor, hardiness, growth,
and productiveness of vine and in the botanical characters of vine and
foliage; but the fruit has many of the characters of the European
parent, Buckland Sweetwater. The grape is a handsome yellowish-green
with large oval berries in a somewhat loose cluster of medium size. As
it grows on the grounds of this Station, the clusters contain many
undeveloped berries and are not as uniform in size and shape as might be
desirable. While the quality is not equal to that of Buckland
Sweetwater, it is much better than Clinton, ranking among good to best
grapes. The flesh is tender and juicy, though slightly stringy, with a
rich, sweet, vinous flavor. The seeds are markedly those of Vinifera.
The hardiness of the vine and the high quality of the fruit should make
Kensington a favorite green grape in northern gardens. It is doubtful if
its good characters are sufficient in number or degree to make it of
value for commercial vineyards.

This variety was produced by William Saunders of London, Ontario, from
seed of Clinton pollinated by Buckland Sweetwater. It was sent out for
testing sometime between 1870 and 1880 and since that time has been
carefully tried at the Canadian Experiment Station and this Station, and
with very favorable results. For some reason it seems not to have been
very generally introduced into cultivation and nurserymen scarcely
handle it though it ought to be found in gardens and in northern
vineyards at least.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, usually productive but sometimes an uncertain
     bearer, somewhat susceptible to attacks of mildew and leaf-hoppers.
     Canes medium to long, of average number, somewhat slender, light
     brown; nodes enlarged, flattened; internodes short to medium;
     diaphragm intermediate in thickness; pith of medium size; shoots
     thinly pubescent; tendrils persistent, intermittent to continuous,
     rather long, bifid to sometimes trifid.

     Leaf-buds medium to below in size, variable in length, slender,
     conical to pointed, open very late. Young leaves tinged with faint
     rose-carmine on lower side only; upper side heavily pubescent,
     prevailing color pale green with faintest trace of carmine. Leaves
     small to medium, thin; upper surface light green, glossy, smooth to
     medium; lower surface pale green, pubescent, somewhat hairy; lobes
     none to three with terminus obtuse to acute; petiolar sinus of
     average depth, moderately narrow; basal sinus shallow when present;
     lateral sinus shallow, usually a notch; teeth deep and wide.
     Flowers strongly self-fertile, open medium early; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens about with Concord, does not keep very long in good
     condition. Clusters medium to large, intermediate in length and
     breadth, cylindrical to tapering, often heavily single-shouldered,
     sometimes double-shouldered, loose to medium, frequently with many
     undeveloped berries; peduncle long to medium, slender; pedicel long
     and slender, covered with numerous small, inconspicuous warts, wide
     at point of attachment to fruit; brush short, pale green. Berries
     variable in size, distinctly oval, attractive green changing to
     yellowish-green as the fruit matures, glossy, covered with thin
     gray bloom, persistent, moderately firm. Skin thin, somewhat tough,
     adheres to the pulp, contains no pigment, faintly astringent. Flesh
     greenish, transparent, juicy, tender, stringy, vinous, sweet, good
     in quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp when fully ripe but
     frequently leave some flesh attached to the seed, two to four,
     average three, heavily wrinkled, large and long, broad to medium,
     somewhat sharp pointed, yellowish-brown; raphe buried in a shallow
     groove; chalaza of average size, above center, very irregular in
     shape, rather distinct.


KING.

(Labrusca?)

     =1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1905=:602. =2.= _Ib._, =1906=:215.

King has not fruited on the grounds of this Station, but one of the
authors of this work was a committeeman from the Michigan Horticultural
Society to name and describe the variety as it grew on the grounds of
the originator. The following was the estimate of it made at that time:

"The King is more vigorous and prolific than the Concord, time of
ripening and length of season the same, clusters are one-fourth larger,
grapes are more persistent in pedicels, pulp is more tender, flavor
nearly the same, but more sprightly, seeds fewer in number, wood harder
and of shorter joints and the pedicels are larger."

This variety was found growing in the Concord vineyard of W. K. Munson,
Grand Rapids, Michigan, in 1892. The vine was set for a Concord, and is
either a bud-sport of that variety or is some other sort that became
accidentally mixed with the Concord vines. Mr. Munson believes it to be
the former. King is thought by some to be Eaton on account of its close
resemblance to that variety but the grape-growers who have examined it,
generally hold it to be distinct. It is in all respects a typical black
offspring of Concord, whether superior remains to be determined. It has
been widely disseminated and its place in viticulture should soon be
known. In seeking the origin of the grapes described in this work, an
effort has been made to determine whether any could be said with
certainty to have arisen from bud-sports. King is the best authenticated
bud-sport among the grapes here listed and yet there is, as the above
history shows, some doubt as to its having originated in this way.

[Illustration: LADY]

The description of King given below was made from vines and fruit from
Ellwanger & Barry's vineyards, Rochester, New York.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, hardy, productive. Canes medium to
     above in length, intermediate in number and thickness, medium to
     dark reddish-brown; tendrils continuous to intermittent, trifid to
     bifid. Leaves unusually large, thick; upper surface medium green,
     dull, of average smoothness; lower surface grayish-white changing
     to slight bronze, considerably pubescent; veins fairly distinct.

     Fruit ripens between Worden and Concord, appears to keep well.
     Clusters large to above medium, above average length, broad to
     medium, irregularly tapering to slightly cylindrical, usually
     single-shouldered, compact to medium. Berries unusually large
     averaging slightly below McPike in size, roundish, reddish-black to
     black as the fruit fully matures, covered with heavy blue bloom,
     persistent, firm. Skin medium to thick, tough, adheres considerably
     to the pulp, contains a moderate amount of reddish pigment,
     astringent. Flesh pale green, very juicy, somewhat tough, stringy
     and with some foxiness, sweet at skin to agreeably tart at center,
     good in quality. Seeds adherent, not numerous, above average in
     size, short, broad, slightly notched if at all, blunt to medium,
     plump, light brown; raphe hidden in a shallow groove; chalaza
     large, at center or above, obscure.


LADY.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Horticulturist_, =29=:48. 1874. =2.= _Ib._, =30=:84, _fig._,
     367. 1875. =3.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1875=:295, 411. _fig._
     =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =18=:40, 135, 136, 143, 162. 1881. =5.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1881=:24. =6.= _N. J. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1881=:12. =7.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:114. =8.= _Ill. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1883=:81. =10.= _Rural N. Y._, =45=:234, 622. 1886. =12.=
     _Gar. and For._, =3=:178, 214, 490, 599. 1890. =13.= _Ill. Sta.
     Bul._, =28=:264. 1893. =14.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:532, 548,
     552. 1898.

Lady is generally accredited with being the highest in quality of all
the seedlings of Concord and, added to its high quality, it is early,
fairly vigorous, hardy, and nearly as free from fungal diseases as its
parent. It is not, however, without faults, one of which, a thin, tender
skin which cracks badly, wholly debars it from ever making a commercial
variety for other than nearby markets. The vine is much like that of
Concord, though not as vigorous nor as productive, but ripening its
fruit fully two weeks earlier. The fruit is much superior to Concord in
quality, being richer, sweeter, and having less foxiness. It hangs on
the vines well but deteriorates rapidly after picking. The term
"ironclad" used by grape-growers to express hardiness and freedom from
diseases, is probably as applicable to Lady as to any other of our
Labrusca grapes. The foliage is dense and of a deep glossy green color,
neither scalding under a hot sun, nor freezing until heavy frosts,
making it an attractive ornament in the garden. It is deservedly popular
as an amateur grape and should be planted more for nearby markets. It
may be expected to succeed wherever Concord is grown, and because of its
early ripening is especially adapted to northern latitudes where Concord
does not always mature. Though it ripens early it starts its buds late
and blossoms late, thereby often escaping late spring frosts.

When Lady was first heard of, it was in the hands of a Mr. Imlay of
Muskingum County, Ohio. He had received it as a premium from an
agricultural paper with others, all represented to be pure Concord
seedlings. This was during the Civil War. Later the variety was sold to
George W. Campbell of Delaware, Ohio, who introduced it in 1874. Lady
was placed on the grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit
catalog in 1881 where it is still retained. The Lady is another example
of a green seedling of Concord which excels its parent in quality. Among
several of such seedlings, this variety is one of the highest in
quality.

     Vine weak to moderately vigorous, hardy, medium in productiveness,
     healthy. Canes short, medium in number, slender, dark
     reddish-brown; nodes of fair size, flattened; internodes short;
     diaphragm thick; pith intermediate in size; shoots pubescent;
     tendrils intermittent, of average length, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds small, short, pointed to conical. Leaves medium to below
     in size, of average thickness; upper surface light green, glossy,
     medium to somewhat rugose; lower surface pale green; pubescent;
     veins rather indistinct; lobes none to five, with terminal lobe
     acuminate; petiolar sinus shallow to medium, wide; basal sinus of
     average width; lateral sinus variable in depth and width; teeth
     medium to shallow, intermediate in width. Flowers fertile, open in
     mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens with Winchell, does not keep well. Clusters not
     uniform, small to above medium, short, slender, cylindrical,
     sometimes single-shouldered, compact to straggling; peduncle medium
     to short, of average size; pedicel intermediate in length, thick
     and smooth, wide at point of attachment to fruit; brush slender,
     long, greenish-white. Berries variable in size, large to below
     medium, roundish, light green, often with tinge of yellow, glossy,
     covered with thin gray bloom, persistent, firm. Skin covered with
     small, scattering, dark dots, inclined to crack, thin, tender,
     adheres slightly to the pulp, contains no pigment, slightly
     astringent. Flesh greenish-white, translucent, juicy, tender,
     aromatic, agreeably sweet from skin to center, very good in
     quality. Seeds separate from the pulp rather easily, few in
     number, intermediate in size and length, medium to broad, blunt,
     light brown; raphe obscure; chalaza large, above center, circular
     to oval, not distinct.

[Illustration: LADY WASHINGTON]


LADY WASHINGTON.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Gar. Mon._, =19=:336. 1877. =2.= _Ib._, =20=:47. 1878. =3.=
     _Ib._, =21=:147. 1879. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:33, 46.
     =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1881=:24. =6.= _Gar. Mon._, =26=:14,
     334. 1884. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =5=:167, 168. 1886. =8.=
     _Ib._, =9=:331. 1890. =9.= _Ala. Sta. Bul._, =10=:11. 1890. =10.=
     _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =28=:164. 1891. =11.= _Col. Sta. Bul._, =29=:22.
     1894. =12.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:147. =13.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:532, 541, 544, 545, 547, 552. 1898.

Were there not so many really fine green grapes, and were they sought
for by grape-buyers, more might be said commendatory of Lady Washington.
It is in many respects a most excellent grape but it falls short in
quality for a green grape and does not excel greatly in vine characters;
it cannot therefore be highly recommended to grape-growers except to
give variety in the vineyard and for locations where it does
preeminently well. The fruit makes an excellent appearance, keeps well
and ships well, and is fairly tender, juicy and sweet, with a delicate
aroma. The vine is very luxuriant,--too much so,--hardy for a grape with
Vinifera blood, and healthy, though slightly susceptible to mildew. As
an exhibition grape few green varieties show better when grown with all
possible care and in a favorable location, for the variety is somewhat
capricious as to soils and locations. It appears to be a desirable
variety for home use. In the West and Southwest it is said to succeed
better than most others of Ricketts' grapes.

Lady Washington is another of J. H. Ricketts' fine seedlings, this
variety having come from seed of Concord fertilized by Allen's Hybrid.
It was introduced in 1878, placed on the grape list of the American
Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1881, and is still retained there.
The vine characters of Lady Washington are mostly those of _Vitis
labrusca_ but the fruit plainly shows the admixture of Vinifera.

     Vine usually more vigorous than Concord, sometimes sustains winter
     injury, productive, susceptible to mildew. Canes long, few, thick,
     moderately dark brown; nodes greatly enlarged, variable in shape;
     internodes medium to long; diaphragm thick; pith large to medium;
     shoots strongly pubescent; tendrils continuous, long, bifid to
     trifid.

     Leaf-buds large to medium, short, thick, open late. Young leaves
     lightly tinged on under side and along margin of upper side with
     light rose-carmine. Leaves medium to large, rather thick; upper
     surface dark green, older leaves strongly rugose, glossy; lower
     surface pale green, strongly pubescent; veins distinct; leaf not
     lobed, with terminus acute; petiolar sinus medium to deep, narrow,
     frequently closed and overlapping; basal sinus usually none;
     lateral sinus shallow, often a mere notch; teeth shallow to medium,
     rather narrow. Flowers fully self-fertile, open in mid-season;
     stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens after mid-season, keeps and ships well. Clusters large
     to medium, broad to medium, irregularly cylindrical,
     single-shouldered to frequently double-shouldered, loose to medium;
     peduncle long, slender to medium; pedicel inclined to short, not
     thick, covered with numerous conspicuous warts, distinctly enlarged
     at point of attachment to fruit; brush very short, greenish.
     Berries variable in size, roundish to oblate, dark green changing
     to yellowish-amber, glossy, covered with thin gray bloom,
     persistent, of medium firmness. Skin thin, tender, adheres
     considerably to the pulp, contains no pigment, not astringent.
     Flesh pale green, transparent, juicy and tender, somewhat stringy,
     aromatic, sweet, ranks above Concord in quality. Seeds separate
     fairly well from the pulp, one to four, average three, intermediate
     in size and length, broad to medium, brown with yellowish tinge;
     raphe obscure; chalaza intermediate in size, above center,
     irregularly circular, obscure.


LENOIR.

(Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Amer. Farmer_, =11=:237, 412. 1829-30. =2.= Downing,
     =1845=:256. =3.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1847=:469. =4.=
     _Horticulturist_, =12=:460. 1857. =5.= _Ib._, =14=:487. 1859. =6.=
     _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1859=:35. =7.= _Gar. Mon._, =5=:74. 1863.
     =8.= _Ib._, =5=:73. 1863. =9.= Fuller, =1867=:226. =10.= _U. S. D.
     A. Rpt._, =1887=:652. =11.= =Am. Pom. Soc. Cat.=, =1889=:24. =12.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:148. _fig._ =13.= Husmann, =1895=:83, 183.
     =14.= Ib., =1895=:121, 122. =15.= _Tex. Farm and Ranch_, Feb. 8,
     =1896=:10, 11. =16.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1150, 1159. 1898. =17.=
     _U. S. D. A. Yr. Bk._, =1898=:557. =18.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._,
     =110=:246. 1902. =19.= _Traite gen. de vit._, =6=:374. 1903.

     _Alabama_ (19). _Archer?_ (8). _Black Souvignon_ (7) but incorr.
     _Black El Paso_ (15). _Black July_ (7). _Black Lenoir_ (19). BLACK
     SPANISH (14). _Black Spanish_ (8, 12, 15, 19). _Blue French_ (15,
     19). _Blue Grape_ of the South (7). _Burgundy_ (12, 15, 19). _Cigar
     Box Grape_ (19). _Clarence_ (?2, 7). _Devereaux_ of "Gardening for
     the South" (4). _Devereaux_ (19). _Devereux_ (5, 7,?9). _Early
     Black_ (4). EL PASO (6). _El Paso_ (12, 19). _Harris?_ (7, 9). JACK
     (8). _Jack_ (12, 15, 19). _Jacques_ (12, 15, 16, 19). JACQUEZ (19).
     _Jacquez_ (15). _Jac_ (19). _Jacquet_ (19). _July Sherry_ (4).
     _Lenoir_ (14, 19). _Long?_ (9). _Longworth's Ohio_ (19).
     _Louisville Seedling?_ (9). _MacCandless_ (19). _Ohio_ (8, 19).
     _Ohio Cigar Box?_ (9). _Oldhouse?_ (7). _Pungo_ of N. C.? (7).
     _Segar Box_ (8, 19). _Sherry of the South_ (7). _Springstein_ (7).
     _St. Genevieve?_ (9). _Sumpter_ (?2, 4, 7). _Thurmond_ (4, 5,
     7,?9). _Warren_ (8). _Wylie?_ (9).

Lenoir is a southern grape, too tender and too late in ripening for even
the Middle States. This variety has been largely used in France, both as
a resistant stock and as a direct producer, but for some years has been
losing favor for either purpose. It has also been grown more or less in
California as a resistant stock. It is highly valued for its dark red
wine, is considered a very good table grape, is very resistant to
phylloxera, and withstands drouths well.

The origin of Lenoir is unknown. It was in cultivation in the South as
long ago as the early part of the last century. Nicholas Herbemont[197]
states in 1829 that its name was given it from a man named Lenoir who
cultivated it near Stateburg, South Carolina, in the vicinity of the
Santee River. There are traditions of its being imported from Europe, of
its being found by Lenoir alongside a hedge, and so on, but none of them
seem in any way authoritative. All that can be said is that Lenoir
originated probably in one of the Carolinas or Georgia some time in the
Eighteenth Century. This variety was tried at an early day in the
northern and middle states, by Longworth at Cincinnati, by the Germans
in Missouri, and in other places. On account of its being only
semi-hardy and somewhat susceptible to rot, its cultivation was soon
abandoned. It was early introduced into Texas and cultivated in the
vicinity of El Paso, from which it derived one of its synonyms. It was
placed on the grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit
catalog in 1889 and is still retained. Lenoir differs from Herbemont,
with which it is often confused, in having wood of a darker color,
larger and darker leaves and slight differences in the fruit.

The following description is taken from various accounts of the variety:

     Vine vigorous, thrifty, semi-hardy, usually quite productive. Canes
     rather numerous with some bloom at the nodes; tendrils
     intermittent. Leaves from two to seven-lobed, usually five, and of
     a characteristic bluish-green color above and a more pale green
     below. Clusters quite variable, medium to very large, tapering,
     usually shouldered. Berries small to medium, round, of a dark
     bluish-purple, nearly black, with lilac bloom. Skin rather thick,
     tough. Flesh slightly juicy, tender, subacidly sweet, very rich in
     coloring matter.


LINDLEY.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1862=:215. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1867=:44. =3.= _Horticulturist_, =24=:126, 312. 1869. =4.= _Mich.
     Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:221. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:40.
     =6.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1882=:75. =7.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:117. _fig._ =8.= _Gar. and For._, =5=:547. 1892. =9.= _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =9=:329. 1890. =10.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:260.
     1893. =11.= _Can. Hort._, =17=:254, 405. 1894. =12.= _Va. Sta.
     Bul._, =94=:137. 1898. =13.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:532, 541,
     543, 545, 546, 548, 552, 558. 1898. =14.= _Miss. Sta. Bul._,
     =56=:15. 1899. =15.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:172. 1899. =16.=
     _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:223, 271. 1900. =17.= _Can. Hort._, =26=:51,
     96, 298, _fig._, 299. 1903.

     ROGERS' NO. 9 (1, 2). _Rogers' No. 9_ (3, 7, 9, 11, 17).

To Lindley, less productive than several others of its class, but when
cross-fertilized usually bearing a crop of excellent grapes, is due much
of the popularity of Rogers' hybrids. By common consent it is the best
of the red grapes originated by Rogers in his crosses between Labrusca
and Vinifera. Unfortunately the color-plate does not do the variety
justice. Both berry and bunch should be shown a little larger, even for
average-sized specimens.

When well grown Lindley is a very handsome grape. The bunches are of
only medium size and are somewhat loose but the berries are well-formed,
of uniform size, and of an attractive dark red color. The flesh is firm,
fine-grained, juicy and tender without pulpiness and with a peculiarly
rich aromatic flavor. The skin is thick and rather tough but is not
objectionable in fully ripe fruit. The fruit keeps well and ships well
and the berries neither crack nor shatter. The vine is vigorous,
comparatively hardy for a Vinifera hybrid, fairly healthy, but as with
most of its kind, susceptible to mildew. The chief defects of Lindley
are its self-sterility and precariousness in bearing, and its lack of
adaptation to many soils. Lindley has long been a favorite grape in the
garden and should continue to be such, and might well be grown in
commercial plantations as a fancy product.

For an account of the origin and parentage of Lindley see "Rogers'
Hybrids." _Rogers' No. 9_, or Lindley, is first mentioned separately
from the others of Rogers' hybrids about 1862. In 1869 Rogers gave this
grape the name Lindley in honor of John Lindley, the English botanist.
The variety has been used by a number of breeders, Munson in particular,
as a parent for improved pure-bred or cross-bred offspring. Lindley was
placed on the American Pomological Society fruit catalog list in 1867
and has not been removed.

[Illustration: LINDLEY]

     Vine vigorous to rank, usually hardy but sometimes injured in
     exposed locations, not a heavy yielder, somewhat susceptible to
     mildew, often subject to attacks of leaf-hoppers. Canes very long,
     intermediate in number, of medium thickness, dark reddish-brown,
     covered with thin blue bloom; nodes enlarged, usually flattened;
     internodes medium to long, thick; pith of medium size; shoots
     pubescent; tendrils continuous, medium to long, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds large, of average length, above medium in thickness,
     obtuse to conical, open in mid-season. Young leaves heavily tinged
     on upper and under sides with mahogany-red. Leaves medium to
     large, thickish; upper surface light green, dull, slightly rugose;
     lower surface grayish-white, pubescent; obscurely three-lobed with
     terminus acute; petiolar sinus deep, narrow, often closed and
     overlapping; teeth shallow, intermediate in width. Flowers sterile,
     open in mid-season; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens in mid-season, keeps and ships well. Clusters medium
     in size, long, inclined to broad, tapering to nearly cylindrical,
     frequently single-shouldered, the shoulder being connected to the
     bunch by a rather long stem, somewhat loose; peduncle medium to
     long, thick; pedicel short to medium, slender, nearly smooth,
     strongly enlarged at point of attachment to fruit; brush short,
     stubby, pale green. Berries large to medium, roundish to slightly
     oval, dark brick-red, covered with lilac or faint blue bloom, do
     not usually drop from the pedicel, of average firmness. Skin
     variable in thickness, tough, adheres considerably to the pulp,
     contains no pigment, strongly astringent. Flesh very pale green,
     translucent, juicy, fine-grained, nearly tender, vinous, sweet at
     skin to tart at center, good to best in quality. Seeds do not
     separate easily from the pulp unless fully ripe, two to five,
     average three, intermediate in size and length, distinctly notched,
     brownish; raphe buried in a deep, broad groove; chalaza small,
     nearly central, oval to pear-shaped. Must 80 deg..


LOUISIANA.

(Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= Husmann, =1866=:110. =2.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =3=:301. 1868.
     =3.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:22, 42, 100, 244, 326. 1869. =4.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1883=:118. =5.= Husmann, =1895=:183. =6.= _Texas Farm and
     Ranch_, Feb. 8, =1896=:10, 11. =7.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:46. 1901.

     _Amoreaux_ (6). _Burgunder_ (1). _Clevener?_ (6). _Red Elben_ (6).
     _Rulander_ (6). _St. Genevieve_ (6). (N. B. Reference number 6 is
     to a red grape. Louisiana is black.)

The grape here discussed is of cultural value in the South and is of
interest from the standpoint of grape-breeding and, historically, to
northern grape-growers. Louisiana first came to notice in Missouri. It
was received about 1860 or before by Frederick Muench of Marthasville,
Warren County, Missouri, from a Mr. Theard of New Orleans, Louisiana,
under the name White and Red Burgundy. Both supposed varieties proved to
be alike. Theard informed Muench that the varieties had been imported
from France about the first of the century by his (Theard's) father.
There has been much difference of opinion as to whether this imputed
origin is correct or not. Munson classes it with the Devereaux section
of the Bourquiniana. It is undoubtedly closely related to Herbemont,
Lenoir, and others of that class.

The variety has been much confused with Rulander and some are of the
opinion that the two varieties are identical. Those who cultivated it
earliest and most extensively were, however, of the opinion that they
were very similar but distinct. The vine is too tender in the North for
cultivation and there are complaints from some sections in the South of
the fruit rotting badly.

The following description is taken from various sources:

     Vine very vigorous, stocky, short-jointed; leaves cordate, not
     lobed. Cluster medium to small, shouldered, compact. Berry small,
     round, black with blue bloom, without pulp, juicy, spicy, sweet.


LUCILE.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =18=:395. 1899. =2.= _Rural N. Y._,
     =60=:167. 1901. =3.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:46. 1901. =4.=
     Budd-Hansen, =2=:384. 1902.

Lucile is of interest and of value because of its truly remarkable vine
characters. In vigor, health, hardiness and productiveness it is not
surpassed by any of the cultivated native grapes. It is probably a
seedling of Wyoming but the vine is much more vigorous than even that
variety, which is considered a very strong grower. Yet with all of its
great growth Lucile ripens its wood almost perfectly. It is very
productive, as much so as any other of our native grapes, often bearing
four bunches to the shoot, its crops exceeding those of Concord. It has
never been known to winterkill in the grape regions of New York and is
probably as hardy as any other of our Labruscas. Its fruit and foliage
are very nearly immune to the fungal diseases of the grape.

Unfortunately the fruit characters of Lucile are not as desirable as the
vine characters. The size, form, and color of bunches and berries are
all good, making a very attractive fruit, but it has an obnoxious, foxy
taste and odor objectionable to those who know good grapes though even
in flavor it is better than its supposed parent and is on a par with
some of the other varieties of its season. A further objection to the
berries is that they are both pulpy and seedy. It is earlier than
Concord, coming about with Worden or preceding it a few days. For so
early a variety the fruit keeps very well and in spite of its somewhat
thin skin ships very well. It is not at all capricious as to soils,
seemingly thriving in all good grape soils.

[Illustration: LUCILE]

Lucile may be recommended where an extra hardy grape is desired, for
localities where the season is short, and as a variety for breeding
purposes, should it prove capable of transmitting its vine characters,
and for those who do not object to foxiness of taste and aroma in
grapes.

J. A. Putnam of Fredonia, Chautauqua County, New York, is the producer
of Lucile. The vine fruited for the first time in 1890, it being then
two years old, and was introduced by Lewis Roesch of Fredonia in 1899.
It is supposed to be a seedling of Wyoming which it resembles very much
in both fruit and vine characters and surpasses in both. It is a typical
red Labrusca in all of its characters.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, very productive, yielding as good or better
     crops than Concord. Canes medium to long, rather numerous,
     intermediate in thickness, light brown; nodes strongly enlarged,
     usually flattened; internodes medium to short; diaphragm moderately
     thick; pith about medium in size; shoots slightly pubescent;
     tendrils continuous, of average length, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds below medium to small, short, moderately thick, pointed
     to conical, open in mid-season. Young leaves heavily tinged on
     lower side and along margin of upper side with bright carmine.
     Leaves healthy, medium to large, of average thickness, firm; upper
     surface light green, glossy, moderately smooth; lower surface pale
     green or with tinge of bronze, pubescent; veins distinct; leaf
     usually not lobed, with terminus acute; petiolar sinus shallow,
     narrow to medium, sometimes closed and overlapping; basal sinus
     usually absent; lateral sinus a mere notch when present; teeth very
     shallow, of average width. Flowers fertile, open early; stamens
     upright.

     Fruit ripens earlier than Concord or in some seasons about with
     Worden, keeps fairly well. Clusters medium to large, above average
     length, slender, cylindrical to tapering, usually
     single-shouldered, very compact; peduncle intermediate in length,
     large; pedicel short, thick, covered with few, small, inconspicuous
     warts; brush light brown. Berries large to medium, roundish to
     somewhat oval when strongly compacted, dark red, duller than
     Wyoming, covered with thin lilac bloom, persistent, firm. Skin
     medium to thin, somewhat tender, contains a small amount of light
     red pigment and some astringency. Flesh pale green, translucent,
     juicy, rather tough, sometimes stringy, foxy, sweet next the skin
     to slightly tart at center, fair to good in quality, not equal to
     Concord but superior to Wyoming. Seeds separate with difficulty
     from the pulp, one to four, average three, small, broad, short to
     medium, blunt, dark brown; raphe obscure; chalaza intermediate in
     size, slightly above center, oval, distinct.


LUTIE.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Gar. Mon._, =26=:307. 1884. =2.= _Ib._, =27=:304. 1885. =3.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:85. =4.= _Ib._, =1889=:120, 136. =5.=
     _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =13=:605. 1894. =6.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:150. =7.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:192. 1896. =8.= _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:532, 545, 547, 555. 1898. =9.= _Mich. Sta.
     Bul._, =169=:172. 1899. =10.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1899=:29.
     =11.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:236. 1902.

As with the preceding variety, Lutie is chiefly valuable for its vine
characters. It is vigorous, hardy, healthy, and fruitful, though
scarcely equaling Lucile in any of these characters. Pomologists differ
widely as to the merits of the fruit, some claiming high qualities for
it and others declaring that it is no better than the average wild
Labrusca. The difference in opinion is partly due to a peculiarity of
the fruit. If eaten fresh from the vines, the quality, while far from
being of the best, is not wholly bad, but after being picked for several
days it develops so much foxiness of flavor and aroma that it is
scarcely edible. As Lutie grows on the Station grounds its fruit has
little merit, though somewhat attractive in appearance, and the variety
can be recommended only for vigor, hardiness, resistance to disease and
fruitfulness. It is given the prominence of an illustration in _The
Grapes of New York_ out of respect for the opinions of others rather
than for its merits as it grows here. It makes a better showing in other
grape regions.

Lutie is a chance seedling found on the grounds of Dr. L. C. Chisholm of
Spring Hill, near Nashville, Davidson County, Tennessee. It was
introduced in 1885 by Messrs. Coleman, Webber and Newson of Nashville.
Lutie was placed on the grape list of the American Pomological Society
fruit catalog in 1899 where it has since been retained. Its gross
characters are much the same as those of Dracut Amber, Lucile, Wyoming,
and Woodruff, all typical red Labruscas and worthy of cultivation only
where better-flavored varieties cannot be grown.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, healthy, productive. Canes short, of average
     number, slender, dark reddish-brown; nodes enlarged, roundish;
     internodes short; diaphragm thin; pith inclined to small; shoots
     pubescent; tendrils continuous, short to medium, bifid.

     [Illustration: LUTIE]

     Leaf-buds small, short to medium, slender, open in mid-season.
     Young leaves tinged on lower side and along margin of upper side
     with bright carmine. Leaves medium to small, of average thickness;
     upper surface dark green, often rugose; lower surface bronze to
     whitish-green, pubescent; veins somewhat distinct; leaf usually not
     lobed, with terminus acute to acuminate; petiolar sinus moderately
     deep, medium to sometimes wide; basal sinus lacking; lateral sinus
     rather shallow and narrow when present; teeth shallow, narrow.
     Flowers fertile, open somewhat early; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens earlier than Concord, some seasons about with Worden,
     does not keep nor ship well. Clusters medium to small, short and
     broad, blunt at end, cylindrical to sometimes conical, usually not
     shouldered, compact; peduncle intermediate in length, rather thick;
     pedicel short, of average thickness, covered with small,
     scattering, inconspicuous warts; brush slender, of average length,
     pale green. Berries large to below medium, roundish, light to dark
     red, dull, covered with thin, whitish or lilac bloom, drop badly
     from pedicel, nearly firm. Skin intermediate in thickness somewhat
     tender, adheres to the pulp, contains no pigment, astringent. Flesh
     pale green, translucent, moderately juicy, somewhat tough, strongly
     foxy, sweet next the skin to slightly tart at center, fair to
     possibly good in quality. Seeds adhere to the pulp unless the fruit
     is fully ripe, one to four, average two, usually above medium size,
     broad, often rather short and blunt, dark brown; raphe buried in a
     small, rather indistinct groove; chalaza large, at center or
     slightly above, irregularly circular, rather distinct.


McPIKE.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Rural N. Y._, =55=:622, _fig._, 627. 1896. =2.= _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1897=:13. =3.= _Nat. Nurs._, =7=:119. 1899. =4.=
     _Ib._, =8=:93. 1900. =5.= _Rural N. Y._, =60=:170, 226, 290, 614,
     710. 1901.

McPike is noteworthy chiefly because of the large size of the berries,
though the bunches, too, average large. The accompanying illustration
shows the size of the berry accurately but the bunch, as shown here, is
too small.[198]

McPike in vine and fruit characters is very similar to its parent,
Worden, differing in having fewer but larger berries per bunch, grapes
not as high in flavor, and fewer and smaller seeds. Because of a thin,
tender skin the berries crack somewhat, shell more or less, and the
vines are less productive than those of Worden. The faults just named
seem to debar it pretty effectually from becoming a commercial grape in
New York and it is not high enough in quality and is lacking in too many
other fruit characters to make it of value for the amateur. It should
be said, however, that the variety has not been largely tested in New
York and further experience with it is needed to fully determine its
value in this State.

This variety was originated by H. G. McPike of Mount Lookout Park,
Alton, Illinois, from seed of Worden planted in 1890. It was introduced
in 1897 by Silas Wilson of Atlantic, Iowa. McPike is a typical black
descendant of Concord, bearing a strong resemblance in its gross
characters to Eaton, Hosford, Chautauqua, King, and its parent, Worden.

     Vine vigorous to medium, hardy, productive to very productive.
     Canes intermediate in length, number and thickness, dull dark
     reddish-brown; nodes enlarged, flattened; internodes very short;
     diaphragm thick to medium; pith large; shoots thinly pubescent;
     tendrils continuous, of average length, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds about average size, short, thick to medium, obtuse to
     conical, compressed. Leaves large, thick; upper surface light
     green, dull, medium to slightly rugose; lower surface grayish-white
     to bronze, heavily pubescent; veins fairly distinct; leaf not
     lobed, with terminus acute to obtuse; petiolar sinus deep to
     medium, rather wide; basal and lateral sinuses lacking; teeth
     intermediate in depth and width. Flowers fertile or nearly so.

     Fruit ripens about with Concord or earlier, appears to keep well.
     Clusters variable in size, medium to short, rather broad,
     irregularly tapering with slight tendency to cylindrical, often
     blunt at ends, usually not shouldered, two to three bunches per
     shoot, of average compactness; peduncle medium to above in length,
     thick; pedicel long to medium, thick, quite brittle, nearly smooth;
     brush long, slender, greenish with brown tinge. Berries unusually
     large, roundish, purplish-black to black, covered with blue bloom,
     firm. Skin of medium thickness, variable in toughness, sometimes
     cracks, adheres considerably to the pulp, contains a large amount
     of purplish-red pigment, astringent. Flesh pale green, translucent,
     very juicy, rather tender, stringy, vinous, nearly sweet at skin to
     rather acid at center, fair to good in quality. Seeds moderately
     adherent to the pulp, one to four, average two, medium to below in
     size, short, broad, blunt, rather plump, light brown; raphe buried
     in a wide, shallow groove; chalaza rather large, at center or
     slightly above, somewhat obscure.


MAGNATE.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1891=:130. =2.= _Ib._, =1892=:270.
     =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:151. =4.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:141.
     1898. =5.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:46. 1901.

[Illustration: McPIKE]

Magnate is a green seedling of Concord and, like several others of
Concord's light-colored offspring, as Lady and Martha, it is better in
quality than the parent though the flesh characters are not as good.
It does not compare favorably with the best green grapes of its season,
either in appearance or quality and is not recommended for New York.

The variety was originated by either John Burr, or Dr. Stayman of
Leavenworth, Kansas, from seed of Concord. It was introduced by Stayman
& Black in 1891 but has not been widely grown. It is better known in the
West than in the East.

     Vine medium to vigorous, hardy except in severe winters, medium to
     productive. Canes intermediate in length, number and size; tendrils
     continuous, bifid to trifid. Leaves not always healthy, large to
     medium, variable in color; lower surface grayish-white, pubescent.
     Flowers nearly fertile, open in mid-season or earlier; stamens
     upright. Fruit ripens about with Concord, keeps well. Clusters
     medium to large, sometimes rather broad, occasionally with a
     medium-sized single shoulder, usually compact and with many
     abortive fruits. Berries variable in size, roundish, pale green
     with trace of yellow, covered with a medium amount of gray bloom,
     persistent. Flesh pale green, slightly tough, vinous, somewhat
     musky, nearly sweet at skin to acid at center, fair to good in
     quality. Seeds below medium to small, short, broad, plump.


MANITO.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Bourquiniana, Lincecumii, Rupestris.)

     =1.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:279. 1900. =2.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._,
     =53=:46. 1901. =3.= _Rural N. Y._, =60=:614. 1901. =4.= _Ib._,
     =62=:790. 1903. =5.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1904=:305. =6.= _Can.
     Cen. Exp. Farms Rpt._, =1905=:107.

Manito is one of Munson's grapes recommended for both the North and the
South. It is remarkable in having for its immediate ancestors five
species, Lincecumii, Rupestris, Labrusca, Vinifera, and Bourquiniana. As
Manito grows at this Station, its vine characters are all good and the
fruit is passably so. According to the originator, the variety endures
extremes of climate very well and has stood the cold of the New York
winter and the heat of summer without any perceptible injury. The fruit
is not sufficiently handsome nor of high enough quality to recommend the
variety highly for this State, but it keeps well, ships well, is said to
make good wine, and is worthy a trial in experimental vineyards at
least. A point of merit is earliness, as it ripens just before Moore
Early.

The variety was produced from seed of America pollinated by Brilliant.
The seed of Manito was planted in 1895 and the variety was introduced by
the originator in 1899.

     Vine medium to vigorous, hardy, medium to productive. Canes long,
     rather numerous and thick, dark reddish-brown, surface covered with
     blue bloom, nodes enlarged, often flattened; internodes
     intermediate in length; diaphragm thick; pith large to medium;
     shoots thinly pubescent; tendrils medium to above in length, bifid
     to trifid.

     Leaf-buds large, of average length, thickish, conical to obtuse,
     open very late. Young leaves tinged on under side and along margin
     of upper side with rose-carmine. Leaves medium to below, of average
     thickness; upper surface dark green, glossy, smooth to medium;
     lower surface duller than upper surface, thinly pubescent; veins
     moderately distinct; lobes usually three in number, with terminal
     lobe variable; petiolar sinus medium to deep, inclined to narrow;
     basal sinus usually lacking; lateral sinus shallow, narrow, often a
     mere notch; teeth of average depth, wide. Flowers semi-fertile,
     open in mid-season or later; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens about with Moore Early, keeps and ships well. Clusters
     large to below medium, often quite long, slender to medium,
     cylindrical, sometimes with enlarged end, usually not shouldered,
     loose; peduncle intermediate in length, slender; pedicel short,
     slender, nearly smooth; brush light green with faint reddish tinge.
     Berries intermediate in size, roundish to slightly oval, dull
     purplish-black, covered with a medium amount of blue bloom,
     persistent, moderately firm. Skin thin, tender, adheres
     considerably to the pulp, contains a large amount of wine-colored
     pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh pale green, with slight pink
     tinge, translucent, moderately juicy, tender and almost melting,
     not very aromatic, sweet next the skin to agreeably tart at center,
     good in quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp, one to four,
     average two, surface often rough and warty, intermediate in size,
     length and breadth, darkish brown; raphe obscure; chalaza of fair
     size, oval to rather pear-shaped, often indistinct.


MARIE LOUISE.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1887=:634. =2.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:151.
     =3.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =15=:295. 1896. =4.= _Ib._, =17=:532,
     548, 555. 1898. =5.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:141. 1898. =6.= _Ga.
     Sta. Bul._, =53=:46. 1901.

The parentage of Marie Louise is unknown but it seems to be a typical
green seedling of Concord and, as tested at this Station, is of no
especial merit. It is surpassed by Diamond, Lady, Martha, and nearly a
score of other green grapes.

The vine characters here are not satisfactory. It is only moderately
productive and for some years has been affected with chlorosis.

[Illustration: MANITO]

Marie Louise was originated by Theophile Huber of Illinois City,
Illinois, about 1880. Besides the characters of the variety, the work of
the originator would indicate that it is a Concord seedling. There are
no records of its ever having been widely disseminated.

     Vine intermediate in vigor, not hardy nor productive. Canes short,
     not numerous, dark brown; tendrils continuous, bifid. Leaves small
     to medium, intermediate in thickness and smoothness; lower surface
     tinged with bronze, heavily pubescent. Flowers nearly fertile, open
     in mid-season; stamens upright. Fruit ripens about with Worden,
     does not keep well. Clusters small to medium, short, slender,
     cylindrical, usually with a small single shoulder, rather loose.
     Berries small to medium, roundish to oval, pale green with tinge of
     yellow, covered with thin gray bloom, shatter badly, not very firm.
     Skin thin, of medium toughness. Flesh pale green, tender,
     sprightly, somewhat vinous, sweet at skin to tart at center, good
     to very good in quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp, not
     numerous, small, short and broad, plump.


(I) MARION.

(Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Horticulturist_, =13=:13. 1858. =2.= _Mag. Hort._, =26=:100.
     1860. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1860=:83. =4.= Fuller,
     =1867=:244. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:120. =6.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._,
     =14=:89. 1890. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =10=:497. 1891. =8.=
     _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:255. 1893. =9.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:532, 545, 546, 548, 555, 559. 1898.

     _Black German_ (2). MARION PORT (2, 4).

Marion is an old variety of unknown parentage but so closely resembling
Clinton in both botanical and horticultural characters as to be clearly
of the type of that variety. In many grape regions it is held that this
variety surpasses Clinton as both a table and a wine grape. The growth
of Marion is vigorous, the vine is hardy but hardly sufficiently
productive, and is susceptible to mildew and to leaf-hoppers. The fruit
is pleasantly sweet and spicy though not of high enough quality for a
table grape, but making, according to the following, from a French
authority, a very good dark red wine.[199]

"With regard to intense coloring, without any foxy taste, nothing equals
the wine made of the Marion grape; one-twentieth part is sufficient to
give to water even a superior wine color; the somewhat violet shade is
easily transformed into a lively red by adding some acid wine or a very
small quantity of tartaric acid."

The fruit colors early in the season but ripens very late, hanging well
on the vines and improving with a light touch of frost. Marion is not
much grown in New York as a wine grape, though it might prove of value
because of its coloring properties for the making of some wines.

This variety was brought to notice by a Mr. Shepherd of Marion, Ohio,
over fifty years ago. It was first known as Black German but this name
was changed to Marion Port. At about the same time, Nicholas Longworth
received a variety resembling the Isabella from Marion, Ohio, probably
also from Shepherd, which he disseminated under the name Marion. Owing
to the similarity of the names, the two varieties became badly confused.
The true Marion, which many believed to be identical with York Madeira,
was soon dropped from cultivation and the Marion Port assumed the name
of Marion. Shepherd did not know where the Marion Port had originated
but stated that it had come originally from Pennsylvania. It is quite
possible that it is some old variety reintroduced under this name. The
species of the variety is usually given as Riparia but as the tendrils
are often continuous, there is evidently an admixture of Labrusca blood.

     Vine vigorous, usually hardy, medium to productive, susceptible to
     injury from leaf-hoppers. Canes very long, intermediate in number
     and thickness, dark reddish-brown, surface covered with blue bloom;
     nodes slightly enlarged, flattened; internodes very long to medium;
     diaphragm thin; pith of average size; shoots glabrous, younger
     shoots tinged with reddish-purple; tendrils continuous, sometimes
     intermittent, long, bifid.

     Leaf-buds nearly medium in size and thickness, short, conical,
     often strongly compressed, open early; young leaves tinged on under
     side and along margin of upper side with carmine. Leaves unusually
     large, of average thickness; upper surface dark green, glossy;
     lower surface pale green, somewhat cobwebby to nearly smooth; veins
     well defined; leaf not lobed with terminus acuminate; petiolar
     sinus very deep, narrow, often closed and overlapping; basal and
     lateral sinuses lacking; teeth shallow, rather wide. Flowers
     sterile, open very early; stamens reflexed.

     [Illustration: MARION]

     Fruit ripens in mid-season, keeps fairly well. Clusters medium to
     below, short and slender, cylindrical to tapering,
     single-shouldered, compact; peduncle short, intermediate in
     thickness; pedicel short, slender, covered with few, inconspicuous
     warts; brush very short, wine-colored. Berries medium to small,
     roundish, black, slightly glossy, covered with abundant blue bloom,
     persistent, firm. Skin medium to thin, rather tough, adheres
     slightly to the pulp, contains much dark wine-colored pigment,
     slightly astringent. Flesh dark green, translucent, juicy,
     fine-grained, tough, sprightly, spicy, agreeably tart but free from
     astringency, no more than fair in quality. Seeds adhere somewhat to
     the pulp, one to five, average four, above medium in size, broad,
     short, usually not notched, very plump, brownish; raphe buried in a
     narrow, shallow groove; chalaza small, nearly central, oval,
     obscure.


(II) MARION.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1856=:433. =2.= Downing, =1857=:341.
     =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1860=:83. =4.= _Mag. Hort._, =26=:100.
     1860. =5.= (?) _Gar. Mon._, =3=:52. 1861. =6.= Fuller, =1867=:244.
     =7.= _Rural N. Y._, =53=:793. 1894.

     GERMAN GRAPE (7).

This variety much resembles Isabella and was said by some to be
identical with it. It is probably the same as York Maderia. Downing[200]
discusses it as follows:

"Origin unknown. Sent to Mr. Longworth from Marion, Ohio, and by him
disseminated. It much resembles the Isabella in shape and size of berry
and form of bunch, but more uniform in its ripening and more delicate in
flavor, ripening about the same time. Growth healthy, making firm and
short-jointed wood, with strong, red tendrils; a good bearer.

"Bunches large, regular, seldom shouldered. Berries large, round,
inclining to oval, dark purple with a bloom, juice abundant, pulp thin,
not sufficiently tested for wine, a promising variety."


MARTHA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =30=:26. 1864. =2.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._,
     =1865=:196. =3.= Fuller, =1867=:227. =4.= _Mag. Hort._, =34=:236.
     1868. =5.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:10, 14, 15, 42, 129, _fig._, 130.
     1869. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1869=:42. =7.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:119. _fig._ =8.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =14=:89. 1890. =9.= _Ill.
     Sta. Bul._, =28=:265. 1893. =10.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:40, 42, 44,
     46. 1899. =11.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =18=:396. 1899.

     _Miller No. 1_ (2, 5).

Martha was at one time the most popular of the green grapes but the
introduction of many other green varieties of superior fruit and vine
characters has gradually reduced its popularity until it is now but
little grown. It is a seedling of Concord and resembles its parent
greatly, differing from it chiefly in the following particulars: Fruit
green, a week or more earlier, bunch and berries smaller, quality far
better, being sweeter, more delicate, and with less foxiness and less
pulp. About the only difference in the vines is a lighter shade of green
in Martha and less robustness, with blossoms opening a few days earlier
than Concord. Martha is often sold in the markets as Niagara, though the
resemblance between the two is not strong, the Niagara being larger in
bunch and berry and not as high in quality. One of the defects of
Martha, and the chief cause of its going out of favor, is that it does
not keep nor ship well. A very good white wine is made from Martha. The
variety is still being planted in some parts of the South, but is
generally abandoned in the North.

Samuel Miller, then of Calmdale, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania, grew
Martha from seed of Concord sent him by E. W. Bull. The variety was
introduced about 1868 by J. Knox of Pittsburg, Pennsylvania. It was
placed on the American Pomological Society fruit catalog list in 1869
and dropped from that list in 1899.

     Vine variable in vigor, hardy, intermediate in productiveness,
     somewhat susceptible to attacks of mildew in unfavorable seasons.
     Canes medium to long, of average number and size, rather dark
     reddish-brown, surface covered with thin bloom, slightly roughened;
     tendrils continuous to intermittent, bifid. Leaves large to medium,
     rather thick; upper surface light green, intermediate in
     smoothness; lower surface light bronze, heavily pubescent; veins
     well defined. Flowers self-fertile, open in mid-season; stamens
     upright.

     Fruit ripens somewhat earlier than Concord, does not keep nor ship
     well. Clusters medium in size, often below average length,
     intermediate in width, tapering to cylindrical, usually
     single-shouldered, inclined to be loose. Berries medium in size,
     roundish, light green with tinge of yellow, covered with thin gray
     bloom, persistent, medium in firmness. Skin thin, very tender, does
     not usually crack, adheres considerably to the pulp, contains no
     pigment, with scarcely any astringency. Flesh pale yellowish-green,
     juicy, moderately tough, fine-grained, slightly foxy, sweet at skin
     to somewhat tart at center, mild, good to very good in quality but
     not as good as Lady. Seeds few in number, rather adherent,
     intermediate in size and length, broad, rather blunt, dark brown;
     raphe obscure; chalaza small, slightly above center, oval,
     frequently shows as a mere depression. Must 85 deg.-90 deg..

[Illustration: MASSASOIT]


MASSASOIT.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1862=:148, 152. =2.= _Horticulturist_,
     =18=:99. 1863. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1867=:44. =4.=
     _Horticulturist_, =24=:126. 1869. =5.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:180, 326.
     1869. =6.= _Ind. Sta. Bul._, =33=:34. 1890. =7.= _Gar. and For._,
     =3=:214, 255, 490. 1890. =8.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =28=:164. 1891.
     =9.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =10=:497. 1891. =10.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:154. =11.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:533, 548, 555. 1898.

     ROGERS' NO. 3 (1, 2, 3). _Rogers' No. 3_ (4, 5, 6, 10).

Massasoit is distinguished as being the earliest of Rogers' hybrids
though it is not, as some viticulturists say, as early as Hartford,
ripening rather with Delaware or a little later. It has the peculiarity
or defect of being at its best before full maturity, and of developing
after ripening a degree of foxiness which impairs its quality. In shape
and size of berry, and sometimes in bunch, there is a striking
resemblance to Isabella, another suggestion of Vinifera in the latter
sort, but the color is that of Catawba. The texture of the fruit is
especially good, firm but tender and juicy, while the flavor, as with
all of Rogers' grapes, is rich and sweet, though in the case of
Massasoit, hardly as good as others of these hybrids. The vine is
vigorous, hardy and productive but very subject to mildew and rot.
Massasoit is well worth a place in the home vineyard, and as an early
grape, of fine quality for the local market.

For an account of the early history and parentage of Massasoit the
reader is referred to Rogers' Hybrids. The variety attracted
considerable attention even while it was known only as _Rogers' No. 3_
and was placed on the American Pomological Society's list of recommended
sorts as early as 1867. In 1869 it was named by Rogers after Massasoit,
the Indian chief who was so intimately connected with the early history
of Massachusetts.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, hardy in all but unusually cold
     winters, often very productive, very subject to rot and mildew.
     Canes long, intermediate in number, thick, inclined to dark brown
     with slight reddish tinge; nodes enlarged, flattened; internodes
     long to medium; diaphragm of average thickness; pith large; shoots
     thinly pubescent; tendrils continuous, long, trifid to bifid.

     Leaf-buds large to medium, long, unusually thick, obtuse to
     conical, heavily coated with brownish pubescence. Young leaves
     tinged on upper and under sides with rose-carmine. Leaves variable
     in size, medium to thin, upper surface light green, dull, smooth
     to medium; lower surface pale green, slightly pubescent; veins well
     defined; lobes three to sometimes obscurely five with terminus
     acute; petiolar sinus deep, narrow to medium; basal sinus shallow,
     narrow, often obscure; teeth very shallow, of average width.
     Flowers sterile, open moderately late; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens about with Delaware, keeps well. Clusters variable in
     size, of medium length, often rather broad, cylindrical to
     tapering, frequently single-shouldered, variable in compactness;
     peduncle short to medium, thick; pedicel of average length, slender
     to medium, covered with few, indistinct warts, enlarged at point of
     attachment to fruit; brush of fair length, pale green. Berries
     large to medium, roundish to oval, dark brownish-red, dull, covered
     with lilac bloom, very persistent, moderately firm. Skin thin,
     tender, adheres considerably to the pulp, contains no pigment,
     astringent. Flesh pale green, translucent, juicy, fine-grained,
     somewhat soft, stringy, foxy, sweet next the skin but acid at
     center, good to very good in quality, somewhat resembling Salem.
     Seeds slightly adherent, one to five, average three, large to
     medium, somewhat broad, distinctly notched, above medium in length,
     plump, blunt; raphe buried in a deep, broad groove; chalaza small,
     slightly above center, circular to nearly oval, often showing only
     as a depression.


MAXATAWNEY.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Horticulturist_, =15=:134, 191, 538. 1860. =2.= _Gar. Mon._,
     =3=:341. 1861. _col. pl._ =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1862=:135,
     152. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1862=:90. =5.= _Grape Cult._,
     =1=:10, 42, 141, 149, 296, 368. 1869. =6.= _Ib._, =2=:76, 85,
     _fig._, 86, 297. 1870. =7.= _Bush Cat._, =1883=:120, 121. _fig._
     =8.= _Ala. Sta. Bul._, =10=:11. 1890. =9.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =11=:630. 1892. =10.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:184. 1896. =11.=
     _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:533, 548, 556. 1898.

At one time very popular, grape-growers now seldom hear of Maxatawney.
At best it is not a northern grape, ripening its fruit in New York only
occasionally, and is much subject to fungal diseases. It is an
interesting variety historically as being one of the first good green
grapes and as showing almost unmistakable Vinifera characters, probably
another example of the fortuitous hybridization which gave us so many
valuable varieties before artificial hybridization of Vinifera with
native grapes had been tried.

In 1843, a man living in Eagleville, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania,
received several bunches of grapes from a friend in Maxatawney, Berks
County, Pennsylvania. The seeds of these grapes were planted and the
following spring one seed grew. This was the original vine of what was
later named Maxatawney. It attracted no more than local attention until
about 1860 when, through the efforts of Peter Crans of Philadelphia, it
received several favorable notices in the horticultural press and
cuttings were disseminated for testing. The man who had originated the
variety, for fear of being besieged by amateur grape cultivators, never
allowed his name to become known. Maxatawney was placed on the American
Pomological Society list of sorts recommended for cultivation in 1862,
but was dropped in 1897. From the first it has been recognized that
Maxatawney shows Vinifera blood. Some have even gone so far as to say
that it is a derivative, in part, from Malaga. It does not appear,
however, that such preciseness is justified. The vine shows the
continuous tendrils and the thick, pubescent leaf of Labrusca. In the
lobing of the leaves, the susceptibility to mildew, the oval berries,
the vinous flavor, and the appearance of occasional seeds, one can
detect the characters of Vinifera.

     Vine medium to vigorous, not always hardy, variable in
     productiveness. Canes medium to above in length, of average number,
     slender to medium; tendrils continuous, bifid. Leaves medium to
     large, dark green, thick; lower surface grayish-white with tinge of
     bronze, heavily pubescent. Flowers sterile or nearly so, some
     blossoms imperfectly self-fertile, open in mid-season; stamens
     upright. Fruit ripens after Concord, in some seasons fully as late
     as Catawba, keeps fairly well. Clusters small to above medium,
     often short and slender, cylindrical, occasionally with a small
     single shoulder, rather open to fairly compact. Berries variable in
     size, oval, not uniform in color, pale red or dull greenish with
     amber tinge, covered with thin gray bloom, persistent. Skin medium
     in thickness, often very tough, astringent. Flesh slightly tender,
     foxy, sweet at skin to tart at center, good to very good in
     quality. Seeds few, separate easily from the pulp, large, of medium
     length, very broad, blunt. Must 76 deg..


MERRIMAC.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1860=:86. =2.= _Gar. Mon._, =6=:23,
     140, 276, 277. _fig._ 1864. =3.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1865=:40. =4.= _N. Y. Ag. Soc. Rpt._, =1865=:339. _fig._ =5.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1867=:44. =6.= Fuller, =1867=:229, 230. =7.=
     _Horticulturist_, =24=:126. 1869. =8.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =5=:263.
     1869. =9.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:181, 239, 327. 1869. =10.= _Mich.
     Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1875=:397. _fig._ =11.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:121.
     =12.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =7=:133. 1885. =13.= _Ark. Sta. Bul._,
     =39=:32. 1896. =14.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:184. 1896. =15.=
     _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1150, 1159. 1898. =16.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =17=:533. 541, 544, 548, 556. 1898.

     ROGERS' NO. 19 (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6). _Rogers' No. 19_ (7, 8, 9, 10,
     11, 13).

Merrimac is accredited by some grape-growers as the best black grape
among Rogers' hybrids, but an analysis of the characters of the several
black varieties produced by Rogers seems to show that it is surpassed at
least by Wilder and Herbert and possibly by Barry. The attributes of
Merrimac are so nearly those given for the several others of these
grapes hitherto described, that there need be no general discussion of
it here other than to state its chief points of difference. It is
stronger in growth, slightly more productive, possibly hardier, and more
exempt from fungal diseases than the average of Rogers' hybrids. Its
season is about that of Concord, a little earlier than that of most of
its kindred hybrids. It is not as high in quality, and its flesh, skin
and seed characters are such that it is not as pleasant to eat as the
black varieties named above. Merrimac is worthy a place in collections
and in the gardens for the sake of variety.

For a full account of the parentage and details of the origin of the
variety see "Rogers' Hybrids." Merrimac was first known as No. 19, and
was considered by those to whom Rogers sent his grapes of peculiar
excellence, and was granted a premium by the Essex Agricultural Society
in 1859. In 1867, Merrimac, with five others of Rogers' numbered
varieties, was placed on the grape list of the American Pomological
Society fruit catalog, where it is still retained. In 1869, Rogers gave
this variety the name Merrimac after the historic New England river.

     Vine vigorous, usually hardy but subject to injury in severe
     seasons, moderately productive to productive. Canes intermediate in
     length and number, medium to slender, dark brown, surface slightly
     roughened; nodes somewhat enlarged, usually flattened; internodes
     medium to short; diaphragm thick; pith of average thickness; shoots
     nearly glabrous; tendrils intermittent, short, bifid.

     Leaf-buds intermediate in size, short to medium, thick, obtuse to
     conical, open in mid-season. Young leaves tinged on lower side and
     along margin of upper side with rose-carmine. Leaves large to
     medium, thin; upper surface very light green, glossy, nearly
     smooth; lower surface pale green, slightly pubescent and cobwebby;
     veins distinct; lobes usually three with terminal lobe obtuse;
     petiolar sinus medium to deep, narrow, sometimes closed and
     overlapping; basal sinus usually lacking; lateral sinus shallow,
     narrow; teeth shallow to medium, of average width. Flowers sterile,
     open in mid-season; stamens reflexed.

     [Illustration: MERRIMAC]

     Fruit ripens with or later than Concord, ships and keeps well.
     Clusters variable in size, intermediate in length, often broad,
     tapering to cylindrical, variable in compactness; peduncle short to
     medium, of average thickness; pedicel intermediate in length,
     slender, covered with numerous, small, inconspicuous warts; brush
     wine-colored. Berries large to medium, roundish, black, glossy,
     covered with abundant blue bloom, persistent, firm. Skin thick,
     tough, adheres slightly to the pulp, contains a small amount of
     wine-colored pigment, astringent. Flesh light green, translucent,
     juicy, moderately fine-grained, medium tender, stringy, with little
     or no aroma, good in quality. Seeds rather adherent, one to five,
     average four, somewhat large and broad, long to medium, frequently
     with enlarged neck, brownish; raphe sometimes shows as a narrow
     cord; chalaza of average size, plainly above center, distinct.


MILLS.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Horticulturist_, =30=:93. 1875. =2.= _Rural N. Y._, =47=:144,
     146. _fig._ 1888. =3.= _Can. Hort._, =11=:102, 103. _fig._ 1888.
     =4.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1888-9=:107. =5.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._,
     =14=:89. 1890. =6.= _Ib._, =28=:160. 1891. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =12=:621. 1893. =8.= _Rural N. Y._, =53=:6. 1894. =9.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:155. =10.= _Rural N. Y._, =54=:715, 779, 795.
     1895. =11.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1897=:19. =12.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =17=:533, 548, 556, 559. 1898. =13.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._,
     =169=:173. 1899. =14.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:46, 51. 1901.

Probably none of the commonly cultivated grapes varies more under
different cultural conditions than Mills. It is chiefly from this fact
that viticulturists are so diverse in their opinions of it, some
claiming that it is among our best grapes and others pronouncing it
almost worthless. Mills grown in the vineyards of this Station is one of
the half dozen best out of 270 varieties in its fruit characters. The
bunches and berries are large and well-formed, the berries being a
handsome black with bluish bloom and adhering so firmly to the stem that
the fruit may be left until April without shelling. The berries are firm
and solid, with the skin adherent to the pulp almost as in the
Viniferas, and with the same texture of flesh as in Black Hamburg. The
flesh, despite the solidity, is juicy and parts readily from the seeds.
Its flavor is rich, sweet, vinous, with a trace of muskiness. The grapes
are hardly surpassed in keeping quality and seldom if ever crack or
shatter. The season is a little earlier than Concord.

But when we have described its fruit characters, practically all that
can be is said in its favor. The vines are of only medium vigor, are not
hardy, are fruitful only under the most favorable conditions, and are
very subject to mildew. In New York neither wood nor roots ripen well in
the average season and the variety is a most difficult one for
nurserymen to handle. That it succeeds only on certain soils is known
but data are not at hand to determine what conditions of soil suit it
best. The soil on which the vines of this Station are growing is a
rather heavy, rich clay and Mills makes a very fair growth here. The
variety is of doubtful commercial value, unless it be for a special
market, but for the garden or the amateur viticulturist it is
undoubtedly one of the best if adapted to the soil and location. It is
possible that the commercial grower may be able to graft it to advantage
on some variety with better vine characters.

William H. Mills of Hamilton, Ontario, produced the Mills grape about
1870 from seed of Muscat Hamburg fertilized by Creveling. It was not
introduced to the public, however, until 1888, when it was offered for
sale by Ellwanger & Barry of Rochester, New York. Mills was placed on
the grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1897
but was dropped from the list two years later. The variety has been
widely tested but as yet has not become of commercial importance in any
of the grape regions of the country.

     Vine medium to above in vigor, not hardy, productive unless injured
     by the winter, somewhat subject to mildew. Canes long, of medium
     size, rather thick, light brown; nodes slightly enlarged and
     flattened, internodes medium to large; diaphragm rather thick; pith
     quite large; shoots slightly pubescent; tendrils intermittent, of
     average length, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds small to medium, short, somewhat slender, conical to
     pointed, open very late. Young leaves tinged with carmine slightly
     on under side and along margin of upper side, which is heavily
     coated with whitish pubescence. Leaves medium to large, thick;
     upper surface dark green, dull, medium to rugose; lower surface
     pale green, cobwebby; lobes three to five with terminus acute to
     acuminate; petiolar sinus intermediate in depth and width; basal
     and lateral sinuses quite deep and wide; teeth deep, of average
     width. Flowers nearly fertile, open in mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens somewhat later than Concord, an unusually good shipper
     and keeper. Clusters large to medium, long, slender to medium,
     cylindrical to slightly tapering, often single-shouldered but
     sometimes double-shouldered, compact; peduncle short, thick;
     pedicel intermediate in length, medium to slender, covered with
     numerous, small warts, much enlarged at point of attachment to
     fruit; brush moderately long, wine-colored. Berries large, oval to
     roundish, very dark red to jet-black when fully ripe, covered with
     abundant blue bloom, very persistent, firm. Skin thick and somewhat
     tough, strongly adherent to the pulp, not astringent. Flesh light
     green, translucent, juicy, not tough but meaty, with a rich,
     sprightly flavor, vinous, sweet, very good to best. Seeds separate
     easily from the pulp, one to three, average two, medium to large,
     variable in length and bluntness, brownish, frequently with
     enlarged neck; raphe obscure; chalaza small, above center,
     irregularly oval to pear-shaped, distinct.

[Illustration: MILLS]


MISSOURI RIESLING.[201]

(Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:33, 149. =2.= _Ill. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1883=:76. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:103, 132. =4.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1889=:24. =5.= _Gar. and For._, =3=:290, 599.
     1890. =6.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =14=:89. 1890. =7.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._,
     =28=:265. 1893. =8.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =13=:605. 1894. =9.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:5, 156. =10.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:533,
     548, 556, 1898. =11.= _Ala. Sta. Bul._, =110=:86. 1900.

     RIESLING (3). _Grein's No. 1_ (3, 9).

Unfortunately the Southern Riparia seedlings, Missouri Riesling, Elvira,
Noah, Grein Golden, and others, do not attain perfection in New York.
The vines are sufficiently hardy, vigorous, productive, and healthy, as
a rule, but the fruit is lacking in quality and not acceptable for table
use nor wholly desirable in wine-making. It is only in the long seasons
and under the sunny skies of the South that the varieties of this group
of Riparias are well grown. As one of these grapes, Missouri Riesling is
not adapted to New York; as it grows here it is not of high quality and
does not mature. The variety is illustrated and described not because of
intrinsic value in this region but as of interest as representing a
somewhat distinct and important group of native grapes. It is a
beautiful fruit when well grown and has many good qualities as a wine
grape, and should it prove adapted to some favored nook or corner of the
State, its culture would probably prove profitable.

Missouri Riesling was originated by Nicholas Grein about 1870, probably
from seed of Taylor. Grein planted seeds of the European Riesling and of
Taylor at the same time and he always supposed that none of the Taylor
seeds grew and that the Missouri Riesling was a seedling of the Riesling
of Germany. Since the Missouri Riesling is evidently of Riparia-Labrusca
lineage and shows no Vinifera whatever, it is to be presumed that
Grein's labels were confused. It was placed on the grape list of the
American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1889 and is still retained
there.

     Vine variable in vigor, usually hardy, medium to productive. Canes
     very long, numerous, thick, dark brown; nodes enlarged, not
     flattened; internodes long; diaphragm below average thickness;
     pith medium to above in size; shoots pubescent; tendrils
     continuous, long, trifid to bifid.

     Leaf-buds medium in size, short, thick, obtuse to conical, open in
     mid-season. Young leaves slightly tinged on under side only with
     faint brownish-carmine. Leaves large, thick to medium; upper
     surface dark green, glossy, nearly smooth; lower surface pale
     green, thinly pubescent; veins distinct; lobes usually five with
     terminal lobe acuminate; petiolar sinus deep, narrow to medium;
     basal sinus shallow and wide; lateral sinus deep, above average
     width; teeth deep to medium, wide. Flowers fertile to semi-fertile,
     open in mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit usually ripens later than Concord and a little before
     Catawba, does not keep nor ship well. Clusters variable in size,
     medium to short, of average width, sometimes cylindrical,
     frequently single-shouldered, variable in compactness; peduncle
     medium to long, slender; pedicel above average length, covered with
     few small warts; brush green with tinge of yellow. Berries
     intermediate in size, roundish to oval, pale or yellowish-green
     changing to light red or with tinge of pink when fully ripe, not
     glossy, covered with thin gray bloom, persistent, firm. Skin
     sprinkled with small brown dots, thin, tough, adheres to the pulp,
     contains no pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh pale green,
     translucent, moderately juicy, tender, fine-grained, lacking
     somewhat in aroma, sweet at skin to agreeably tart at center, mild,
     of fair quality. Seeds adherent, one to four, average two, with
     surface somewhat roughened, intermediate in size and breadth,
     medium to long, not blunt, dark brown; raphe obscure; chalaza of
     fair size, above center, ovate, very distinct.


MONROE.

(Labrusca, Bourquiniana?)

     =1.= _Gar. Mon._, =22=:176. 1880. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1881=:40, 43. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:122. =4.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =9=:327. 1890. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:156. =6.= _Va. Sta.
     Bul._, =94=:135. 1898. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:533, 546,
     547, 552. 1898. =8.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:173. 1899.

It is now about thirty years since Monroe was offered to the
grape-growers of this State, and as a New York seedling, yet it can now
scarcely be found under cultivation. It has failed because it is lacking
in quality and because its vine characters are not sufficiently good to
attract either the commercial or the amateur grape-grower.

[Illustration: MISSOURI RIESLING]

This variety was raised by Ellwanger & Barry of Rochester, New York,
from mixed seed of Delaware, Diana, Concord, and Rebecca, and was first
fruited in 1867. Patrick Barry at one time stated that it was a cross of
Delaware and Concord. This, while evidently a surmise, appears quite
probable. It was tested by the originators for many years and was
finally introduced in 1880 but was dropped some years ago from the list
of recommended sorts in Ellwanger & Barry's catalog.

     Vine vigorous to medium, hardy, variable in productiveness,
     somewhat susceptible to attacks of mildew and rot. Canes medium to
     long, often numerous, medium to slender, covered with considerable
     blue bloom; tendrils continuous, bifid. Leaves intermediate in size
     and color; lower surface pale green, thinly pubescent. Flowers
     fertile, open in mid-season; stamens upright. Fruit ripens soon
     after Hartford, keeps well. Clusters above medium to medium in size
     and length, often broad and cylindrical, rather blunt at ends,
     usually single-shouldered, the shoulder being attached to the bunch
     by a long stem, nearly compact, sometimes with a number of abortive
     fruits. Berries medium to above in size, roundish, black or
     purplish-black, covered with heavy blue bloom, persistent. Skin
     thick, tough, adheres considerably to the pulp, contains a large
     amount of purplish-red pigment, not astringent. Flesh pale green
     with a tinge of yellow, rather transparent, tender and almost
     melting, nearly sweet, lacks character, no more than fair in
     quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp, intermediate in
     length, size, and width.


MONTEFIORE.

(Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:44. =2.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1883=:44, 182. =3.= _Ib._, =1884=:216. =4.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._,
     =14=:89. 1890. =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:630. 1892. =6.=
     _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:256. 1893. =7.= _Col. Sta. Bul._, =29=:19.
     1894. =8.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:156. _fig._ =9.= Husmann,
     =1895=:36. =10.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:533, 548, 556. 1898.

     _Rommel's Taylor Seedling No. 14_ (8). _Taylor's Seedling No. 14_
     (1).

Montefiore, named in honor of the Jewish philanthropist, Moses
Montefiore, is one of Rommel's seedlings of Taylor. The variety has been
largely grown in Missouri and the Southwest as a claret wine grape but
is almost unknown in New York and the East. Montefiore is reported as
succeeding in the Lake District of Ohio and, with the exception that it
is somewhat uncertain in bearing and not always productive on the
grounds of this Station, it has grown well in this section of New York.
While Montefiore is essentially a wine grape, yet it is pleasing in
taste and texture of fruit and is far better in quality than many of the
coarser Labruscas so commonly cultivated. It keeps and ships well and
presents an attractive appearance as a table grape. Were it not that the
variety has been under cultivation for thirty years or more and
therefore probably tested and discarded in New York, we should recommend
it for extensive trial, especially as a red wine grape.

Jacob Rommel[202] of Morrison, Missouri, produced this variety from seed
of Taylor said to have been fertilized with Ives. It was exhibited by
Rommel at the American Pomological Society meeting in 1879, where it
attracted the attention of Isadore Bush, of Bush & Son & Meissner, who
named it Montefiore and introduced it the following year.

     Vine medium to vigorous, hardy, an uncertain bearer. Canes long, of
     average number, thick, dark brown with slight reddish tinge,
     surface covered with thin blue bloom; nodes enlarged, flattened;
     internodes long to medium; diaphragm thick; pith medium to above in
     size; shoots thinly pubescent; tendrils continuous, long, bifid.

     Leaf-buds of average size, short, thick, conical to obtuse, open in
     mid-season. Young leaves tinged on under side and along margin of
     upper side with light brownish-carmine. Leaves intermediate in
     size, thick to medium; upper surface light green, dull, smooth to
     medium; lower surface grayish-white, pubescent; veins well defined;
     lobes three when present with terminus acute to acuminate; petiolar
     sinus of average depth, medium to wide; basal sinus lacking;
     lateral sinus very shallow and narrow when present; teeth deep to
     medium, intermediate in width. Flowers self-sterile to imperfectly
     self-fertile, open in mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens about with Concord or later, keeps well. Clusters
     medium to small, rather short, of average width, tapering to
     cylindrical, frequently single-shouldered, the shoulder being
     connected to the bunch by a long stem, compact; peduncle medium to
     short, intermediate in size; pedicel short, slender, nearly smooth;
     brush of fair length, tinged with red. Berries medium to small,
     oval to roundish, often compressed, black, glossy, covered with
     abundant blue bloom, persistent, firm. Skin medium to thin, tough,
     adheres slightly to the pulp, with wine-colored pigment,
     astringent. Flesh medium green, translucent, juicy, fine-grained,
     tender and melting, vinous, sweet to agreeably tart, fair to good
     in quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp, one to five,
     average three, small, broad, faintly notched, short, plump,
     brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza intermediate in size, slightly
     above center to central, oval to nearly circular, somewhat obscure.
     Must 90 deg..

[Illustration: MONTEFIORE]

[Illustration: MOORE EARLY]


MOORE EARLY.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1871=:43. =2.= _Ib._, =1872=:94.
     =3.= _Ib._, =1873=:101. =4.= _Ib._, Pt. =2=:81, 82, 109. 1877. =5.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:32, 40, 41. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1881=:24. =7.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1886=:225. =8.= _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1887=:97. =9.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =9=:327. 1890.
     =10.= _Can. Hort._, =15=:95. 1892. _col. pl._ =11.= _Ia. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1893=:161. =12.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:158. _fig._ =13.=
     _Col. Sta. Bul._, =29=:19. 1894. =14.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol.
     =9=:184, 195. 1896. =15.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =15=:430, 431,
     432, 433. 1896. =16.= _Vt. Sta. Bul._, =62=:41. 1898. =17.= _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:533, 541, 543, 544, 545, 547, 552. 1898. =18.=
     _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:173. 1899. =19.= _Rural N. Y._, =66=:173.
     1907.

Moore Early is the standard grape of its season in New York. It cannot
be better described than as an early Concord. It comes in season from
two to three weeks earlier than Concord and the last fruits of it are
sent to market before those of the later grape are picked. The vines are
readily recognizable from those of Concord, differing chiefly in being
less productive and more precarious bearers. To grow the variety
satisfactorily the soil must be rich, well drained and loose, must be
frequently cultivated and the vines should be carefully pruned and cared
for in every way. The bunches of Moore Early are not as large as those
of Concord and are more inclined to looseness, and the berries sometimes
shell rather badly. The berries are larger and, as with Concord, crack
under unfavorable conditions. The flesh characters and the flavor are
essentially those of Concord, though the quality, representing all of
the characters which make a fruit pleasant to the palate, is not as high
as in the older variety; it is however much higher than that of Champion
and Hartford, its chief competitors in this State and varieties which it
should replace. Moore Early is by no means an ideal grape for its season
but until something better is introduced it will probably remain the
best early commercial grape for New York.

Captain John B. Moore of Concord, Massachusetts, is said to have
originated this variety from seed of Concord. In 1871 it was exhibited
before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society with fifty other
seedlings of the same parentage. It was awarded a first class
certificate of merit by this Society in 1877, and was introduced by the
originator the same year. In 1881 Moore Early was placed on the grape
list of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog where it still
remains.

     Vine medium to vigorous, hardy, not a heavy yielder. Canes medium
     to short, of average number, medium to below in thickness, rather
     dark reddish-brown, surface slightly roughened; nodes enlarged,
     flattened; internodes short to medium; diaphragm thinnish; pith
     intermediate in size; shoots pubescent; tendrils continuous, of
     fair length, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds small and slender, short, pointed to conical, open medium
     early. Young leaves tinged on lower side and along margin of upper
     side with rose-carmine. Leaves large to medium, thick; upper
     surface medium dark green, dull, of average smoothness; lower
     surface tinged with bronze, heavily pubescent; veins distinct; leaf
     usually not lobed, with terminus acute; petiolar sinus of average
     depth, wide to medium; basal sinus lacking; lateral sinus a notch
     when present; teeth shallow, narrow to medium. Flowers fertile,
     open in mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens from two to three weeks earlier than Concord, does not
     keep well. Clusters intermediate in size, length, and breadth,
     irregularly cylindrical to tapering, sometimes single-shouldered,
     inclined to looseness; peduncle short to medium, thick; pedicel
     short, thick, nearly smooth; brush short, pale green. Berries large
     to above medium, roundish, dark purplish-black to black, covered
     with abundant blue bloom, not very persistent, nearly firm. Skin
     intermediate in thickness, tender, adherent to the pulp, contains
     dark purplish-red pigment, not astringent. Flesh greenish,
     translucent, juicy, fine-grained and tough, with slight foxiness,
     sweet next the skin but somewhat acid at center, fair to good in
     quality. Seeds adherent, one to four, average two and three, large,
     often irregular in shape, broad and plump, blunt, brown with yellow
     tinge at tips; raphe buried in a small and indistinct groove;
     chalaza of average size, obscure, often showing as a faint,
     irregular depression.


MOYER.

(Labrusca, Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Columbus Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1887=:218. =2.= _Ib._,
     =1887=:218. =3.= _Can. Hort._, =11=:265. 1888. _col. pl._ =4.= _W.
     N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =35=:176. 1890. =5.= _Ib._, =36=:42. 1891.
     =6.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:261. 1893. =7.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:159. =8.= _Can. Hort._, =22=:386. 1899. _fig._ =9.= _Mo.
     Sta. Bul._, =46=:40, 42. 1899. =10.= _Ont. Fr. Exp. Stas. Rpt._,
     =6=:20. 1899. _fig._ =11.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1899=:29.

     JORDAN (2). _Jordan_ (5, 7). MOYER'S EARLY RED (1).

[Illustration: MOYER]

Moyer at its best is almost a counterpart of its parent Delaware. It has
all of the faults of Delaware and some added ones. Were it not for the
fact that the variety is from one to two weeks earlier than its parent,
and somewhat hardier, hence better adapted for colder regions, it could
not have received the recognition given it by viticulturists. As
compared with Delaware, it is hardly as vigorous and is less productive.
It is reputed to be more free from rot and mildew, the latter
especially. The bunches are much like those of Delaware but with the
fault of setting fruit imperfectly oftentimes even when
cross-pollination is insured. The berries are a little larger but of
much the same color and of like flavor, rich, sweet, and with pure
vinousness without a trace of foxiness but withal not of so high quality
as Delaware. The fruit keeps well, ships well, and does not crack nor
shell in New York. Moyer is well established in Canada, where it
originated, and is highly thought of, proving perfectly hardy wherever
the Concord is grown and possibly standing even more cold. Its place is
as an early Delaware for northern regions.

W. H. Read of Port Dalhousie, Lincoln County, Ontario, raised the
original vine of Moyer about 1880, from seed of Delaware fertilized by
Miller's Burgundy. It was named after Allan Moyer of St. Catharines,
Ontario, who introduced the variety in 1888. Moyer was placed on the
grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1899.

     Vine vigorous to medium, hardy, healthy, not productive. Canes
     intermediate in length, numerous, medium to slender, rather dull
     dark reddish-brown; nodes slightly enlarged, flattened; internodes
     short to medium; diaphragm thin; pith medium to below in size;
     shoots pubescent; tendrils continuous, medium to rather long, bifid
     to trifid.

     Leaf-buds of about average size and thickness, short, conical to
     rather obtuse, open very late. Young leaves tinged on under side
     and along margin of upper side with rose-carmine. Leaves small to
     medium, of average thickness; upper surface dark green, dull and
     smooth; lower surface very pale green or with faint blue tinge,
     heavily pubescent; lobes two to five with terminus acute; petiolar
     sinus shallow to medium, not narrow; basal sinus usually lacking,
     but shallow when present; lateral sinus shallow, narrow; teeth very
     shallow, medium to narrow. Flowers sterile, open early; stamens
     reflexed.

     Fruit ripens from one to two weeks earlier than Delaware, keeps
     well but loses its color if kept too long. Clusters medium to
     small, short and slender, irregularly tapering, sometimes
     single-shouldered, medium in compactness; peduncle intermediate in
     length, somewhat slender; pedicel inclined to short, of average
     thickness, covered with very small warts; brush yellowish-green.
     Berries medium to small, oblate, dark red covered with dark lilac
     to faint blue bloom, persistent, rather firm. Skin intermediate in
     thickness, not tender, does not adhere to the pulp, astringent.
     Flesh light green, translucent, juicy, rather tender, fine-grained,
     somewhat vinous, good to very good. Seeds separate easily from the
     pulp, one to four, average two or three, intermediate in size,
     broad, short, very blunt, brown with yellow tinge at tips; raphe
     obscure; chalaza of fair size, slightly above center, irregularly
     circular, obscure.


MUSCAT HAMBURG.

(Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Gar. Chron._, =1857=:645. =2.= _Horticulturist_, =13=:167.
     1858. =3.= _Ib._, =14=:95. 1859. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1862=:92. =5.= _Gar. Mon._, =9=:285. 1867.

As one of the parents of a number of valuable hybrids cultivated in
American vineyards, Muscat Hamburg is illustrated and described in _The
Grapes of New York_. It is described below in detail that grape-breeders
may detect any of its characters transmitted to its offspring. The
grapes and vines described here were grown under glass, as the variety
cannot be grown out of doors in eastern America.

Muscat Hamburg is a forcing grape only and is apparently unknown in the
grape-growing districts of Europe. It is said to grow better grafted on
Black Hamburg than on its own roots.

Seward Snow of Wrest Park, Bedfordshire, England, originated Muscat
Hamburg more than a half century ago from seed of Black Hamburg
fertilized by White Muscat of Alexandria. It was placed on the grape
list of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog for 1862 as an
exotic recommended for growing under glass.

     Vine very vigorous, tender, productive. Canes long, numerous,
     slender to medium, light brown, slightly darker at nodes which are
     enlarged and somewhat flattened; internodes short to medium;
     diaphragm thick; pith nearly large; shoots glabrous; tendrils
     inclined to dehisce early, intermittent or frequently with only one
     tendril present with vacancy on either side, long, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds large, long to medium, inclined to thick. Leaves medium
     to large, intermediate in thickness; upper surface light green,
     dull, somewhat smooth; lower surface slightly lighter green than
     upper surface, faintly pubescent, densely hairy; lobes usually five
     with terminus acute to acuminate; petiolar sinus of average depth,
     medium to narrow, rarely closed or overlapping; basal sinus
     intermediate in depth; lateral sinus deep; teeth very irregular in
     depth and width, some teeth approaching a tendency to lobing.

     [Illustration: MUSCAT HAMBURG (Reduced Size)]

     Fruit ripens the latter part of October under glass, keeps
     unusually well. Clusters very large to medium, long, broad,
     tapering, frequently single-shouldered but sometimes
     double-shouldered, rather loose; peduncle intermediate in length,
     medium to rather thick; pedicel of average length and thickness,
     very much enlarged at point of attachment to fruit. Berries large
     to below medium, oval, dark red, rather dull, covered with lilac
     bloom, very persistent, of average firmness. Skin medium to thick,
     adheres strongly to the pulp, contains no pigment, not astringent.
     Flesh pale green, translucent, very juicy, fine-grained, tender,
     vinous, sweet, very good to best in quality. Seeds separate easily
     from the pulp, one to four, average two, large to medium, long and
     broad, sharply pointed, brownish; raphe hidden in a shallow, broad
     groove; chalaza intermediate in size, decidedly above center,
     pear-shaped, distinct.


NAOMI.

(Vinifera, Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Gar. Mon._, =22=:176. 1880. =2.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1882-3=:46. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:124. _fig._ =4.= _Can.
     Hort._, =11=:287. 1888. =5.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =14=:90. 1890. =6.=
     _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1151, 1160. 1898.

Naomi is one of Ricketts' seedlings and, according to the originator,
one of the finest of all his score or more of worthy grapes. But
viticulturists have never agreed with the producer of Naomi in his
estimate of it and the variety is now scarcely known. So far as New York
is concerned, Naomi has been discarded because it ripens too late for
this latitude and is very subject to mildew. Moreover, grapes of its
color are not as highly esteemed as red or black grapes and the demand
for green grapes does not sustain the varieties we have of this color.

This variety was originated by J. H. Ricketts of Newburgh, New York,
from seed of Clinton fertilized with Muscat Hamburg. It was first
exhibited before the American Pomological Society in 1879. It has not
been widely disseminated.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, variable in productiveness. Canes very long
     to medium, numerous, not uniform in size, medium dark brown
     deepening in color at the nodes; tendrils intermittent, bifid.
     Leaves large to below medium, thin, frequently inclined to be torn
     by heavy winds, medium green; lower surface pale green, slightly
     pubescent. Stamens upright. Fruit ripens late. Clusters large to
     above medium, above average in length, broad to medium,
     single-shouldered to sometimes double-shouldered, compact. Berries
     intermediate in size, roundish to oval, light green, occasionally
     with reddish-yellow tinge, glossy, covered with thin gray bloom,
     persistent. Skin moderately thick, tough, not astringent. Flesh
     greenish, juicy, slightly tough and solid, aromatic, sweet at skin
     to tart at center, good in quality when fully ripened. Seeds medium
     to below in size, elongated, sharp-pointed.


NECTAR.

(Labrusca, Bourquiniana, Vinifera?)

=1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:92. =2.= _Ib._, =1885=:108. =3.= _Ohio
Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1888-9=:107. =4.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Adv. Rpt._,
=1890=:22. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:160. =6.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
=1894-5=:12. =7.= _Del. Sta. An. Rpt._, =7=:134, 136. 1895. =8.=
_Husmann_, =1895=:94. =9.= _Mass. Hatch Sta. Bul._, =37=:11, 14. 1896.
=10.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:533, 548, 556, 559. 1898. =11.= _Am.
Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1899=:29. =12.= _Miss. Sta. Bul._, =56=:16. 1899.
=13.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:242. 1902. =14.= _Rural N. Y._, =61=:685,
_fig._, 690. 1902.

BLACK DELAWARE (1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 9).

There are either two varieties under the supposedly synonymous names,
Nectar and Black Delaware, or else this variety varies greatly in
different localities. Reports from different sources give the vigor as
from weak to vigorous, the hardiness from hardy to tender, the season
from earlier than Moore Early to later than Concord, the size of berry
from small to large, the productiveness from unproductive to productive
to a fault.

The Nectar vines at this Station were secured from Caywood, the
originator, in 1888, and from the T. S. Hubbard Company, in 1883. Vines
from both sources are vigorous, small-leaved, bearing medium-sized black
berries of good but not high quality. These vines are nearly worthless
on account of their susceptibility to mildew. The resemblance to
Delaware is not apparent.

We have received from Massachusetts, under the name Black Delaware, and
there is described in several publications, a grape which is strikingly
like Delaware except that the color is black. It is a grape of high
quality, and the vine is described as being resistant to mildew. This
variety may be worth something. The Nectar on the Station grounds is
not. Possibly Nectar and Rommel's Black Delaware have been confused.

The variety here described was originated by Caywood. It is said to be
from seed of Concord fertilized by Delaware. Nectar first became known
to the public about 1880 under the name Black Delaware, which was
afterward changed by Caywood to Nectar. It was placed on the grape list
of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1899, as a
recommended variety.

[Illustration: NECTAR]

     Vine medium to vigorous, not always hardy, usually produces light
     crops, very susceptible to attacks of mildew. Canes long, of
     average number, thick, surface roughened, dark reddish-brown;
     nodes enlarged, flattened; internodes variable in length, of medium
     thickness; pith intermediate in size; shoots pubescent; tendrils
     intermittent to continuous, long, trifid.

     Leaf-buds medium to above in size, short and thick, open in
     mid-season. Young leaves faintly tinged on under side and along
     margin of upper side with rose-carmine. Leaves small to medium,
     thick; upper surface dark green, rugose, often heavily wrinkled;
     lower surface dull whitish or light gray, strongly pubescent; veins
     distinct; lobes three to five with terminus obtuse to acute;
     petiolar sinus medium in depth, wide; basal sinus shallow and open
     when present; lateral sinus medium to deep, often wide; teeth very
     shallow, medium to narrow. Flowers partly self-fertile, open
     moderately late; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens about with Concord, does not keep long in good
     condition. Clusters intermediate in size, length, and thickness,
     irregularly cylindrical to tapering, often single-shouldered but
     sometimes double-shouldered, medium to compact; peduncle variable
     in length, slender to medium; pedicel medium to short, slender,
     smooth; brush yellowish-green. Berries intermediate in size,
     roundish, dark purplish-black, dull, covered with heavy blue bloom,
     not very persistent, soft. Skin of average thickness, medium to
     somewhat thin, adheres considerably to the pulp, with wine-colored
     pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh pale yellowish-green,
     translucent, juicy, tough, fine-grained, vinous, sweet next the
     skin but quite acid at the center, good to very good in quality.
     Seeds rather adherent, one to four, usually three, intermediate in
     size, medium to long, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza of average
     size, much depressed, strongly above center, circular, obscure.


NIAGARA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1879=:161. =2.= _Mich. Pom. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1879=:194, 323. _fig._ =3.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1880=:240, 254. =4.= _N. J. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:9. =5.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:46. =6.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:124. =7.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1885=:26. =8.= _Minn. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1886=:134, 136. =9.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1889=:370. =10.=
     _Rural N. Y._, =48=:18, 19. 1889. _figs._ =11.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._,
     =14=:90. 1890. =12.= _Minn. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1891=:220. =13.=
     _Rural N. Y._, =50=:66, 230. 1891. =14.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._,
     =28=:265. 1893. =15.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:161. =16.= _N. Y. Sta.
     An. Rpt._, =15=:430, 431, 432, 433. 1896. =17.= _Ib._, =17=:533,
     547, 552. 1898. =18.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:40, 44, 45. 1899. =19.=
     _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:173. 1899. =20.= _Ala. Sta. Bul._,
     =110=:70, 87. 1900. =21.= _N. C. Sta. Bul._, =187=:60. 1903. =22.=
     _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1903=:30.

Niagara is the leading American green grape, holding the rank among
grapes of this color that Concord does among the black varieties. It is,
however, a less valuable grape than Concord, and all in all, it is
doubtful if it should be ranked much if any higher than several others
of the green grapes with which it must compete. Much of the popularity
of Niagara is due to the novel way in which the variety was sold to the
public. For many years after its origin, the entire stock of this grape
was owned by the Niagara Grape Company, who retained all of the
propagating wood, and in many instances well guarded interests in the
vineyards of this variety. The advantages gained by this method of
distribution enabled the promoters of the variety to advertise it to an
extent not equaled in the dissemination of any other grape. As is likely
to be the case with new fruits, Niagara was overpraised by the company
selling it and for a time by the horticultural press and viticulturists
as well. When vineyards of the variety came into bearing, a reaction set
in, and Niagara lost in popularity; many who had planted it condemned it
and oftentimes unjustly. For years the reports for and against it were
more or less colored by personalities and it has not been until a
comparatively recent day that a just estimate of the variety could be
obtained from grape-growers.

Since one of the parents of Niagara is Concord, and since the two grapes
are largely grown in the same regions and for the same general markets,
and chiefly as table grapes, we may best arrive at the status of Niagara
by comparing it with Concord.

In vigor and productiveness, where the two grapes are upon equal footing
as to adaptability, Niagara and Concord rank the same. In these respects
both are standards scarcely surpassed among our cultivated native
grapes. In hardiness of root and vine Niagara falls somewhat short of
Concord; practically all grape-growers who have tested the two varieties
in cold climates agree as to the greater hardiness of Concord. In some
of the grape regions of New York Niagara is not grown profitably because
of its susceptibility to cold. The variety cannot be relied upon without
winter protection where the thermometer falls much below zero. Like
Concord the Niagara has much of the foxiness of the wild Labrusca,
distasteful to many palates. On the other hand there are many Americans
who really like the foxy taste and aroma and count it an asset in these
varieties. The foxiness of Niagara is most marked just after the fruit
is picked, and it is usually better flavored after having stood for a
few days. The flavor is not at its best unless the grapes be fully ripe.
Both bunches and berries of Niagara are larger than those of Concord and
are better formed, making a handsomer fruit if the colors are liked
equally well. The skin of Niagara does not crack as easily as that of
Concord. The fruit shells as badly and does not keep much, if any,
longer. Both vines and fruits of Niagara are more susceptible to fungal
diseases than are those of Concord and especially to black-rot, which
proves a veritable scourge with this variety in unfavorable seasons and
localities.

[Illustration: NIAGARA]

It is likely that Niagara will continue for some time to be the leading
green grape for the market. As long as grape consumers demand a showy
grape to be had at a low price, and without much regard as to quality,
if the grape be passably good, Niagara will be popular. For those who
rank quality first, with appearance and reasonable cost as secondary
consideration, there are other green grapes superior.

Niagara was produced by C. L. Hoag and B. W. Clark of Lockport, Niagara
County, New York. The originators state that the variety was grown from
seed of Concord fertilized by Cassady, planted in 1868, and that it
fruited for the first time in 1872. It was introduced about 1882 by the
Niagara Grape Company. In 1885 it was placed on the grape list of the
fruit catalog of the American Pomological Society. Niagara has attained
its greatest popularity and is most grown in New York and in the North.
In the grape regions of the South and Southwest, it is too susceptible
to fungi especially the mildews and black-rot. It is said that the
quality of the variety, however, is improved as grown to the southward
and that where comparatively free from diseases, or when they are
controlled by spraying, it becomes a profitable early market grape. In
Ohio, Niagara is grown more or less for wine. This variety is a typical
white seedling of Concord showing little trace of any other variety.

     Vine vigorous to medium, less hardy than Concord, productive to
     very productive, somewhat subject to mildew and black-rot in
     unfavorable locations. Canes medium to long, of average number,
     thick, dark reddish-brown deepening in color at the nodes which are
     strongly enlarged and slightly flattened; internodes medium to
     long, thick; pith large to medium; shoots pubescent; tendrils
     continuous, long, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds medium in size and thickness, short, slightly compressed,
     conical to pointed, open in mid-season. Young leaves lightly tinged
     on under side and along margin of upper side with rose-carmine.
     Leaves medium to large, thick; upper surface glossy, medium dark
     green, rather smooth; lower surface pale green, pubescent; veins
     distinct; lobes three to five with terminus acute to acuminate;
     petiolar sinus intermediate in depth and width; basal sinus
     shallow, wide, often toothed; lateral sinus of mean depth, wide,
     frequently toothed; teeth shallow, variable in width. Flowers
     fertile, open in mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens about with Concord, keeps fairly well. Clusters large
     to medium, long to medium, somewhat broad, tapering to often
     cylindrical, frequently single-shouldered, moderately compact;
     peduncle short to medium, thick; pedicel intermediate in length,
     thick, covered with few, small, inconspicuous warts; brush pale
     green, medium to long. Berries above medium to large, slightly
     oval, light green changing to a pale yellowish-green tinge as the
     ripening season advances, covered with thin gray bloom, persistent,
     firm. Skin thin, tender, adheres somewhat to the pulp, contains no
     pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh light green, translucent,
     juicy, fine-grained, moderately tender, foxy, sweet next the skin
     to agreeably tart at center, as good or better than Concord in
     quality. Seeds separate rather easily from the pulp, one to six,
     average three, intermediate in size, length and breadth, deeply
     notched, brownish; raphe buried in a deep groove; chalaza of fair
     size, above center, circular to oval, moderately distinct.


NOAH.

(Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Gar. Mon._, =22=:176. 1880. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1881=:24. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:58. =4.= _Mo. Hort.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:40, 185. =5.= _Ib._, =1884=:217. =6.= _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:631. 1892. =7.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:265.
     1893. =8.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:162. _fig._ =9.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =17=:548, 556, 559. 1898. =10.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1151,
     1160. 1898. =11.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:40, 43, 44, 45. 1899. =12.=
     _Traite gen. de vit._, =5=:171. 1903.

For some years after its introduction in 1876, Noah was quite popular on
account of its vigor, supposed health, productiveness, and the high
alcoholic content of its wine. It is now, however, but little grown
outside of Missouri where it is still used somewhat in wine-making. In
France Noah was largely grown for a time both as a stock for grafting
and as a direct producer for the making of wine and brandy. Probably no
other American grape has caused more general discussion, or received
more praise and more condemnation in France, with the result that it is
now but little grown. The name was given the variety on account of the
alcoholic strength of its wine, the originator holding that the
lamentable accident which befell the patriarch Noah could easily have
happened had he partaken of the wine of this grape.

[Illustration: NOAH]

Noah is so like Elvira that the two are often confused. There are,
however, very marked differences in the vine characters; and the
clusters of Elvira are smaller, the berries more foxy in taste and the
skins more tender and crack much more than do those of Noah. The large,
dark, glossy green leaves make the vines of this variety very handsome
and a vineyard of them is a pleasing sight. As with Elvira, Othello,
Rommel, and other varieties of this group of grapes, Noah is of little
value in New York. These grapes are fit only for wine but the
wine-makers in this State seem not to have found them desirable for
their wants. Noah shatters badly and does not keep nor ship at all well,
and buyers therefore do not care for it.

Noah was originated by Otto Wasserzieher of Nauvoo, Illinois, from seed
of Taylor planted in 1869, and fruited for the first time in 1873. It
was exhibited before the American Pomological Society in 1879. It was
placed on the grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit
catalog in 1881. Noah shows, like its parent, characters of both Riparia
and Labrusca. The vine characters are markedly those of Riparia and,
among others of these, the healthiness of the foliage is an asset of the
variety; the Labrusca shows more plainly in the fruit of Noah than in
that of Taylor, the berries being larger and having more of the foxiness
than the last named variety.

     Vine medium to sometimes vigorous, not hardy in severe winters,
     productive, susceptible to attacks of mildew. Canes long, of
     average number, thick to medium, dark brown, surface roughened;
     nodes enlarged, flattened; internodes intermediate in length;
     diaphragm of mean thickness; pith medium in size; shoots slightly
     pubescent; tendrils usually continuous, of average length, bifid to
     trifid.

     Leaf-buds medium to small, very short, thick to medium, somewhat
     compressed, obtuse, open very late. Young leaves faintly tinged on
     under side and along margin of upper side with rose-carmine. Leaves
     large to medium, of average thickness; upper surface dark green,
     glossy, smooth; lower surface pale green, thinly pubescent; veins
     distinct; leaf usually not lobed, with terminus acuminate; petiolar
     sinus deep to medium, rather wide; basal sinus lacking; lateral
     sinus very shallow when present; teeth somewhat shallow, moderately
     wide. Flowers sterile to semi-fertile, open early; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens with Concord or later, does not ship nor keep well.
     Clusters variable in size and length, above average breadth,
     cylindrical to nearly tapering, usually single-shouldered, medium
     to compact; peduncle intermediate in length, thick; pedicel short
     to medium, covered with few, small warts; brush medium to short,
     brownish. Berries small, usually roundish, light green tinged with
     yellow, somewhat dull, covered with thin gray bloom, not
     persistent, nearly firm. Skin variable in thickness and tenderness,
     adheres to the pulp, contains no pigment, not astringent. Flesh
     yellowish-green, translucent, juicy, tough, fine-grained, vinous,
     tart at skin to acid at center, sprightly, good in quality. Seeds
     separate with difficulty from the pulp, one to four, average two or
     three, intermediate in size and breadth, rather dark brown; raphe
     buried in a shallow groove; chalaza of average size, slightly above
     center, oval, obscure. Must 100 deg..


NORFOLK.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1872=:95. =2.= _Ib._, Pt. =2=:120.
     1875. =3.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =28=:164. 1891. =4.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._,
     =28=:261. 1893. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:163, 186. =6.= _Del. Sta.
     An. Rpt._, =7=:135, 139. 1895. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:533, 548. 1898. =8.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:138. 1898. =9.=
     _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:40, 42, 44, 46, 51. 1899.

     NORFOLK MUSCAT (1, 2).

Norfolk was disseminated as an early Catawba and it resembles that
variety very much in appearance and somewhat in flavor, but ripens much
earlier. Unlike the Catawba too, the fruit does not keep well, nor is
the flavor quite up to the high quality of the older variety, more
nearly resembling, as it grows here, that of Agawam. It is not, however,
the fruit characters so much as those of the vine that have kept Norfolk
from becoming popular. It falls short in several vine characters,
chiefly in productiveness, and after having been known for many years is
now scarcely cultivated.

N. B. White[203] of Norwood, Massachusetts, originated this variety some
time in the sixties from seed of a native Labrusca fertilized with Black
Hamburg.

     Vine medium to vigorous, usually hardy, variable in productiveness.
     Canes long, numerous, thick; tendrils usually intermittent, bifid
     to trifid. Leaves large to medium, moderately light green, thick;
     lower surface grayish-white with tinge of bronze, pubescent.
     Flowers nearly fertile, open early; stamens upright. Fruit ripens
     earlier than Concord, does not keep very well. Clusters medium to
     small, often broad, tapering, usually with a long single shoulder,
     loose. Berries large to medium, oval to roundish, dark
     purplish-red somewhat resembling Catawba, covered with a fair
     amount of dark lilac or faint blue bloom, shatter, rather soft.
     Skin thin, inclined to tender, astringent. Flesh somewhat tough,
     stringy, rather coarse, vinous, sweet at skin to acid at center,
     fair in quality. Seeds adhere to the pulp, numerous, quite large,
     long to medium, distinctly notched.


NORTHERN MUSCADINE.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Horticulturist_, =9=:518. 1854. =2.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._,
     =1854=:315. =3.= _Mag. Hort._, =22=:25. 1856. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1856=:166. =5.= _Ib._, =1862=:143. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Cat._, =1862=:90. =7.= Phin, =1862=:259. =8.= _Minn. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1877=:59. =9.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:126. =10.= _N. Y. Sta.
     An. Rpt._, =17=:533, 548, 556. 1898. =11.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._,
     =48=:1151, 1160. 1898. =12.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:40, 42, 44, 46.
     1899.

     EARLY NORTHERN MUSCADINE (2, 7).

To those who profess to like a foxy grape, the Northern Muscadine should
be the grape _par excellence_. Many of the differences in opinion to be
found in grape literature regarding the quality of grapes have hinged
upon whether foxiness in taste and aroma is liked or not. Thus some
horticulturists put Northern Muscadine, both for the table and for wine,
well toward the head of the list of American grapes, while others
condemn it as unfit to eat. The fact that this variety, with Lucile,
Lutie, and others with the foxy taste strongly marked, has not become
popular, in spite of particularly good vine characters, is presumptive
evidence that the American public do not want such grapes. In appearance
of fruit Northern Muscadine is much like Lutie, and much like it in
quality, the two being distinguished from most other grapes by an
unmistakable odor. A serious defect of the fruit is that the berries
shatter badly as soon as the grape reaches maturity. Taken as a whole,
the vine characters of this variety are very good and it offers
possibilities for the grape-breeder because of them. It cannot be
recommended for either the vineyard or the garden.

This variety originated at New Lebanon, Columbia County, New York. It
was first brought to notice by D. J. Hawkins and Philemon Stewart of the
United Society of Shakers at that place about 1852. It was placed on the
grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1862 and
dropped in 1871. It is a typical red Labrusca in all of its characters.

     Vine variable in vigor and productiveness, healthy, not always
     hardy. Canes intermediate in length and number, medium to slender,
     dark brown, sometimes with a a slight red tinge, heavily pubescent;
     tendrils continuous, bifid, dehisce early. Leaves medium to very
     large and of distinct Labrusca type, inclined to roundish, thick;
     upper surface of medium greenness, dull, medium to rugose; lower
     surface dark bronze, heavily pubescent; veins well defined. Flowers
     fertile to sterile, open in mid-season or earlier; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens about with Worden, does not keep well. Clusters medium
     to small, short, of average width, frequently oval but sometimes
     roundish, occasionally single-shouldered, medium to compact.
     Berries medium to large, roundish to oval, dark amber to dull
     brownish-red, covered with thin gray bloom, drop badly from
     pedicel. Skin variable in thickness, medium to tough, adheres
     considerably to the pulp, contains little or no pigment, slightly
     astringent. Flesh very pale green, juicy, fine-grained, tender and
     soft, unusually foxy, sweet, poor in quality. Seeds separate easily
     from the pulp, often numerous, large, broad, faintly notched, long,
     not blunt, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza of average size,
     slightly above center, variable in shape, often showing as an
     obscure depression.


NORTON.

(Aestivalis, Labrusca.)

     =1.= Prince, =1830=:186. =2.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1845=:939.
     =3.= _Horticulturist_, =12=:461. 1857. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1858=:68. =5.= _Ib._, =1860=:88. =6.= _Horticulturist_, =16=:16,
     286. 1861. =7.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1865=:197. =8.=
     _Horticulturist_, =20=:39. 1865. =9.= Husmann, =1866=:19, 48, 85,
     87, _fig._, 98. =10.= _Horticulturist_, =22=:355. 1867. =11.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1867=:44. =12.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1867=:111.
     =13.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:5, 74, 98, 122, 138, 150, 212, 296. 1869.
     =14.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:126. =15.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1885=:100. =16.= _Ib._, =1889=:109. =17.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1891=:131. =18.= _Am. Gard._, =20=:688. 1899. =19.= _Mo. Sta.
     Bul._, =46=:40, 43, 45, 51, 54. 1899. =20.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =18=:397. 1899. =21.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1905=:59.

     _Norton's Seedling_ (9). NORTON'S VIRGINIA (3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
     11, 12, 13, 15, 21). _Norton's Virginia_ (14, 18). NORTON'S
     VIRGINIA SEEDLING (1, 2, 4). _Virginia Seedling_ (9, 13).

Norton is the leading wine grape in eastern America, and, if we except
Cynthiana, which can hardly be told from it, the wine made from it is
the best of its class made in the regions in which the variety will
grow. The fruit is of small value for any other purpose than wine.
Norton is fairly hardy but requires a long warm season to reach
maturity. While it is said that it may be grown wherever Catawba
thrives, this has not proved to be the case in New York; Norton in this
State is far more precarious than Catawba in maturity, so much so that
it is now scarcely grown even in the most favored parts of New York. It
has great adaptability to soils and thrives in rich alluvials or clays,
gravels or sands, the only requisite seemingly being a fair amount of
fertility and soil warmth. The vines are robust, very productive,
especially on fertile soils, as free, or more so, from fungal diseases
than any others of our native grapes, and very resistant to phylloxera.

[Illustration: NORTON]

The bunches of Norton are of medium size, not averaging nearly as large
as the one shown in the illustration, and the berries are small; the
fruit is not at all attractive in appearance. The grapes are pleasant
eating when fully ripe, rich and spicy, and pure-flavored but tart if
not quite ripe; but still are in no sense table grapes. The fruit keeps
well. The cluster usually ripens evenly and the berries neither shatter
nor crack. The variety is difficult to propagate from cuttings and to
transplant, and the vines do not bear grafts readily.

Norton has been used to quite an extent in breeding work and the blood
may be found in a number of desirable grapes but it is not a prolific
parent of worthy grapes as has been the case with so many of its
contemporary varieties. Like Concord, Norton gives, in experimental
work, many white seedlings.

The origin of Norton is rather uncertain. In 1830 Prince writes that he
received the grape from Dr. D. N. Norton, one of the pioneer
grape-growers of Richmond, Virginia, who had originated it from the seed
of Bland with Miller's Burgundy growing nearby. This parentage, it
appeared later, was undoubtedly an error as the Norton shows none of the
characters of either Bland or Miller's Burgundy. Prince's description
leaves little doubt but that his Norton was the Norton of to-day. In
1861 there was an article published in the _Horticulturist_[204] by a
Mr. Lemosy saying that the original Norton vine had been discovered in
1835 by his father, Dr. F. A. Lemosy of Richmond, Virginia, on an island
in the James River and that Dr. Norton secured the variety from this
source. Since Norton had sent this variety to Prince prior to 1830, this
story is evidently wrong as to dates and is suspicious as to facts. It
is probable that the true history of the variety will never be known.
Many grapes of the Norton class have been found at the South, a fact
which has led to much confusion as to the origin of varieties as well as
in the varieties themselves. Grapes of the Norton type were not looked
upon with favor by the early viticulturists and it was not until some
years after its introduction that the variety was widely planted--and
then in Missouri and not in the region of its origin. The Norton was
placed on the grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit
catalog in 1867, and is yet retained.

This variety has been usually classed as Aestivalis, which is
approximately correct although most viticulturists agree that there is a
strain of Labrusca present as indicated by the occasional continuity of
tendrils. Millardet, of France, believes that the variety may contain a
strain of Cinerea as well. But in fruit at least, Norton is essentially
a variety of Aestivalis.

     Vine very vigorous, healthy, usually hardy but sometimes
     half-hardy, an uncertain bearer at this Station but producing heavy
     crops in more southern localities. Canes long, of average number,
     thick to medium, dark brown to reddish-brown, surface covered with
     considerable blue bloom; nodes much enlarged; internodes medium to
     long; diaphragm thick; pith large to medium; shoots pubescent;
     tendrils intermittent, occasionally continuous, long, bifid to
     sometimes trifid.

     Leaf-buds above average size and thickness, short to medium, often
     compressed, obtuse to conical, open late. Young leaves considerably
     tinged on upper and under sides with bright carmine. Leaves medium
     to large, irregularly roundish, of average thickness; upper surface
     green, dull, rugose on older leaves; lower surface pale green,
     slightly pubescent; veins indistinct; leaf usually not lobed with
     terminus acute to sometimes obtuse; petiolar sinus deep to medium,
     narrow, sometimes closed and overlapping; basal sinus usually
     absent; lateral sinus shallow to a mere notch when present; teeth
     variable in depth and width. Flowers self-fertile, open late;
     stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens too late for this locality, keeps well when properly
     matured. Clusters medium to small, inclined to short, moderately
     broad, tapering, usually single-shouldered, medium to compact;
     peduncle short to medium, thick, sometimes flattened; pedicel
     intermediate in length, slender, covered with few warts; brush
     dull, wine-colored. Berries medium to small, roundish to oblate,
     black, somewhat glossy, covered with heavy blue bloom, persistent,
     soft. Skin thin, of average toughness, does not adhere to the pulp,
     contains a large amount of dark red pigment, no astringency. Flesh
     greenish, translucent, juicy, tender, spicy, tart and somewhat
     astringent. Seeds separate fairly easily from the pulp, two to six,
     average three, numerous, medium to small, intermediate in breadth
     and length, not notched, brownish; raphe distinct; chalaza small,
     above center, circular, obscure. Must 105 deg.-110 deg..


NORWOOD.

(Vinifera, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1880=:231. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1881=:43. =3.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:256. 1893. =4.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:164. =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =13=:605.
     1894. =6.= _Col. Sta. Bul._, =29=:19. 1894. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =17=:533, 545, 546, 548, 552. 1898. =8.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._,
     =110=:242. 1902.

Norwood is a Labrusca-Vinifera cross-breed of the same specific
parentage as Rogers' hybrids which it greatly resembles. It is rather
more hardy than most other grapes of its breeding and is preeminently a
long keeper, surpassing most of the similar hybrids in this respect,
though all of these are notable for their keeping quality. But the
variety is incapable of self-fertilization and does not set its fruit
well even in a mixed vineyard, which fault should debar it from either
the commercial or the amateur list. The quality is from good to very
good.

N. B. White originated Norwood from seed of Concord fertilized with
Black Hamburg. It was introduced about 1880 and has been rather widely
tested but has never been popular, and is now seldom seen in varietal
vineyards.

     Vine vigorous, subject to winter injury in unfavorable locations,
     variable in productiveness. Canes intermediate in length and
     number, slender; tendrils continuous to intermittent, bifid. Leaves
     large, not uniform in color, thin; lower surface grayish-green,
     thinly pubescent. Flowers sterile to imperfectly self-fertile, open
     late; stamens short. Fruit ripens a little earlier than Concord,
     keeps and ships well. Clusters large to medium, often long and
     broad, irregularly tapering, sometimes heavily single-shouldered,
     intermediate in compactness. Berries large, roundish to oval,
     purplish-black covered with heavy blue bloom, very persistent,
     firm. Skin thick, rather tough, adheres considerably to the pulp,
     decidedly astringent. Flesh greenish, tough, stringy, slightly
     foxy, sweet at skin to acid at center, good to very good in
     quality. Seeds adherent, rather large, long, sharp-pointed.


(I) OHIO.

(Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =8=:168. 1842. =2.= _Ib._, =9=:191, 430. 1843.
     =3.= Downing, =1845=:251, 257. =4.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._,
     =1845=:937, 940. =5.= _Ib._, =1847=:465. =6.= _N. Y. Ag. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1848=:366. =7.= Thomas, =1849=:398. =8.= _Mag. Hort._,
     =16=:546. 1850. =9.= _Horticulturist_, =6=:224. 1851. =10.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1883=:127. =11.= _Tex. Farm and Ranch_, Feb. 8, =1896=:11.
     =12.= _Traite gen. de vit._, =6=:374. 1903.

     _Alabama_ (12). _Black Spanish_ (12). _Black Spanish Alabama_
     (12,?10). _The Black_ (12). _Blue French_ (12). _Burgundy_ (12).
     _Cigar Box_ (2, 8, 9, 11, 12). _Devereaux_ (12). _El Paso_ (12).
     _Jack_ (9, 10, 12). _Jacques_ (10, 12). JACQUEZ (12). _Jac_ (12).
     _Jacquet_ (12). _Lenoir_ (12). LONGWORTH'S OHIO (4, 8).
     _Longworth's Ohio_ (3, 7, 10, 11, 12). _MacCandless_ (12). _Ohio_
     (12). _Segar Box_ (3, 6, 7, 10, 12).

At one time Ohio attracted a great deal of attention in southern grape
regions as a wine grape of the Lenoir group but was discarded as
inferior to other similar grapes, lacking chiefly in hardiness and in
health of vine. The grape is somewhat interesting from its singular
history.

In 1834 some grape cuttings in a cigar-box were left at the home of
Nicholas Longworth of Cincinnati, Ohio, during Mr. Longworth's absence
from home. The man who left them did not return and Longworth could not
succeed in tracing the donor's identity. From these came Ohio.

The Ohio has, at different times, been said to be the same, in turn, as
Herbemont, Lenoir and Norton. In regard to the first, Longworth had
Herbemont in cultivation before he received the Ohio and neither he nor
his vineyardists failed to see distinct and constant differences between
the two varieties. The last two are disposed of in the _Cincinnati
Horticultural Society Report_ given on the next page. Longworth and
others corroborated these statements from their own comparisons of the
varieties growing in the vineyards around Cincinnati. Many
grape-growers, and Longworth of the number, have been of the opinion
that Ohio might be the same as the variety cultivated in Mississippi
under the name Jack or Jacques, both names being corruptions of Jacquez,
an old Spaniard who had introduced the grape into the section around
Natchez. The Ohio is probably now obsolete. It did not succeed north of
Cincinnati and its culture was dropped in the place of its origin on
account of its susceptibility to mildew and black-rot.

The following description of Ohio is taken from a report to the
Cincinnati Horticultural Society:[205] "Very fine specimens of the grape
cultivated under this name, were presented by N. Longworth and J. E.
Mottier, some of the bunches measuring nine inches in length. As there
has been some belief expressed by eastern cultivators, that this grape
is the same as Norton's Seedling, of Virginia, the committee took pains
to examine them together, in Mr. Longworth's garden, where both were
pointed out to us by Mr. Sleath, the gardener. The difference between
the two was at once apparent and striking. In the grape shown as the
Norton's Seedling, said by Mr. Sleath to have been obtained from Mr.
Norton himself, the wood is not so bright a red as in the Ohio, and the
leaf is large and entire, whereas that in the Ohio is three-lobed; the
bud is also much less prominent and not so pointed as in the Ohio. The
bunches of fruit in the Norton's Seedling were shorter and more compact,
with a thick pulp. In the Ohio, the bunches were long, very much
shouldered, conical or sharp-pointed, and the fruit without
pulp--sweeter, more juicy and vinous in flavor, and the seeds smaller,
darker colored and less numerous than in the Norton's Seedling.

"The Committee think the grape brought into notice here, by N.
Longworth, Esq., under the names of the Ohio or Cigar box, a valuable
and distinct variety, and well worthy of cultivation. This grape has a
stronger resemblance to the Le Noir which was also growing near; but its
bunches were more shouldered, more pointed, and less compact."


(II) OHIO.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1892=:264. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1895=:75.

Another Ohio originated with R. H. Hunt of Euclid, Ohio, about twenty
years ago. Of this variety Van Deman says:

     "Cluster large, tapering, slightly shouldered. Berry rather large,
     round, black with slight bloom; skin rather thick, tender; pulp
     moderately juicy, tender. Seeds small, three or four in number.
     Flavor mild, slightly subacid; quality medium. Season early."

This variety is not in the collection of this Station and we have not
been able to find either vines or fruit.


ONEIDA.

(Vinifera, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:128. =2.= _Mass. Hatch Sta. Bul._,
     =2=:21. 1888. =3.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:261. 1893. =4.= _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:533, 548, 556. 1898. =5.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._,
     =169=:174. 1899. =6.= _Ga. Sta. An. Rpt._, =13=:328. 1900. =7.= _N.
     Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =21=:396. 1902.

Oneida is a New York seedling, interesting as an offspring of the
Vinifera-Labrusca hybrid Merrimac. It was sold by subscription in 1884
and thereby somewhat widely distributed but has not generally been
reported upon with favor and is of doubtful value. There are many
complaints of its being unfruitful and some of its being unhealthy and
in consequence a weak grower. In some sections, however, it is fairly
satisfactory. While it keeps well it is said to lose flavor soon after
picking. Oneida is one of the rare sorts with erect stamens and yet
self-sterile.

H. Thacher of Oneida County, New York, originated Oneida from seed of
Merrimac planted in 1871. It bore its first fruit in 1875 and was
introduced by A. M. Purdy of Palmyra in 1884. The vine characters are
largely those of Labrusca but the fruit shows very strongly the descent
from Vinifera. Unlike the berries of Labrusca there is no disagreeable
taste near either skin or seeds and the texture of skin and flesh is
much like that of the European Malaga.

     Vine medium in vigor, not hardy, variable in productiveness,
     somewhat subject to attacks of fungi. Canes medium to long,
     numerous, often rather slender, roughened; tendrils continuous,
     bifid. Leaves large to medium, moderately light green; lower
     surface pale green, pubescent. Flowers sterile, open medium late;
     stamens upright. Fruit ripens later than Concord, keeps well.
     Clusters small to medium, tapering, usually single-shouldered,
     loose. Berries variable in size, roundish, handsome red in color,
     almost equal to Delaware although in some seasons the berries have
     an unattractive greenish-red color. Skin thick, adheres
     considerably to the pulp. Flesh somewhat stringy, tender, vinous,
     sweet from skin to center, with some Vinifera sprightliness, fair
     to good in quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp, not
     numerous, rather large, broad, short, plump, usually with a small
     enlarged neck; chalaza large, distinct, roughened.


OPORTO.

(Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =26=:552. 1860. _fig._ =2.= _U. S. Pat. Off.
     Rpt._, =1861=:477. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1862=:90. =4.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1862=:157. =5.= Strong, =1866=:352. =6.= Husmann,
     =1866=:124. =7.= Fuller, =1867=:247. =8.= _Am. Jour. Hort._,
     =4=:275. 1868. =9.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1871=:108. =10.= _Mich.
     Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1872=:540. _fig._ =11.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:128.

     BLUE TART (2). _Blue Vine Grape_ (2). _Oporto_ (2).

Oporto was at one time somewhat sought for as a wine grape from the fact
that its wine resembled in color and flavor that from Oporto. The name
has given many the idea that the grape is a European variety--a misnomer
in this respect, as its botanical characters show it to be a cross
between Riparia and Labrusca. The variety is now scarcely known, being
inferior in most of its horticultural characters to others of its
species, but it might be valuable in breeding work for some of its
characters. Oporto is very hardy, unusually free from fungal diseases,
and its must is very thick and dark, even staining the hands a deep
purple, hence suitable for adding color to wines. The variety is very
resistant to phylloxera and has been used in France as a
phylloxera-resistant grafting stock.

The origin of this variety is unknown. It was introduced into
cultivation about 1860 by E. W. Sylvester of Lyons, New York. The Oporto
was placed on the American Pomological Society list in 1862 and removed
in 1867. The botanical characters indicate that this variety is a
Riparia-Labrusca cross-breed. It has much the same vine characters as
Clinton, but is, if anything, more rampant in growth than that vigorous
variety.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, unusually hardy, healthy, variable
     in productiveness. Canes above medium to long, of medium thickness,
     dark brown to reddish-brown, surface covered with thin blue bloom;
     tendrils continuous, bifid. Stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens with Concord, ships and keeps well. Clusters medium to
     small, inferior in length, intermediate in width, cylindrical to
     oval, often single-shouldered, variable in compactness. Berries
     below medium in size, roundish to oblate, frequently compressed on
     account of compactness of cluster, black, glossy, covered with
     abundant blue bloom, persistent, firm. Skin very thin, tender,
     contains a large amount of dark wine-colored pigment. Flesh nearly
     white, or sometimes with purplish tinge, moderately juicy,
     fine-grained, inclined to solid, sweet to somewhat acid, decidedly
     spicy, of fair quality. Seeds separate somewhat easily from the
     pulp, often numerous, below medium to small, of average length,
     inclined to broad, faintly notched, often sharply pointed, plump,
     dark brown; raphe sometimes shows as a partly submerged cord in the
     shallow groove; chalaza of average size, above center, oval, nearly
     obscure.


ORIENTAL.

(Vinifera, Labrusca.)

     =1.= Barry, =1883=:449. =2.= _Kan. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1889-90=:95.
     =3.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:256. 1893. =4.= _Col. Sta. Bul._,
     =29=:19. 1894. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:165.

Oriental is an excellent dark red Vinifera-Labrusca hybrid resembling
Rogers' red hybrids but not in any way surpassing them. While a good
grape, it is doubtful if it can take the place of the better known
varieties of Rogers. Like many grapes of this class its fruit is of high
quality but the vine is of only moderate vigor and is susceptible to
mildew and black-rot. Oriental is more satisfactory in the dry portions
of the middle West than in New York.

This variety was produced by N. B. White of Norwood, Massachusetts, from
seed of a wild Labrusca fertilized with Black Hamburg pollen.

     Vine vigorous, not always hardy, averages with Concord in
     productiveness. Canes unusually long, above medium in number and
     thickness, surface slightly roughened; tendrils continuous,
     sometimes intermittent, bifid to trifid. Leaves large, green; lower
     surface grayish-green, pubescent. Fruit ripens about ten days
     before Concord, keeps well. Clusters intermediate in size and
     length, broad, vary from single-shouldered to double-shouldered,
     loose. Berries large to medium, oval to roundish, dull dark red,
     covered with lilac bloom, inclined to drop somewhat from pedicel,
     soft. Skin thick, tough, with but little astringency. Flesh
     somewhat tough, stringy, coarse, vinous, sweet from skin to center,
     good in quality. Seeds adherent to the pulp, often numerous, large,
     long, medium to broad, blunt; chalaza central to distinctly above
     center, frequently with shallow radiating furrows.


OTHELLO.

(Vinifera, Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Gar. Mon._, =9=:22, 23. 1867. _fig._ =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1867=:173. =3.= Downing, =1869=:552. =4.= _Grape Cult._,
     =2=:24, 25. 1870. _fig._ =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:167. =6.= _Tenn.
     Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:185. 1896. =7.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1151,
     1161. 1898. =8.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:40, 43, 44, 45, 76. 1899.
     =9.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:47. 1901. =10.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._,
     =110=:246. 1902. =11.= _Traite gen. de vit._, =5=:160. 1903.

     _Arnold's Hybrid No. 1_ (4). ARNOLD'S NO. 1 (1). _Arnold's No. 1_
     (3, 5, 6, 11). ARNOLD'S HYBRID (2). _Arnold's Hybrid_ (11).
     _Canadian Hamburg_ (3, 11). _Canadian Hybrid_ (3, 11). _Challenge?_
     (11).

Othello is interesting as being so far the most valuable hybrid between
Vinifera and Riparia, having attracted much attention in Europe as well
as in America. The significance of the name is not apparent unless,
because of its dark color, it was christened after Shakespeare's dusky
Moor. In France, Othello does remarkably well as a direct producer and
is used somewhat for a resistant stock. While most of its characters are
spoken of in the superlative by the French, in America it is not so
highly thought of chiefly because of its susceptibility to fungi, though
it shows other weaknesses which seem inherent to hybrids of Vinifera and
native species when grown in this country. The fruit of Othello matures
so late that it could never become a valuable variety for any
considerable portion of New York. It is in no sense a table grape nor
does it make, according to the French,[206] a high grade of wine, but
rather a well-colored, pleasant, ordinary wine of considerable alcoholic
strength.

[Illustration: OTHELLO]

Charles Arnold of Paris, Brant County, Ontario, produced Othello from
seed of Clinton fertilized by Black Hamburg. The seed was planted in
1859 and the variety was sent out for testing about ten years later.
There seems considerable doubt whether Arnold's Clinton was the same as
the variety known under that name in the United States, but if not, it
was similar. Assuming that Arnold's is the well known Clinton, Othello
is descended from Labrusca, Riparia and Vinifera. The characters of the
three species are shown in the variety. The foxy flavor, the tomentum of
the leaf, the pulpy flesh, and the usually continuous tendrils are all
from Labrusca. Riparia is revealed in the long, slender canes, the
resistance to phylloxera and the shallow, spreading root system. There
are but few of the characters of Black Hamburg, the Vinifera parent, to
be found and yet the much lobed leaf, the cluster, the oval berry and
the flavor indicate the Old World grape and make fairly certain the
triple origin.

     Vines vigorous, hardy, usually productive, slightly susceptible to
     attacks of mildew in some localities. Canes long, intermediate in
     number and size, light to dark brown; nodes enlarged, frequently
     strongly flattened; internodes medium to below in length; diaphragm
     of average thickness; pith intermediate in size; shoots pubescent;
     tendrils continuous, sometimes intermittent, of medium length,
     bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds intermediate in size, length and width, conical to nearly
     obtuse. Leaves of average size and thickness; upper surface light
     green, dull and smooth; lower surface pale green, pubescent; lobes
     three to five with terminal lobe acute to obtuse; petiolar sinus
     deep to medium, very narrow, frequently closed and overlapping;
     basal sinus shallow, narrow; lateral sinus deep to medium, not
     wide; teeth medium to very deep, rather wide; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens late, keeps fairly well. Clusters very large to above
     medium, long, broad, tapering, frequently with a loose single
     shoulder, two to three bunches per shoot, compact; peduncle medium
     to long, intermediate in thickness; pedicel nearly long, medium to
     slender, covered with numerous small warts, enlarged at point of
     attachment to fruit; brush very short, wine-colored. Berries large
     to medium, oval to roundish, black, glossy, covered with abundant
     blue bloom, very persistent, intermediate in firmness. Skin thin,
     tough, adheres strongly to the pulp, contains a moderate amount of
     bright colored red pigment, without astringency. Flesh dark green,
     very juicy, fine-grained, slightly tough, sprightly, low in quality
     for table use. Seeds separate somewhat easily from the pulp, one to
     three in number, medium to below in size, of average length and
     breadth, with neck sometimes slightly swollen, brownish; raphe
     usually distinct; chalaza small, above center, oval to circular,
     not obscure.


OZARK.

(Aestivalis, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1889=:374. =2.= _Ib._, =1890=:156.
     =3.= _Ib._, =1891=:128. =4.= _Ib._, =1892=:267. =5.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:167. =6.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:135. 1898. =7.= _Mo. Sta.
     Bul._, =46=:40, 43, 44, 45, 52. 1899. =8.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._,
     =169=:174. 1899. =9.= _Ky. Sta. Bul._, =92=:95. 1901. _fig._ =10.=
     _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:47. 1901. =11.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1905=:213.

Ozark belongs to the South and to Missouri, and the Ozarks in
particular, and cannot be ripened in the average New York season. Its
merits and demerits have been threshed out by the Missouri grape-growers
with the result that its culture is somewhat increasing. It is a wine
and not a table grape, of low quality, partly, perhaps, from overbearing
which it habitually does unless the fruit is thinned. It is healthy and
a very strong grower; but is self-sterile, which is against it as a
market sort. In spite of self-sterility and low quality, however, it is
a promising sort for the country south of Pennsylvania.

Ozark was originated by Dr. J. Stayman of Leavenworth, Kansas, from seed
which he states was from an unknown source. The variety was introduced
by Stayman & Black about 1890. The variety apparently is of Aestivalis
descent with a slight admixture of Labrusca. There was another
Ozark[207] raised by Frederick Muench of Marthasville, Warren County,
Missouri, in 1851. It has probably long been obsolete.

     Vine vigorous to very vigorous, usually hardy, medium to very
     productive. Canes rather long, often somewhat thick, intermediate
     in number, covered with thin blue bloom, surface slightly
     roughened; tendrils intermittent, usually bifid. Leaves unusually
     healthy and attractive, dense, medium to large, light green; lower
     surface pale green, thinly pubescent and cobwebby. Flowers sterile
     or nearly so, open late; stamens reflexed. Fruit ripens late, keeps
     well. Clusters medium to large, long to medium, usually with a long
     and loose single shoulder, very compact. Berries variable in size,
     dull black, covered with abundant blue bloom, persistent. Skin
     variable in thickness, tough, contains a large amount of
     wine-colored pigment. Flesh not very juicy, tender when fully ripe,
     mild, fair in quality. Seeds separate somewhat easily from the
     pulp, medium to small, not notched; raphe shows as a distinct
     cord-like ridge; chalaza plainly above center, very distinct.


PEABODY.

(Riparia, Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:129. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1883=:92. =3.= _Mass. Hatch Sta. An. Rpt._, =6=:22. 1893. =4.=
     _Va. Sta. Bul._, =30=:108. 1893. =5.= _Can. Cen. Exp. Farms Rpt._,
     =1894=:139. =6.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:174. 1899. =7.= _Ib._,
     =194=:58. 1901.

Peabody is a comparatively unimportant offspring of Clinton produced by
Ricketts. The grapes are too small for dessert purposes and their value
for wine seems not to have been determined though from its parentage it
would be called a wine grape. In general appearance Peabody resembles
Ricketts' Advance but is later, not so strong a grower, nor so prolific
nor hardy. It appears to do better in the northern tier of states or in
Canada than farther south.

This variety is supposed to be a seedling of Clinton grown by J. H.
Ricketts about 1870 and introduced in 1882. The fruit is distinctly
different in several characters from Clinton or other seedlings of that
variety suggesting that Peabody is not a pure-bred seedling.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, produces medium crops. Canes long, numerous,
     often thick, light brown with ash-gray tinge, considerably darker
     at nodes, covered with thin blue bloom; tendrils intermittent,
     bifid to trifid. Leaves medium to above in size, dark green, thin,
     lower surface pale green, nearly glabrous. Flowers semi-fertile,
     open in mid-season; stamens upright. Fruit ripens rather early,
     keeps well. Clusters large to medium, medium to long, usually with
     a fair-sized shoulder connected to the bunch by a long stem,
     compact to medium. Berries intermediate in size, distinctly oval to
     roundish, black, glossy, covered with abundant blue bloom,
     persistent. Skin thick, tough, not astringent. Flesh very juicy,
     tender, vinous, spicy, agreeably sweet at skin to tart at center,
     good in quality. Seeds usually separate from the pulp easily when
     fully mature, intermediate in size, broad; raphe sometimes shows as
     a partially submerged cord in the bottom of a rather wide, deep
     groove; chalaza distinctly above center, often roughened.


PERFECTION.

(Labrusca, Bourquiniana, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1889=:372. =2.= _Ib._, =1892=:268.
     =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:168. =4.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:138.
     1898. =5.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:48. 1901.

Perfection is a seedling of Delaware, which it greatly resembles but
does not equal in New York, being hardly as high in quality, does not
keep as well, shrivels before ripening, and shells badly. In its vine
characters it is much more like a Labrusca than Delaware, suggesting
that it is a Delaware cross. In the Southwest it is considered a
valuable early red grape.

Dr. J. Stayman of Leavenworth, Kansas, originated Perfection from seed
of Delaware; sent out for testing about 1890.

     Vine medium to vigorous, healthy, injured in severe winters,
     productive. Canes intermediate in length and number, slender;
     tendrils intermittent, trifid to bifid. Leaves healthy, medium in
     size and color; lower surface grayish-white with tinge of bronze,
     heavily pubescent. Flowers fertile or nearly so, open in
     mid-season; stamens upright. Fruit ripens before Delaware, does not
     keep well. Clusters intermediate in size, averaging slightly larger
     than Delaware, of fair length, usually single-shouldered, compact.
     Berries medium to small, nearly roundish when not misshapen by
     compactness of cluster, attractive red but slightly less brilliant
     than Delaware, covered with thin gray or faint lilac bloom,
     inclined to drop from pedicel, soft. Skin thin, variable in
     toughness, not astringent. Flesh medium in juiciness and
     tenderness, vinous, mild, moderately sweet, good in quality but
     inferior to Delaware. Seeds adherent to the pulp, quite numerous,
     below medium to small, of average length, often with slightly
     enlarged neck.


PERKINS.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Horticulturist_, =14=:246. 1859. =2.= _Mag. Hort._, =27=:523,
     532. 1861. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1862=:147. =4.= _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Cat._, =1875=:24. =5.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1878=:8. =6.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:58. =7.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1883=:40. =8.= _Neb. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1890=:93. =9.= _Ill. Sta.
     Bul._, =28=:261. 1893. =10.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:168, 169. _fig._
     =11.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:534, 548, 556. 1898. =12.= _Mich.
     Sta. Bul._, =169=:174. 1899. =13.= _Ala. Sta. Bul._, =110=:69, 70,
     88. 1900. =14.= _S. C. Sta. Bul._, =58=:7, 8. 1901. _fig._

Perkins was at one time grown largely as an early grape but has been
very generally discarded on account of its poor quality. Its pulp is
hard and its flavor is that of Wyoming, Northern Muscadine and their
like, all easily identified and best characterized by their disagreeable
foxiness. As with nearly all Labruscas it is a very poor keeper.
Notwithstanding the faults of its fruit, Perkins may have value in
regions where grape-growing is precarious; for it is one of the most
reliable grapes cultivated, being hardy, vigorous, productive, and very
free from fungal diseases. Added to the above qualities, it is early,
thus making a plant well worthy the attention of the grape-breeder.

This variety is said to be an accidental seedling found about 1830 in
the garden of Jacob Perkins of Bridgewater, Massachusetts. For many
years it had only a local reputation and became known to viticulturists
about 1860. It was placed on the grape list of the American Pomological
Society fruit catalog in 1875 and although several efforts have been
made to have it removed it still remains. It was suspected by some of
those familiar with its early history to be a seedling of Isabella or
Catawba but there is little or nothing in the vine or fruit to
substantiate such a supposition.

     Vine vigorous, healthy, hardy, productive. Canes long to medium,
     numerous, thick to medium, rather dark brown, deepening in color at
     the nodes, surface heavily pubescent; tendrils continuous, bifid to
     trifid. Leaves above medium to small, thick; upper surface medium
     green, medium to slightly rugose; lower surface grayish-white,
     heavily pubescent; veins distinct. Flowers nearly fertile, open
     medium early; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens earlier than Delaware, ships well for an early grape.
     Clusters intermediate in size and length, broad to medium,
     cylindrical to slightly tapering, often with a short single
     shoulder, compact. Berries large to medium, distinctly oval, dull
     green changing to an attractive pale lilac or light red when fully
     ripe, covered with rather abundant gray or lilac bloom, inclined to
     drop considerably from the pedicel, somewhat soft. Skin thin,
     tough, contains no pigment. Flesh nearly white, medium juicy,
     stringy, fine-grained, firm and meaty, very foxy, sweet at skin to
     nearly acid at center, poor to fair in quality. Seeds decidedly
     adherent, numerous, medium to above in size, width and length,
     somewhat blunt, light brown with yellow tips; raphe buried in a
     narrow, nearly deep groove; chalaza small, distinctly above center,
     oval to pear-shaped, rather distinct.


POCKLINGTON.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Gar. Mon._, =21=:207, 362. 1879. =2.= _Mass. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1880=:238. =3.= _Gar. Mon._, =22=:176. 1880. =4.= _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:32, 44. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1881=:24.
     =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:58. =7.= _Rural N. Y._, =45=:622,
     653. 1886. =8.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1886-87=:171. =9.= _Ill.
     Sta. Bul._, =28=:266. 1893. =10.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:169. =11.=
     _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =13=:605. 1894. =12.= _Ib._, =15=:432, 433.
     1896. =13.= _Ib._, =17=:534, 542, 544, 545, 547, 552, 556. 1898.
     =14.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:48, 52, 58. 1901. =15.= _Kan. Sta.
     Bul._, =110=:237. 1902.

     _Golden Pocklington_ (10).

Before the advent of Niagara, Pocklington was, all things considered,
the leading white grape, having very generally displaced Martha. The
variety had the fatal fault, however, of ripening late in the latitude
of New York which, with some minor defects, has caused it to fall below
Niagara in value for the grape districts of this region if not for the
whole country. It is now being grown less and less, and though still
commonly found, must soon become largely a grape for the amateur and the
collector.

Pocklington is a seedling of Concord and resembles its parent in most of
its vine characters, fully equaling or surpassing it in hardiness, but
of slower growth and not quite as healthy, vigorous or productive. In
quality it is as good if not better than either Concord or Niagara,
being sweet, rich and pleasant flavored, though as with the other two
grapes it has a little too much foxiness for critical consumers of
grapes. It is a handsome fruit, a delicate golden yellow in color, being
often called the Golden Pocklington, and with finely formed bunches and
berries making it one of the most attractive of all green grapes.
Pocklington keeps and ships better than Concord or than any of the
latter's seedlings, having a tough, though comparatively thin, skin.
Under some conditions, it ripens unevenly and in some localities it is
unfruitful. Pocklington is not equal to several other of the grapes of
its season in quality, as, for instance Iona, Jefferson, Diana, Dutchess
and Catawba, but it is far above the average as a table grape and for
this reason and because of its handsome appearance, one of the most
attractive of all green grapes, it should be retained in our list of
grapes for the garden.

John Pocklington of Sandy Hill, Washington County, New York, originated
Pocklington from seed of Concord about 1870. The variety was first
exhibited at the New York State fair in Rochester, in 1877, and was
exhibited before the American Pomological Society two years later. It
was introduced by John Charlton of Rochester, New York, about 1880. In
1881 it was placed on the grape list of the American Pomological Society
fruit catalog. In spite of its general failure as a commercial sort, it
is still offered for sale by many nurserymen.

     Vine medium in vigor, hardy, variable in productiveness, somewhat
     subject to mildew in the Hudson River and Central Lakes districts.
     Canes intermediate in length, number, and size, very dark
     reddish-brown; nodes enlarged, flattened; internodes medium to
     below in length; diaphragm thin; pith slightly above average size;
     shoots pubescent; tendrils continuous, of fair length, bifid to
     trifid.

     [Illustration: POCKLINGTON]

     Leaf-buds small, very short, slender, pointed, open late. Young
     leaves tinged on lower side only, prevailing color light
     rose-carmine. Leaves variable in size, medium to rather thick;
     upper surface light green, glossy, of average smoothness; lower
     surface tinged with bronze, pubescent; veins distinct; lobes none
     to three with terminus acuminate to acute; petiolar sinus medium to
     deep, rather wide; teeth of average depth, medium to rather narrow.
     Flowers fertile, open in mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit not uniform in season of ripening but averaging later than
     Concord, keeps and ships fairly well. Clusters medium to large,
     intermediate in length and breadth, cylindrical to slightly
     tapering, often single-shouldered, medium to compact; peduncle
     medium to short, of average thickness; pedicel short to medium,
     thick, covered with few small warts; brush short, greenish. Berries
     large to above medium, slightly oblate, attractive yellowish-green
     or with tinge of amber, covered with thin gray bloom, variable in
     adhesion to pedicel, nearly firm. Skin covered with scattering
     russet dots, thin and tender, adheres slightly to the pulp,
     contains no pigment, faintly astringent. Flesh light green, often
     with yellow tinge, translucent, juicy, tough, fine-grained,
     slightly foxy, nearly sweet at skin to tart at center, good in
     quality. Seeds do not separate easily from the pulp, one to six,
     average three, intermediate in size, length and breadth, brownish;
     raphe obscure; chalaza of medium size, slightly above center,
     usually oval, obscure.


POUGHKEEPSIE.

(Bourquiniana, Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Gar. Mon._, =22=:176. 1880. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1881=:144. =3.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =9=:329. 1890. =4.= _Ib._,
     =11=:632. 1892. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:170. =6.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =17=:534, 547. 1898. =7.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:41, 43, 44,
     45, 53. 1899. =8.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:175. 1899. =9.= _Ga.
     Sta. Bul._, =53=:48. 1901. =10.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:239. 1902.

     POUGHKEEPSIE RED (1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9).

Poughkeepsie has been known on the Hudson River for nearly a half
century yet it is now but little grown there and has not been widely
disseminated elsewhere. There is no doubt as to its quality, both as a
table grape and for wine; in this respect it is considered by many as
equal to the best of our American varieties and quite the equal of some
of the finer European sorts. But the vine characters are practically all
poor and the variety is thus effectually debarred from common
cultivation. Both vine and fruit greatly resemble Delaware but it is not
the equal of the latter variety in vine characters and does not surpass
it in fruit. In particular, it is more easily winter-killed and is less
productive than Delaware. It ripens with us a little earlier than the
last named sort and this with its beauty and fine quality is sufficient
to recommend it for the garden at least.

A. J. Caywood of Marlboro, New York, originated Poughkeepsie, it is
said, from seed of Iona fertilized by mixed pollen of Delaware and
Walter. The original seedling was raised in the sixties but the variety
was only known locally until about 1880 when it was brought before the
public. It has never been popular in any section and is now nearly
obsolete.

     Vine intermediate in vigor, doubtfully hardy, variable in
     productiveness, some seasons producing such heavy crops that the
     vine is weakened, and on this account a somewhat uncertain bearer.
     Canes medium to short, intermediate in number, thick to medium,
     dark reddish-brown; tendrils intermittent, frequently three in
     line, bifid to trifid. Leaves not healthy, medium to small, of
     average thickness; upper surface medium green, glossy, somewhat
     rugose on older leaves; lower surface pale green to grayish-green,
     thinly pubescent. Flowers fertile, open medium late; stamens
     upright.

     Fruit ripens about with Delaware, keeps and ships fairly well.
     Clusters medium to below in size, intermediate in length and width,
     tapering to cylindrical, usually single-shouldered, very compact.
     Berries small, roundish, pale red to attractive red when properly
     ripened, covered with a medium amount of dark lilac bloom,
     persistent, firm. Skin thin and tender but does not crack, contains
     no pigment. Flesh pale green, very juicy, tender, nearly melting,
     fine-grained, vinous, sweet or nearly so from skin to center,
     refreshing, very good to best in quality. The flesh characters
     closely resemble Delaware. Seeds separate easily from the pulp,
     small, of medium length, medium to broad, usually plump with
     slightly enlarged neck, brownish; raphe obscure; chalaza of average
     size, distinctly above center, circular, obscure.


PRENTISS.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1878=:357. =2.= _Ib._, =1879=:191,
     194, 320, _fig._, 321. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1881=:24. =4.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:59, 61. =5.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1884=:343, 345. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:103, 106, 144.
     =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =9=:332. 1890. =8.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._,
     =28=:266. 1893. =9.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:171. _fig._ =10.=
     Husmann, =1895=:93. =11.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:534, 542,
     545, 547, 552. 1898. =12.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:175. 1899.

Prentiss is a green grape of good quality, once well known and generally
recommended, but now going out of cultivation. If popular preference
turned upon quality, we should still grow this variety, but
consideration must be given to other characters and in these Prentiss
fails. Those who have grown it in the several grape districts of New
York accredit the vines with about all the faults a grape can have.
Thus, it is almost universally considered tender to cold, lacking in
vigor and being unproductive, while in some localities it is looked upon
as uncertain in bearing, and subject to rot and mildew. On the other
hand, there are vineyards in which it does very well and in such it is a
remarkably attractive green grape, especially in form of cluster and in
form and color of berry, in these respects resembling the one-time
favorite Rebecca though never so high in quality as that variety. Its
season is given as both before and after Concord. It must always remain
a variety for the amateur and for special localities.

This variety is said to have been originated by J. W. Prentiss of
Pulteney, Steuben County, New York, about forty years ago, from seed of
Isabella.[208] It was introduced about 1880 by T. S. Hubbard of
Fredonia, New York. In 1881 it was placed on the catalog of the American
Pomological Society and is still retained.

     Vine medium to weak, with a tendency to winter injury, unfruitful,
     capricious in bearing, somewhat subject to attacks of mildew. Canes
     intermediate in length and number, thick, light to dark brown;
     tendrils continuous, bifid.

     Leaves above medium to small, thick; upper surface light green,
     smooth to rugose in the older leaves; lower surface pale green,
     pubescent; veins obscure. Flowers self-fertile, open in mid-season;
     stamens upright.

     Fruit variable in season of ripening averaging about with Concord,
     keeps well. Clusters not large, medium to short, of average width,
     tapering to cylindrical, sometimes with a slight single shoulder,
     compact. Berries above medium to small, vary in shape from roundish
     to oval, light green with strong yellowish tinge covered with thin
     gray bloom, persistent, firm. Skin of medium thickness, somewhat
     tough, contains no pigment. Flesh pale green, juicy, medium in
     tenderness, slightly foxy, sweet next the skin to agreeably tart at
     center, good in quality. Seeds adherent, sometimes numerous,
     intermediate in size, variable in width, very slightly notched,
     short to medium, sharp-pointed, dark brown; raphe buried in a
     shallow, narrow groove; chalaza large, slightly above center,
     irregularly circular to oval, surface often roughened, obscure.


REBECCA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =22=:458, 484, 502. 1856. =2.= _Horticulturist_,
     =11=:528. 1856. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1856=:39, 162, 201.
     _fig._ =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1856=:214. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1858=:67. =6.= _Gar. Mon._, =2=:200. 1860. =7.= _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Cat._, =1862=:90. =8.= _Grant's Descrip. Cat._, =1864=:5. =9.=
     _Mag. Hort._, =33=:70, 148. 1867. =10.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:43, 150,
     327. 1869. =11.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:59. =12.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1883=:132. =13.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:237. 1902.

During the middle and latter part of the last century, when
grape-growing was more in the hands of connoisseurs than now, Rebecca
was one of the sterling green varieties. It is wholly unsuited for
commercial vineyards and for years has gradually been disappearing from
cultivation. The fruit of Rebecca is exceptionally fine, consisting of
well-formed bunches and berries, the latter a handsome yellowish-white
and semitransparent. In quality it is of the best, with a rich, sweet
flavor and pleasing aroma. But the vine characters condemn it for any
but the amateur and even in the garden it must have exceptionally good
care to succeed. The vines lack in hardiness and vigor, are susceptible
to mildew and other fungi, and are productive only under the best
conditions. It is recommended as being especially desirable to plant on
south walls where it seems to succeed much better than in exposed
situations.

The original vine of this variety was an accidental seedling found in
the garden of E. M. Peake at Hudson, New York. It bore its first fruit
in 1852 when the vine was four years old and was brought to the notice
of the public four or five years later. The Massachusetts Horticultural
Society awarded the variety their silver medal in 1856 and it was
exhibited before the American Pomological Society the same year. Here it
made so favorable an impression that it was placed with Concord and
Delaware under "new varieties which promise well." In 1862 it was placed
on the regular list where it remained till 1891, when it was removed. It
was introduced by W. Brooksbank of Hudson.

     Vine weak to vigorous, not always hardy, not productive, somewhat
     susceptible to attacks of mildew. Canes long to below medium,
     numerous, above medium to slender, inclined to dull brown,
     deepening in color at the nodes; tendrils continuous to
     intermittent, bifid to trifid. Leaves variable in size, of average
     thickness; upper surface dark green, dull, medium to rugose; lower
     surface grayish-green, pubescent; veins variable in distinctness.
     Flowers fertile or nearly so; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens with Concord or later, ships and keeps well. Clusters
     medium to small, medium to short, of average width, cylindrical to
     roundish, rarely with a small single shoulder, compact. Berries
     intermediate in size, oval, green with yellowish tinge sometimes
     verging on amber, not glossy, covered with thin gray bloom,
     persistent, firm. Skin intermediate in thickness and toughness,
     contains no pigment. Flesh pale green, very juicy, tender, nearly
     melting, vinous and a little foxy, sweet from skin to center, good
     to very good in quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp,
     medium to below in size, medium to short, above medium to narrow,
     blunt, medium brown; raphe obscure; chalaza of average size, above
     center, circular to oval, not distinct. Must 69 deg..

[Illustration: RED EAGLE]


RED EAGLE.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =28=:162. 1891. =2.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =10=:498. 1891. =3.= _Ib._, =11=:633. 1892. =4.= _Va. Sta. Bul._,
     =30=:106. 1893. =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:525, 534, 548,
     556. 1898. =6.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:138. 1898. =7.= _Ga. Sta.
     Bul._, =53=:48. 1901.

     _Munson No. 47_ (4).

Red Eagle is a pure-bred seedling of Black Eagle which it resembles in
all characters except color of fruit. It is one of comparatively few
pure-bred offspring of Vinifera-Labrusca crosses of the second
generation and therefore of interest to grape-breeders. Munson, the
originator of the variety, does not include Red Eagle in his last
catalog but on the grounds of this Station it takes high rank as a grape
of quality and at least can be recommended to the amateur. In general it
shows the characters found in Rogers' first generation hybrids and ranks
with them in fruit and vine.

The variety was originated by T. V. Munson, from whom it was received at
this Station in 1888.

     Vine medium in vigor, injured in severe winters, moderately
     productive. Canes of average length, medium to few, slender, dark
     brown, surface covered with a small amount of blue bloom; nodes
     prominent, slightly flattened; internodes of fair length; diaphragm
     intermediate in thickness; pith medium in size; shoots pubescent;
     tendrils continuous to intermittent, long to medium, bifid.

     Leaf-buds medium to below in size, short, of average thickness,
     conical to obtuse, open late. Young leaves heavily tinged on under
     side and lightly along margin of upper side with rose-carmine.
     Leaves intermediate in size, thick; upper surface light green,
     dull, medium to slightly rugose; lower surface grayish-green,
     slightly pubescent; veins well defined; lobes three to five with
     terminus obtuse to acute; petiolar sinus deep, medium to narrow,
     sometimes closed and overlapping; basal sinus variable in depth,
     wide; lateral sinus often very deep, somewhat wide; teeth medium to
     deep, wide. Flowers sterile to fertile, open moderately late;
     stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens a little before Concord, keeps fairly well. Clusters
     medium to small, variable in length, broad, slightly tapering,
     usually single-shouldered but sometimes double-shouldered, loose to
     medium with many abortive berries; peduncle nearly long to medium,
     inclined to slender; pedicel very long, slender; brush pale green
     with brown tinge, short to medium, rather slender. Berries variable
     in size, roundish, light to very dark red, not glossy, covered with
     heavy lilac or faint blue bloom, persistent, rather soft. Skin
     medium to thick, tender, adheres slightly to the pulp, contains a
     small amount of red pigment, without astringency. Flesh greenish,
     transparent, juicy, very tender and melting, slightly foxy,
     agreeably tart next the skin to slightly acid at center, very good
     in quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp, one to five,
     average three or four, often rather large, of mean breadth, long,
     somewhat blunt, light brown; raphe buried in a narrow, shallow
     groove; chalaza large, above center, irregularly circular to oval,
     distinct.


REGAL.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Rural N. Y._, =62=:436. 1903. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1903=:82. =3.= _N. Y. State Fr. Gr. Assoc. Rpt._, =1904=:41.

As was the case with the preceding grape, Regal is also a second
generation hybrid of Vinifera and Labrusca, the parent of this variety
being Lindley, which, as the technical description shows, it much
resembles. The fact is again demonstrated in this variety that the
characters of grape-hybrids, at least of these two species, are passed
to subsequent generations much as they were found in the first
generation. The fruit of Regal is attractive in appearance and in
quality, its characters being much the same as those of Lindley. A
seemingly insignificant fault might make it somewhat undesirable in a
commercial vineyard; it is that the clusters are borne so close to the
wood that it is difficult to harvest the fruit, and especially to avoid
injury to the berries next to the wood. The variety is worthy of
extensive trial in the vineyards and gardens of the State.

Regal was originated in Rockford, Illinois, in 1879 by A. W. Woodward.
It was introduced some years later by M. Crawford of Cuyahoga Falls,
Ohio. The original vine was one of a lot of Lindley seedlings. Some
vines of this variety were sent out by the introducer under the title
_Crawford No. 99_.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, healthy, very productive. Canes intermediate
     in length and size, rather numerous, medium dark reddish-brown.
     Tendrils intermittent, bifid to trifid. Leaves healthy, medium to
     nearly large, of average thickness; upper surface green, slightly
     glossy and rugose; lower surface pale green with bronze tinge,
     strongly pubescent. Flowers fully self-fertile, open in mid-season;
     stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens with Lindley or later; keeps well. Clusters small to
     medium, shorter than Lindley, medium to broad, cylindrical to
     tapering with sometimes an inclination to oval, usually with a
     short single shoulder, sometimes double-shouldered, very compact.
     Berries above medium to below, averaging larger than Brighton,
     roundish but frequently compressed on account of compactness of
     cluster, purplish-red to dark red, covered with lilac bloom,
     persistent, of average firmness. Skin thin, medium to tough,
     contains no pigment. Flesh pale green, very juicy, fine-grained,
     slightly stringy and solid until fully ripe when it becomes rather
     tender, sweet at skin to acid at center, slightly musky, good in
     quality but not equal to Lindley. Seeds separate easily from the
     pulp, rather numerous, intermediate in size, long to below medium,
     above medium to narrow, slightly notched, inclined to blunt,
     frequently with a short enlarged neck, brownish; raphe buried in a
     medium-sized groove; chalaza small, above center, circular to oval,
     distinct.


REQUA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1864=:136. =2.= _Horticulturist_,
     =24=:126. 1869. =3.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:181. 1869. =4.= _N. Y. Sta.
     An. Rpt._, =11=:633. 1892. =5.= _Ib._, =17=:534, 548, 556. 1898.
     =6.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:41, 43, 44, 45. 1899. =7.= _Mich. Sta.
     Bul._, =169=:175. 1899. =8.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:48. 1901. =9.=
     _Can. Hort._, =24=:261. 1901. _fig._ =10.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._,
     =110=:243. 1902.

     ROGERS' NO. 28 (1). _Rogers' No. 28_ (2, 3, 4, 9).

Requa is one of Rogers' hybrids hardly equaling others of its color and
season. It is an attractive grape in cluster and berry and of very good
quality but quite subject to rot and ripening too late for the grape
regions of this latitude, being as late as Catawba. In giving his grapes
names, Rogers used those of English or German horticultural or botanical
celebrities and of some of the Indian names of counties and towns of
Massachusetts. Requa was dedicated by Rogers to a Mr. Requa, a
horticulturist of local note, of Salem-on-Erie, Massachusetts.

For an account of the parentage and early history of this variety see
Rogers' Hybrids. In 1869 this variety was named Requa, it having been
previously known as _Rogers' No. 28_. There appear at present to be two
varieties passing under this name. Georgia, Texas and Missouri report
this variety as having erect stamens but in our vineyard it shows only
recurved stamens.

     Vine medium to vigorous, hardy except in severe winters, medium in
     productiveness, not always healthy. Canes medium to long,
     intermediate in number and thickness; tendrils continuous to
     intermittent, trifid to bifid. Leaves large to medium, dark green,
     often thick and rugose; lower surface grayish-green, pubescent.
     Flowers sterile to partly fertile, open late; stamens reflexed.
     Fruit ripens about with Catawba or earlier, keeps a long time in
     good condition. Clusters large to medium, intermediate in length
     and width, nearly cylindrical, often with a long single shoulder,
     compact. Berries medium to large, slightly oval to roundish, dark
     dull red covered with thin gray or lilac bloom, strongly adherent,
     not firm. Skin thin, nearly tough, adheres considerably to the
     pulp. Flesh very pale green, somewhat tender, rather stringy,
     vinous, slightly foxy, almost sweet from skin to center, good to
     very good in quality. Seeds slightly adherent to the pulp, above
     medium to medium in size and length, often rather broad, somewhat
     blunt.


ROCHESTER.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =23=:60. 1878. =2.= _Ib._,
     =27=:22. 1882. =3.= Barry, =1883=:442. =4.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =9=:329. 1890. =5.= _Ib._, _11_:634. 1892. =6.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:173. =7.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:138. 1898. =8.= _N. Y. Sta.
     An. Rpt._, =17=:534, 546, 547, 552. 1898. =9.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._,
     =46=:41, 43, 44, 45, 53. 1899. =10.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:175.
     1899. =11.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:240. 1902.

     _Barry's No. 19_ (1).

Rochester, as the color-plate shows, is a large-clustered, red grape,
very handsome in appearance. It is also very good in quality. The vine
is a particularly strong grower and very productive and in the locality
in and about Rochester at least, very free from diseases. It is so very
vigorous that it needs much room and long pruning. The variety is
difficult to propagate and therefore not in favor with nurserymen, and
is to be had, if at all, usually at extra expense. The grapes are sweet,
rich, and vinous, ranking from good to very good in quality. The fruit,
however, should be used as soon as ripe, as it does not keep well and
the berries quickly shatter from the bunch. As an attractive early red
grape Rochester is well worth a place in the garden and possibly in
favored locations for a special market.

Ellwanger & Barry of Rochester, Monroe County, New York, in 1867 fruited
over one hundred seedling grapes which they had raised from mixed seed
of Delaware, Diana, Concord, and Rebecca. Only two of these seedlings
were finally saved, the Rochester and the Monroe. The Rochester was
introduced by the originators about 1880.

     Vine medium to vigorous, usually hardy, medium to productive. Canes
     long, intermediate in number and size, dark reddish-brown; nodes
     moderately enlarged, slightly flattened; internodes short;
     diaphragm thick; pith small, shoots pubescent; tendrils
     intermittent, long, bifid or trifid.

[Illustration: ROCHESTER]

     Leaf-buds medium to below in size, short, of average thickness,
     conical, open in mid-season. Young leaves tinged on upper and under
     sides with dull rose-carmine. Leaves medium to large; upper surface
     light green, slightly glossy, nearly smooth; lower surface
     grayish-green, pubescent; veins distinct; lobes none to three with
     terminus acute; petiolar sinus deep to medium, variable in width;
     basal sinus absent; lateral sinus shallow to a mere notch when
     present; teeth shallow, of average width. Flowers fertile, open
     mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens earlier than Concord, does not always ripen evenly,
     does not keep well. Clusters large to medium, about average length,
     broad, tapering, usually single-shouldered but sometimes heavily
     double-shouldered, very compact; peduncle short, intermediate in
     thickness; pedicel short, slender, covered with few warts; brush of
     medium length, slender, yellowish-brown. Berries above medium to
     small, oval, dark red to purplish-red but the berries do not color
     uniformly, dull, covered with thin, lilac bloom, inclined to drop
     from pedicel, soft. Skin thick to medium, somewhat tough, inclined
     to crack sometimes on account of compactness of cluster, does not
     adhere to pulp, contains no pigment, astringent. Flesh pale green,
     transparent, juicy, tender, fine-grained, somewhat vinous and foxy,
     sweet, good to very good in quality. Seeds separate easily from the
     pulp, one to three, average two, large, medium to short, rather
     broad but often blunt, quite variable, however, in general
     characters, medium to dark brown; raphe buried in a slight groove;
     chalaza of average size, above center, circular to oval, obscure.


ROCKWOOD.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1874=:154. =2.= _An. Hort._,
     =1889=:101. =3.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =14=:279. 1895. =4.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1894=:107. =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:534, 548, 556.
     1898. =6.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:175. 1899. =7.= _Ala. Sta.
     Bul._, =110=:74, 88. 1900. =8.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:49. 1901.
     =9.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:237. 1902. =10.= _Mich. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1903=:30.

Rockwood is a comparatively unimportant black seedling of Concord and
from the originator of Concord. It is of higher quality than its parent
and since it is earlier, coming with Moore Early or just after, it is
worthy a place in garden collections as an early black grape. It has
been thoroughly tested and discarded as unprofitable by commercial
vineyardists probably on account of its vine characters which on our
grounds are not as good as those of Concord and would disqualify it for
a market variety. In appearance the fruit is much like Concord.

The variety was originated by E. W. Bull of Concord, Massachusetts, from
seed of Concord. It was introduced in 1889 by George S. Josselyn of
Fredonia, New York.


ROGERS' HYBRIDS.

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =23=:86. 1857. =2.= _Horticulturist_, =13=:86,
     119. 1858. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1860=:35, 85. =4.= _Ib._,
     =1862=:148. =5.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1864=:135, 136, 137.
     _figs._ =6.= _N. Y. Ag. Soc. Rpt._, =1865=:338. _figs._ =7.=
     _Horticulturist_, =20=:81. 1865. =8.= Strong, =1866=:31, 339. =9.=
     Mead, =1867=:204. =10.= Fuller, =1867=:228, 246. =10.= _Rec. of
     Hort._, =1868=:46. =11.= _Horticulturist_, =24=:126. 1869. =12.=
     _Grape Cult._, =1=:153, 193, _fig._, 194, 262. 1869. =13.= _Am.
     Jour. Hort._, =5=:261. 1869. =14.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1875=:39.
     =15.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:173. _fig._ =16.= _Meehan's Mon._,
     =9=:94. 1899. =17.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1901=:166.

The forty-five seedlings known as Rogers' Hybrids were originated by
Edward S. Rogers of Salem, Massachusetts.[209] Rogers states that the
suggestion which started him in this work was an article by Dr. Lindley
of the University of London, originally printed in the London
_Horticulturist_ and reprinted in Downing's _Horticulturist_ for
September, 1847. This article, which is entitled "Remarks on Hybridizing
Plants," is a general discussion of the results of this practice so far
as they were then known.

The female parent used by Rogers was a four or five year old,
large-fruited Labrusca known locally as Carter or Mammoth Globe, and
very similar to, but not identical with Sage. The pollen for fertilizing
the blossoms of this vine was secured from vines of Black Hamburg and
White Chasselas growing in a cold grapery near by. In the summer of
1851, clusters of the Carter were fertilized with pollen from the
Vinifera vines both at the time of emasculation and later, and small
cotton bags were tied on the blossoms to prevent the interference of
foreign pollen. In addition to the repeated applications of pollen to
the stigmas, Rogers placed clusters of blossoms of the Vinifera sorts in
the enclosing sacks. As a result of these pollinations, he secured about
one hundred and fifty seeds which were planted in the garden that fall.
In the spring of 1852 practically every seed germinated, but cut worms
and other accidents reduced the number to forty-five which finally
fruited. These were left to grow on poles where they were originally
planted for three years, when, because of crowding, twenty-five of them
were removed to another part of the garden. The untransplanted vines
began to bear fruit in 1856 and the transplanted ones a few years later.
The seedlings were numbered by Rogers from one to forty-five and for a
long time they were known under these numbers. Of these, one to five
inclusive were of the Carter-Black Hamburg cross; six to fourteen
inclusive were of the Carter-White Chasselas cross; and all of the
numbers from fifteen to forty-five were of Hamburg parentage. As will be
noted under Salem, this was later given a number higher than forty-five,
owing to the confusion of the sort with some other after being sent out.
With this exception, the original crosses were all included in these
numbers. In 1858 and 1859, Rogers sent many of these varieties, under
the original numbers, to various people for testing. He was compelled to
do this, owing to lack of room in the half acre which comprised the
Rogers' garden, to properly test the sorts himself. Of this garden
Marshall P. Wilder says: "It is 150 years old; a cold matted soil,
filled with old apple and pear trees, currant bushes, flax, and
everything mingled in together. It is in a close, hived up place in the
city of Salem, and it is a wonder that he ever had a bunch of grapes to
show."

Unfortunately, this dissemination led to the confusion of some of the
numbers, a confusion which has never been satisfactorily straightened
out.

In 1867, No. 22, or 53, was given the name Salem. Two years later at the
earnest request of a committee from the Lake Shore Grape Growers'
Association, Rogers gave names to several of his hybrids, as listed
below. He stated that the names selected were either those of persons
noted for scientific or literary attainments, or else of counties and
towns in Massachusetts. There was some criticism at the time from those
who thought there were other numbers as well deserving of names as
those which were so distinguished. And it must be admitted that the
vines of this collection are remarkably equal in their possession of
good and bad characters. About 1870, Bush of Bushberg, Missouri,
received three sorts as _Rogers' No. 39_. One of these which was
particularly promising, he, with Rogers' consent, named Aminia. None of
the others has ever been named, although several of them are still
cultivated to a minor extent. The named varieties, with the
corresponding numbers, are as follows: 1. Goethe. 3. Massasoit. 4.
Wilder. 9. Lindley. 14. Gaertner. 15. Agawam. 19. Merrimac. 28. Requa.
39. Aminia. 41. Essex. 43. Barry. 44. Herbert. 53 or 22. Salem (but not
the Salem now known).

For some years, many grape-growers believed that these hybrids were
nothing more than seedlings of the wild Labrusca mother but it was soon
generally accepted that they were genuine hybrids. To those who are
familiar with Rogers' work, this was evident from the first, as the
Carter or Mammoth Globe is a self-sterile sort, and the sacks enclosing
the blossoms would prevent the introduction of other pollen than that
intentionally placed on the stigmas by Rogers himself. A. D. Rogers, a
brother of E. S. Rogers, in a communication to the _Horticulturist_, in
1858, says that "many of these seedlings had upright stamens," but of
the ones which were later named, Agawam alone is thus characterized.
This is important in considering the value of these varieties, as no
variety has ever become popular as a market sort which is self-sterile.

Rogers' Hybrids are unique in that the standard of excellence was so
high in all of the forty-five seedlings produced. Some have credited
this to the manner in which he did his work and in particular to the
excess of pollen applied to the stigmas; others consider it more likely
due to his choice of parent vines. Unfortunately the evidence bearing on
this point is not sufficient to form definite conclusions.

After the production of the seedlings mentioned above Rogers continued
the work, recrossing the varieties already produced with various
Vinifera varieties. None of these ever showed sufficient promise to be
introduced.

[Illustration: ROMMEL]


ROMMEL.

(Labrusca, Riparia, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _An. Hort._, =1889=:101. =2.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1890=:117. =3.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =13=:606. 1894. =4.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1894=:174. _fig._ =5.= Husmann, =1895=:125. =6.= _Kan. Sta.
     Bul._, =73=:182. 1897. =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:535, 548,
     556. 1898. =8.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1151, 1162. 1898. _fig._
     =9.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:41, 42, 44, 45, 53, 76. 1899. =10.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1899=:31. =11.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:271, 280.
     1900.

Rommel is rarely found under cultivation in New York, lacking somewhat
in robustness, hardiness and productiveness, and being very susceptible
to the leaf-hopper. The variety comes from Munson of Denison, Texas, and
is seemingly too far removed from the warm climate in which it
originated to be profitable in New York. Besides the defects named
above, it does not attain its natural high quality in this latitude and
the grapes crack badly as they ripen. The bunch and berry are attractive
in form, size and color as shown in the color-plate, though the
illustration does not do justice to the size of the bunch, the season of
1908, in which the fruit was produced, having been cold and wet and
therefore very unfavorable to this variety. At its best, Rommel is a
very good table grape and the authorities say makes a very fine white
wine. The variety is of interest to the student of grapes from the
standpoint of its breeding, having very largely the vine characters of
its maternal parent, Elvira, with somewhat better fruit. The name
commemorates the service to viticulture of Jacob Rommel of Morrison,
Missouri.

T. V. Munson originated Rommel in 1885 and introduced it in 1889. The
parents are Elvira pollinated by Triumph. Rommel was placed on the grape
list of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1899.

     Vine medium to vigorous, not always hardy, medium to productive,
     susceptible to injury by leaf-hoppers. Canes medium to long,
     moderately numerous, thick to medium, light to dark reddish-brown,
     surface somewhat rough; nodes enlarged, often flattened; internodes
     medium to short; diaphragm thick or nearly so; pith medium to
     large; shoots slightly glabrous; tendrils intermittent, medium to
     long, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds intermediate in size and thickness, short to medium,
     prominent, obtuse to conical, open very late. Young leaves tinged
     on under side and along margin of upper side with light
     rose-carmine. Leaves medium to above in size, roundish, thick;
     upper surface light green, dull, rugose; lower surface pale green,
     nearly free from pubescence but slightly hairy; leaf usually not
     lobed with terminus acute to acuminate; petiolar sinus medium to
     deep, narrow, often closed and overlapping; basal sinus lacking;
     lateral sinus very shallow when present; teeth medium to deep, of
     average width. Flowers semi-fertile, open moderately late; stamens
     upright.

     Fruit ripens in mid-season, ships and keeps fairly well. Clusters
     variable in size, above medium to short, moderately broad,
     cylindrical to slightly tapering, usually single-shouldered,
     compact to medium; peduncle long to medium, thick; pedicel of
     average length, slender, usually smooth; brush short, pale green.
     Berries large to medium, oblate to roundish, frequently compressed
     on account of compactness of cluster, light green with yellow
     tinge, glossy, covered with a moderate amount of gray bloom,
     persistent, firm, but breaking easily under pressure. Skin thin,
     cracks badly, medium to tender, adheres very slightly to the pulp,
     contains no pigment, without astringency. Flesh greenish,
     translucent, juicy, tender and melting, slightly stringy, sweet to
     agreeably tart at center, variable in quality but ranks fair to
     good, appears to be better in some locations. Seeds separate easily
     from the pulp, one to four, average two, medium in size and length,
     rather broad, sharp-pointed, very plump, brownish; raphe buried in
     a somewhat wide groove; chalaza intermediate in size, above center,
     oval to circular, indistinct.


R. W. MUNSON.

(Lincecumii, Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1893=:118. =2.= Husmann, =1895=:126.
     =3.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:280. 1900. =4.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._,
     =53=:49. 1901. =5.= _Rural N. Y._, =60=:614, 726. 1901. =6.= _Ib._,
     =62=:790, 886. 1903. =7.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1904=:239.

R. W. Munson, from Texas, is a somewhat promising variety for the North
for its intrinsic value, and is certainly interesting from the
standpoint of its breeding as it gives Northern growers a grape with a
generous admixture of Lincecumii blood. Its several essential vine
characters are very good though it is self-sterile and needs a companion
variety which produces an abundance of pollen. Concord and Brilliant are
recommended by the originator as notable pollenizers. R. W. Munson is
particularly resistant to black-rot, making it valuable for regions
where this fungus is a scourge. The fruit is sweet, juicy and very
pleasantly flavored, with tender pulp, and while not of the highest
quality yet a most pleasing and particularly refreshing grape. The
variety is well worthy more extensive trial in New York.

T. V. Munson of Denison, Texas, raised the original vine of R. W. Munson
from seed of Big Berry (a variety of Post-oak) pollinated by Triumph.
The seed was planted in 1887 and the resulting variety introduced by the
originator in the fall of 1894.

     Vine vigorous, doubtfully hardy, productive, healthy. Canes medium
     to nearly long, intermediate in number, thick to medium, dark red;
     internodes medium to long; tendrils intermittent, bifid. Leaves
     healthy. Flowers sterile or nearly so, open late; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens about with Concord, does not keep well. Clusters below
     medium to small, rather short, often single-shouldered, compact to
     medium. Berries medium to large, slightly oblate, dull black
     covered with a medium amount of blue bloom, inclined to shatter
     considerably, not very firm. Skin thin, variable in toughness, not
     astringent. Flesh pale green, rather tender when fully ripe,
     peculiarly vinous, nearly sweet at skin to agreeably tart at
     center, slightly spicy and with some Post-oak flavor, good in
     quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp, rather numerous,
     intermediate in size, length, and width. Raphe obscure in a very
     shallow groove; chalaza slightly above center, oval; obscure.


SAGE.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= Allen, =1848=:134. =2.= _Horticulturist_, =6=:575. 1851.
     _Ib._, =7=:87, 108. 1852. =4.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1853=:300,
     301. =5.= _Mag. Hort._, =24=:91. 1858. =6.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._,
     =1859=:48, 55, 66. =7.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1864=:134. =8.= _N. Y.
     Ag. Soc. Rpt._, =1865=:337. _fig._ =9.=(?) _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:151.

     _Mammoth_ (7, 8). ?MAMMOTH SAGE (9). _Sage_ (7, 8). _Globe_ (8).

This variety, which is variously known under the names Sage, Mammoth
Sage, Mammoth, and Globe, is of interest because it represents a type of
large-fruited, early-ripening Labruscas which have been used frequently
by breeders as the native parent in a Vinifera cross. A variety similar
to this was used in particular by E. S. Rogers as the mother plant in
making his notable crosses. They have also been used by White and
others.

The original vine was a chance seedling found by Henry E. Sage about
1811 on the banks of a small stream near Portland, Connecticut. The
variety was first brought to public notice by John Fiske Allen in 1848
through a very laudatory description which was much criticised by those
who objected to the foxy aroma of the Sage but as warmly defended by
others who liked the foxiness. The variety was later advertised and sent
out by the Shaker community at Harvard, Worcester County, Massachusetts.
Within a few years it seems to have been disseminated throughout eastern
New England, and was particularly acceptable in those sections where
Isabella failed to ripen. There is no evidence that it was ever planted
except in gardens. With the introduction of Concord and other early
varieties of higher quality the cultivation of the Sage was dropped. It
is probably now obsolete.

The best description we have of Sage is the following, copied from the
_United States Department of Agriculture Report_ for 1864:

     "It is much like most of the wild Fox grapes of this vicinity,
     [Massachusetts] but the berries are much larger, light chestnut or
     mahogany color, and they have a flattened or compressed shape,
     instead of being round, frequently an inch in diameter. The bunch
     is small with three to six berries in a round, ball-like cluster,
     with sometimes a side stem with one berry at the end of it for a
     shoulder. The stem of the bunch is not very long. The leaves
     usually are 'entire' with a short pointed termination at the end of
     the midrib, and two other points of the other divisions into which
     all American leaves are divided, making always either plainly, or
     in the rudimental state, five lobes. Thus the leaves are not much
     lobed, scarcely toothed, and have a rusty, woolly appearance. The
     young wood, last season's growth, is hard and wiry and covered with
     bristles. The grape itself is sweet, but has a hard pulp, that some
     compare to a piece of India-rubber when eating it. It is early, and
     perfectly hardy, as much so as any wild grape in this vicinity."


ST. LOUIS.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1899=:54. =2.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1905=:166. =3.= _Mich. Sta. Sp. Bul._, =30=:11. 1905.

As St. Louis grows on the Station grounds it is so similar to Worden and
Concord that it would seem to be superfluous in the grape list of the
State. But the variety is so highly recommended in the West, especially
in the states from which the above references come, that it is possibly
worthy of trial in the grape regions of New York as an early type of
Concord.

St. Louis was introduced by Henry Wallis of Wellston, Missouri, about
1897. In 1900, he states that it is a seedling of Concord, was
originated in St. Louis, and that it had created a sensation for twenty
years in the St. Louis markets. The general character of both fruit and
vine corroborates the Concord parentage though the frequently
intermittent tendrils indicate there is a strain of other than Labrusca
blood present.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, medium to productive. Canes long to medium,
     intermediate in number, often rather thick, medium brown to nearly
     dark reddish-brown deepening in color at the nodes, covered with
     considerable pubescence; tendrils continuous to intermittent, bifid
     to trifid. Leaves very large to medium, variable in color, thick;
     lower surface grayish-white tinged with bronze; heavily pubescent.
     Flowers fertile or nearly so, open medium early; stamens upright.
     Fruit ripens about with Concord, or slightly earlier, keeps and
     ships well. Clusters large to medium, intermediate in length,
     rather broad, usually single-shouldered but occasionally with a
     double shoulder, medium to compact. Berries nearly large to medium,
     roundish, dull black, covered with thick blue bloom, persistent.
     Skin of average thickness and toughness. Flesh tough, foxy, sweet
     at skin to slightly acid at center, good in quality with a slight
     resemblance to Concord. Seeds do not separate easily from the pulp,
     medium to above in size and width, intermediate in length.


SALEM.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1862=:148. =2.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._,
     =1865=:16. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1867=:114. =4.= Mead,
     =1867=:222. =5.= _Rec. of Hort._, =1868=:46. =6.= _N. Y. Ag. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1868=:228. =7.= _Mag. Hort._, =34=:7. 1868. =8.=
     _Horticulturist_, =24=:138. 1869. _fig._ =9.= _Grape Cult._,
     =1=:150, 181, 327. 1869. =10.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =5=:264. 1869.
     =11.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1869=:42. =12.= _Grape Cult._,
     =2=:148, 149, _fig._, 298. 1870. =13.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1877=:205. =14.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:42, 138. =15.= _N.
     Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =9=:329. 1890. =16.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:261.
     1893. =17.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:187. 1896. =18.= _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:535, 542, 543, 544, 548, 553. 1898. =19.=
     _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:175. 1899.

     ROGERS' NO. 22 (1, 2). _Rogers' No. 22_ (3, 5, 6, 9, 11, 12, 13,
     15). _Rogers' No. 53_ (4, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 17).

Salem is the one of Rogers' hybrids of which the originator is said to
have thought most and to which he gave the name of his place of
residence. Taking all of its characters, the variety is as close an
approximation to the ideal Rogers had in mind of a European grape and an
American vine as any one of the score or more of his hybrids. Salem
ranks among the best of these hybrids for either the garden or the
commercial vineyard, and while commonly found in both it has not been
sufficiently recognized by those who grow grapes for the market. It is
difficult to say why it is not more largely grown as a market fruit in
New York. The two chief faults, unproductiveness and susceptibility to
mildew, are not found in all localities, and in these at least and
especially near good markets, Salem ought to take high rank as a
commercial fruit.

As compared with other hybrids of Vinifera and Labrusca, Salem is early,
hardy, vigorous and fairly productive of handsome fruit of high quality
both for table and for wine-making. Though the color-plate does not show
it, there is a suggestion in bunch and berry of Black Hamburg, the
paternal parent. So, too, there is such a suggestion in the flavor and
the keeping quality and, as with the parent, the fruit neither cracks
nor shatters and therefore ships well. To the two faults named above
must be added that of pulpiness of berry, a defect common to many
hybrids of the two species represented in Salem. It is useless to
recommend for testing varieties that have been known as long and as
widely grown as Salem but it is worth while, is almost a duty, in a work
of this kind to urge further trials of some of the grapes of highest
quality, as Salem, on a commercial basis. Such fruit properly grown,
packed, and placed in the market ought to bring remunerative prices.

This one of Rogers' hybrids is _No. 22_ of his Vinifera-Labrusca
crosses. It early attracted favorable attention from the various
cultivators who had received vines from the originator for testing. It
was christened Salem by Rogers in 1867, two years earlier than his other
hybrids were named. At about this time, owing to a confusion of this
variety with some other, and charges that certain parties were sending
out a black grape under the name _Rogers' No. 22_, Rogers changed the
number of Salem to 53.

Salem was placed on the grape list of the American Pomological Society
fruit catalog in 1869 and was removed in 1871, reinstated in 1873, and
has since been retained. It is possible that the dropping of the name
from the catalog for the one year was a printer's oversight as there is
nothing in the body of the text to indicate a reason for such action.
Salem has always been one of the most popular of Rogers' hybrids and it
is offered for sale to-day by practically all grape nurserymen.

     Vine medium to vigorous, unusually hardy, variable in
     productiveness, susceptible to severe attacks of mildew. Canes
     long, of average number, intermediate in thickness, light to dark
     brown; nodes enlarged, usually not flattened; internodes medium to
     above in length; diaphragm thick; pith medium to above in size;
     shoots slightly pubescent; tendrils continuous to intermittent,
     long to medium, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds rather large, of average size, thick to medium, often
     compressed, roundish, obtuse to conical, open early. Young leaves
     faintly tinged on lower side with slight rose-carmine. Leaves
     variable in size, medium to thin; upper surface dark green, dull,
     of medium smoothness; lower surface pale green with slight bronze
     tinge, pubescent; veins moderately distinct; lobes none to three
     with terminus acute; petiolar sinus deep, narrow, often closed and
     overlapping; basal sinus lacking; lateral sinus shallow, narrow,
     often notched; teeth intermediate in depth and width. Flowers
     sterile, open in mid-season; stamens reflexed.

[Illustration: SALEM]

     Fruit ripens slightly before Concord, keeps and ships well.
     Clusters medium to large, rather short and broad, tapering to
     cylindrical, frequently heavily single-shouldered, compact;
     peduncle short to medium, thick; pedicel medium to short, thick,
     covered with few small warts, enlarged at point of attachment to
     berry; brush short, pale green. Berries large to medium, roundish,
     very dark red, dull, covered with a medium amount of blue bloom,
     decidedly persistent, soft. Skin thick, intermediate in toughness,
     adheres strongly to the pulp, contains no pigment, astringent.
     Flesh slightly translucent, juicy, tender, somewhat stringy,
     moderately fine-grained, inclined to vinous, sprightly, sweet at
     skin but acid at center, good to very good in quality. Seeds one to
     six, average four, large, long and broad, blunt, brownish; raphe
     shows as a distinct cord-like ridge; chalaza small, roughened and
     frequently with radiating furrows, much above center, variable in
     shape, distinct.


SCUPPERNONG.[210]

(Rotundifolia.)

     =1.= _Amer. Farmer_, 1:317. 1819. =2.= _Ib._, =3=:332. 1822. =3.=
     _Ib._, =9=:29, 30. 1827. =4.= _Ib._, =9=:139. 1827. =5.= Prince,
     =1830=:167. =6.= _Ib._, =1830=:170. =7.= Downing, =1845=:258. =8.=
     _Horticulturist_, =12=:457. 1857. =9.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._,
     =1857=:231. =10.= _Gar. Mon._, =5=:73, 74. 1863. =11.= _Grape
     Cult._, =1=:38, 280, 292. 1869. =12.= _Ib._, =3=:60. 1871. =13.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1871=:16. =14.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1881=:40, 68, 147, 153, 155. =15.= _Gar. Mon._, =28=:140, 173.
     1886. =16.= _Ala. Sta. Bul._, =29=:18. 1891. =17.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:177. _fig._ =18.= _Am. Gard._, =20=:688. 1899. =19.= _Ga.
     Sta. Bul._, =53=:49, 59. 1901. =20.= _N. C. Sta. Bul._, =187=:58,
     60. 1903. =21.= _S. C. Sta. Bul._, =132=:18. 1907.

     _American Muscadine_ (5, 10, of the South 7). _Bull_ (9, 17, of the
     South 7). _Bullace_ (9, 17). _Bullet_ (17, of the South 7). _Fox
     grape_ of the South (7). GREEN SCUPPERNONG (6). _Green Muscadine_
     (6). HICKMAN (3). _Hickman_ (5, 10). _Muscadine_ (9). ROANOKE (4).
     _Roanoke_ (5, 10, 17, of the South 7). _Scuppernong_ (3, 4, 5).
     _White Muscadine_ (11, 17). WHITE SCUPPERNONG (5). _Wild green
     Muscadine_ (6). _Yellow Muscadine_ (17).

The Scuppernong is preeminently the grape of the South. It is the chief
representative of the great species _Vitis rotundifolia_, which runs
riot in natural luxuriance from Delaware and Maryland to the Gulf, and
westward from the Atlantic to Arkansas and Texas. The name Scuppernong
was taken from the Indians and is now common in the geography of North
Carolina; a river, a town, a lake, and a swamp all bear this
appellation. Calvin Jones, an agriculturist of note in North Carolina
during the early part of the last century, gives the following history
of the name as applied to the grape it now distinguishes:[211] "This
grape & wine had the name of Scuppernong given to them by Henderson &
myself, in compliment to James Blount of Scuppernong, who first diffused
a general knowledge of it in several well written communications in our
paper--and it is cultivated with more success on that river than in any
other part of the state, perhaps, except the Island of Roanoke."

Scuppernong is said to have been found on Roanoke Island at the time of
the landing of Sir Walter Raleigh's colony. There is a tradition that an
old vine now growing on this island is the original vine. At an early
day it was quite common to propagate Scuppernong by seed, pulling out
all vines bearing black fruit as soon as the color of the fruit could be
determined. Because of this practice it is probable that there are many
seminal varieties under the general name Scuppernong. All that seems to
be required for a grape to pass under this name is that the vine should
be a Rotundifolia and the fruit white.

In the horticultural accounts of the history of Scuppernong it is
commonly spoken of as having been found wild during the latter part of
the eighteenth century. But Lawson, writing about 1700, in the account
quoted on page 37 of this work, describes with sufficient accuracy a
white Rotundifolia which could hardly be any other than the Scuppernong.
It is, thus, in a sense, a botanical as well as a horticultural variety.
Its close relationship to the black form of Rotundifolia is attested by
the fact that its seedlings are as often, probably more often, black
than white. That Scuppernong is more distinct than the other varieties
of Rotundifolia is indicated by the fact that of the ten cultivated
varieties of Rotundifolia now grown in the South, James, Thomas, Eden,
Meisch, Flowers, Memory, Seedlin, Tenderpulp, Jeter, and Scuppernong as
given by Newman,[212] all are black but the last named.

Scuppernong vines are to be found on arbors, in gardens, or half wild,
on trees and fences on nearly every farm in the South Atlantic States.
As a rule, these vines receive little cultivation, are unpruned, and
are given no care of any kind, but even under neglect they produce large
and sure crops, are almost immune to mildew, rot, phylloxera, or other
fungal or insect pests. The plants give not only an abundance of fruit
but on arbors and trellises are much prized for their shade and beauty.
The growth of the vine is prodigious; seemingly well authenticated
reports state that vines are known which cover an acre of land; other
tales, having at least the semblance of truth, are equally marvellous.
Thus there are accounts of vines of this variety over a hundred years
old and which bear 500 bushels of fruit and make 2000 gallons of wine.

The fruit, to a palate accustomed to other grapes, is not very
acceptable, having a musky flavor and a somewhat repugnant odor, which,
however, becomes with familiarity, it is said, quite agreeable. The pulp
is sweet and juicy but is lacking in sprightliness. From the Scuppernong
are made several very good wines and it would seem that the future of
this and other varieties of Rotundifolia, from a commercial standpoint,
lies largely in their value for wine. Quite aside from the quality of
the fruit as a table grape, they are not suitable for the market from
the fact that the berries drop from the bunch in ripening and become
more or less smeared with juice so that as they are brought into market
in quantity, their appearance is not at all appetizing.

     Vine vigorous to rank, not hardy in the North, very productive.
     Canes long, numerous, slender, vary from ash-gray to grayish-brown;
     surface smooth, thickly covered with small, light brown dots; pith
     greenish; tendrils intermittent, simple. Leaves small, thin; upper
     surface light green, smooth; lower surface very pale green,
     slightly pubescent along the ribs, otherwise smooth; veins
     inconspicuous. Flowers open very late; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens late, even in the South, often ripening unevenly,
     appears to keep well but berries drop as they mature. Clusters
     small, roundish, not shouldered, loose. Berries very few per
     cluster, large, roundish, dull green often with brown tinge, not
     persistent, firm. Skin very thick and tough, covered with many
     small russet dots; no pigment. Flesh pale green, juicy, tender and
     soft, fine-grained, very foxy, sweet to agreeably tart, fair to
     good in quality. Seeds slightly adherent to pulp, large, medium to
     short, often very broad, not notched, quite blunt, plump, surface
     unusually smooth, brownish; raphe buried in a narrow, shallow
     groove; chalaza small, nearly central, elongated, rather obscure.
     Must 88 deg..


SECRETARY.

(Vinifera, Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Grape Cult._, =2=:158. 1870. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1871=:41, 112. =3.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1872=:94. =4.=
     _Horticulturist_, =29=:328. 1874. =5.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1876-7=:32. =6.= _N. J. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:11. =7.= _W. N.
     Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =27=:21. 1882. =8.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:135.
     _fig._ =9.= _Mass. Hatch Sta. Bul._, =37=:11, 16. 1896. =10.= _Tex.
     Sta. Bul._, =48=:1151, 1162. 1898. =11.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._,
     =169=:176. 1899. =12.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:41. 1891.

Injured by mildew and rot which nearly every year attack leaves, fruit
and young wood, Secretary is able only in exceptional seasons and in
favored localities to produce a crop of good grapes. Nevertheless it has
many excellent qualities as an amateur grape and should not be lost to
cultivation. The fact that it is the result of the fecundation of a
Riparia by a Vinifera, both parents being excellent varieties, gives
Secretary added interest and value and makes its perpetuation still
further worth while.

There is no question as to the rank of the fruit characters of
Secretary. Taken together they make it a grape of exceptionally high
quality, the berries being meaty yet juicy, fine-grained and tender with
a sweet, spicy, vinous flavor. The bunches are large, well formed with
medium-sized, purplish-black berries covered with thick bloom, making a
very handsome cluster. While the vine and foliage somewhat resemble
those of Clinton, one of its parents, the variety is not nearly as
hardy, vigorous or productive nor as healthy, falling short in all of
these respects and making its culture in New York precarious. Moreover,
in any but favored localities in this State, its maturity is somewhat
uncertain. These defects of vine have kept Secretary from becoming of
commercial importance and make it of value only to the amateur.

Secretary is one of the first productions of Ricketts of Newburgh. He
grew the original vine from seed of Clinton fertilized by Muscat
Hamburg. Planted in 1867, it is said to have borne a little fruit when
one year old from the seed. Specimens of the variety were exhibited
before the American Pomological Society in 1871. Ricketts sold the
variety about 1875 to S. W. Underhill of Croton Point, New York, who
introduced it a few years later. On account of its many weak points it
has never been popular and it is apparently not offered for sale by any
of the nurserymen to-day.

[Illustration: SENASQUA]

     Vine not uniform in vigor, doubtfully hardy, quite variable in
     productiveness, inclined to be an uncertain bearer, subject to
     attacks of fungi. Canes medium to below in length, numerous,
     intermediate in thickness, light brown but conspicuously darker at
     nodes, surface covered with thin blue bloom; tendrils intermittent,
     bifid. Leaves small to medium, thin; upper surface light green,
     nearly dull, smooth; lower surface pale green, almost glabrous;
     veins indistinct. Flowers semi-fertile, open early; stamens
     upright.

     Fruit ripens soon after Concord, keeps and ships well. Clusters
     medium to large, long to medium, of average width, cylindrical to
     tapering, frequently with a medium to large single shoulder,
     variable in compactness but often loose and with many abortive
     fruits. Berries large to medium, roundish to oval, somewhat
     flattened at point of attachment to pedicel, dark purplish-black,
     glossy, covered with thick blue bloom, persistent, firm. Skin
     intermediate in thickness, tough with wine-colored pigment. Flesh
     greenish, juicy, fine-grained, tender, vinous, sweet, good in
     quality. Seeds separate readily from the pulp, medium to nearly
     large, broad to medium, slightly notched, long to above medium,
     dark brown; raphe shows as a moderately distinct cord; chalaza
     small, above center, distinctly oval. Must 93 deg..


SENASQUA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1868=:10. =2.= Downing, =1872=:120
     app. =3.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =8=:9. 1870. _fig._ =4.= _U. S. D. A.
     Rpt._, =1875=:384. =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:138. _fig._ =6.= _N.
     Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =9=:327. 1890. =7.= _Ib._, =11=:636. 1892. =8.=
     _Ib._, =17=:535, 546, 547. 1898. =9.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:49.
     1901.

It is almost a sufficient characterization of Senasqua to say that it is
a Labrusca-Vinifera hybrid. The merits and demerits of the cross-breeds
of these two species are so similar in the varieties of them now in
cultivation that they can be placed in a group having as few variations
as can be found in the parent species. The characters of these hybrid
grapes have been well discussed in writing of the varieties sent out by
Rogers and the place of Senasqua is well designated when the statement
is made that it is very similar to Rogers' hybrids. The vine lacks
somewhat in vigor, hardiness, productiveness and health. The grapes are
of good quality and when well grown the variety is up to the average of
such hybrids in fruit characters so far as the palate is concerned.
Unfortunately the berries have a tendency to crack which is aggravated
by the fact that the bunches are so compact as to crowd the berries and
thus add to the cracking. Senasqua is one of the latest to open its buds
and is therefore seldom injured by late frosts. This variety is hardly
as well adapted for commercial viticulture as several other such hybrids
and can be recommended only for the garden for the sake of variety.

Stephen W. Underhill of Croton Point, New York, originated Senasqua from
seed of Concord pollinated by Black Prince. The seed was planted in 1863
and the resulting variety introduced about 1870. This variety, although
it attracted much attention at the time of its introduction, was never
popular. It was rather widely tested but was soon dropped and is to-day
practically obsolete. The foliage and vines of Senasqua show little
trace of Vinifera but the descent from the foreign species is plainly
marked in the fruit.

     Vine variable in vigor, sometimes weak and tender, medium to
     unproductive, somewhat susceptible to attacks of mildew. Canes
     short, few in number, above average size, light to dark
     reddish-brown; nodes enlarged, flattened; internodes short to
     medium; diaphragm thick; pith of medium size; shoots slightly
     pubescent; tendrils intermittent, long to medium, trifid to bifid.

     Leaf-buds below average size, short, of medium thickness, conical,
     open very late, tinged on under side and slightly along margin of
     upper side with light rose-carmine. Leaves intermediate in size and
     thickness, light green, slightly glossy, medium to somewhat rugose;
     lower surface whitish-green, pubescent; veins distinct; leaf
     usually not lobed with terminus acute; petiolar sinus of average
     depth, medium to narrow; basal and lateral sinuses shallow and
     narrow when present; teeth intermediate in depth and width. Flowers
     fertile, open late; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens a little later than Concord, keeps well. Clusters
     large to medium, intermediate in length, broad to medium,
     irregularly tapering, usually with a small single shoulder, very
     compact with uneven surface; peduncle short to medium, thick;
     pedicel intermediate in length, thick, usually smooth, enlarged at
     point of attachment to fruit; brush short to medium, green with
     slight red tinge. Berries above medium in size, roundish,
     reddish-black to black, covered with heavy blue bloom, persistent,
     firm. Skin medium to thick, tender, inclined to crack, adheres
     strongly to the pulp, contains a fair amount of light wine-colored
     pigment, without astringency. Flesh greenish, translucent, very
     juicy, tender, meaty, vinous, somewhat spicy, sprightly, good in
     quality. Seeds separate readily from the pulp, one to five, average
     two, intermediate in size, rather long, narrow, usually one-sided,
     light brown; raphe buried in a narrow groove; chalaza small, above
     center, oval, obscure.


SHELBY.

(Labrusca, Riparia.)

     =1.= _Vineyardist_, Oct. 15, 1893. =2.= _Rural N. Y._, =53=:683.
     1894. =3.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:180. =4.= _Rural N. Y._, =55=:638,
     _fig._, 642. 1896. =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:535, 546, 547,
     557. 1898. =6.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:49. 1901.

Shelby is hardly worth cultivating in New York. It ripens at a time when
there are many other grapes which surpass it in flavor and appearance.
It has, however, been somewhat highly spoken of and grape experimenters
may want to try the variety. The name is from Shelby, Ohio, the
birthplace of the originator.

D. S. Marvin of Watertown, New York, originated the Shelby about 1880.
It was introduced in the fall of 1894. The originator writes that the
parentage of this variety is not positively known but it is supposed to
be a Labrusca-Riparia cross. The botanical characters of the fruit and
vine as it grows on the Station grounds verify this supposition.

     Vine vigorous, variable in hardiness, medium to productive. Canes
     long, numerous, medium to slender; tendrils intermittent, sometimes
     continuous, bifid to trifid. Leaves uniform in size, green, often
     thin; lower surface grayish-green with tinge of bronze, strongly
     pubescent. Flowers fertile or nearly so, open in mid-season or
     earlier; stamens upright. Fruit ripens early, sometimes before
     Winchell, does not keep nor ship well. Clusters medium to below in
     size, short, frequently with a single shoulder, shorter and more
     compact than Winchell. Berries medium to small, roundish, light
     green to yellowish-green, covered with thin gray bloom, somewhat
     inclined to shatter. Skin thin, variable in toughness, peculiarly
     astringent. Flesh tough, stringy, foxy, sweet from skin to center,
     mild, fair to good in quality. Seeds do not separate readily from
     the pulp, not very numerous, medium to below in size, short, broad,
     plump.


STANDARD.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Bourquiniana?)

     =1.= _Kan. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1886=:187. =2.= _Mo. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1892=:266. =3.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:637. 1892. =4.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:180. =5.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:136. 1898.
     =6.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:535, 548, 557. 1898. =7.= _Mo.
     Sta. Bul._, =46=:41. 1899.

     _Burr's No. 2_ (1).

Standard is said to be a full sister of Jewel, but it is not equal to
the sister nor nearly equal to the reputed parent, Delaware. The variety
seems to be thought highly of in the West and it is possible that it has
greater value there than in New York. The quality of the grape is high
and it is said to make a light-colored wine of good body, taste and
aroma, but taking it all and all it does not rise above mediocre and
cannot be recommended unless for trial.

The variety was originated by John Burr of Leavenworth, Kansas, from
seed of Delaware planted about 1874. It was introduced in 1887 by
Stayman & Black of Leavenworth, Kansas. There are few characters of
either vine or fruit that show evidence of having come from Delaware.

     Vine variable in vigor, usually hardy in ordinary seasons,
     productive. Canes short to medium, few in number, rather slender;
     tendrils continuous to intermittent, bifid to trifid. Leaves not
     very healthy, medium to small, moderately light green; lower
     surface tinged with bronze, pubescent. Flowers partly fertile, open
     in mid-season; stamens upright. Fruit ripens about with Concord,
     usually keeps fairly well. Clusters not uniform in size, short,
     frequently with a small single shoulder, compact to medium. Berries
     small to above medium, roundish, very dark reddish-black covered
     with a large amount of lilac bloom, sometimes shatter considerably
     from pedicel. Skin thin, rather tender. Flesh unusually pale green,
     somewhat stringy, vinous, tender, sweet from skin to center, good
     in quality. Seeds slightly adherent, medium to small, intermediate
     in width; chalaza oval, often distinctly above center.


STARK-STAR.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Aestivalis.)

     =1.= _National Nur._, =10=:128, 133. 1902. =2.= _Rural N. Y._,
     =62=:788. 1903. =3.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1903=:65, 208, 274,
     276. =4.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1904=:301.

Stark-Star is receiving careful attention in the South and Southwest but
unfortunately it does not ripen early enough to promise well for this
latitude. On the Station grounds it ripens after Catawba, which does not
always mature. If the variety fulfills the high expectations of it in
the region of its origin it is worthy a trial in the regions of this
State where the Catawba ripens.

The variety was originated by Joseph Bachman of Altus, Arkansas, from
seed of Catawba fertilized by Norton or Hermann. The seed was planted
about 1892. Stark-Star was introduced by Stark Brothers, of Louisiana,
Missouri.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, healthy, productive. Canes medium to short,
     numerous, often slender, roughened; tendrils continuous to
     intermittent, bifid to trifid. Leaves large to medium, dark green,
     frequently thin; lower surface pale green, slightly pubescent,
     cobwebby. Fruit ripens later than Catawba, appears to be an
     excellent keeper. Clusters large, medium to long, inclined to
     broadness, frequently with a well marked short single shoulder,
     very compact. Berries medium to below in size, oval to roundish but
     frequently compressed on account of compactness of cluster, black
     when ripe, covered with blue bloom, persistent. Skin intermediate
     in thickness, tender. Flesh pale green, not very juicy, tough and
     solid, slightly aromatic and spicy, almost sweet, fair to good in
     quality. Seeds adhere somewhat to the pulp, numerous, medium to
     small, intermediate in length and width, plump; raphe shows as a
     distinct cord; chalaza distinctly above center to nearly central.


SUPERB.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Aestivalis.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1891=:126. =2.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1891=:126. =3.= _Rural N. Y._, =52=:636. 1893. _fig._ =4.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1894=:180. =5.= Husmann, =1895=:38. =6.= _N. Y. Sta. An.
     Rpt._, =18=:396. 1899. =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1899=:28, =8.=
     _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:49. 1901.

The quality of Superb ranges from good to very good but the appearance
of the fruit is against the variety. It resembles Eumelan, the reputed
parent, in size, shape, and color but is not as attractive. The vine on
the Station grounds is not such as to recommend it highly, and since it
has been known for at least twenty years without having become at all
popular with grape-growers, it may be assumed that the grape has
weaknesses elsewhere as well as here.

A. F. Rice of Griswoldville, Georgia, originated this variety, it is
said, from seed of Eumelan. The seed was planted in 1880 near South
Weymouth, Massachusetts. Superb was placed on the grape list of the
American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1899.

     Vine medium to vigorous, usually hardy, healthy, productive. Canes
     short to medium, few in number, often tapering, ash-gray changing
     to light or dark brown; tendrils continuous, bifid. Leaves healthy,
     medium to large, moderately light green; lower surface
     grayish-green, thinly pubescent, the pubescence being distributed
     in flecks. Flowers strongly self-fertile, open in mid-season or
     later; stamens upright. Fruit ripens before Concord, keeps and
     ships well. Clusters intermediate in size and width, medium to
     long, frequently with a long, loose single shoulder, compact.
     Berries medium to below in size, roundish to oval, dark
     purplish-black covered with thin blue bloom, persistent, not very
     firm. Skin thick, tough, without astringency. Flesh juicy, tender,
     aromatic, sweet from skin to center, spicy, good to very good in
     quality. Seeds separate readily from the pulp, medium to small,
     medium to long, sharp-pointed; raphe occasionally shows as a
     partially submerged cord in a broad groove; chalaza distinctly
     above center.


TAYLOR.

(Riparia, Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Valley Farmer_, =1858=:122. =2.= _Horticulturist_, =14=:486.
     1859. =3.= _Ib._, =15=:34. 1860. =4.= _Gar. Mon._, =2=:68, 119,
     163. 1860. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1860=:78. =6.=
     _Horticulturist_, =19=:156. 1864. =7.= Husmann, =1866=:104. =8.=
     Fuller, =1867=:231. =9.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:44, 74, 242, 291, 296.
     1869. =10.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:161. =11.= _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:133. =12.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:20, 138. =13.=
     _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1151, 1162. 1898. =14.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._,
     =46=:41, 43, 45, 46, 76. 1899. =15.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:49.
     1901.

     BULLITT (1, 4). _Bullitt_ (3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 12). TAYLOR (2, 5).
     _Taylor_ (4, 11). TAYLOR BULLIT (13, 14). TAYLOR'S BULLITT (8, 11).
     _Taylor's Bullitt_ (12).

Taylor is hardly known in New York nor, indeed, is it now much grown
elsewhere. It is of interest for the part it has played in the grape
culture of the past and especially for its worthy offspring. Many of
these now outrank the parent in the regions and for the purposes for
which Taylor is grown. In truth, the most valuable quality of Taylor
seems to be its capacity for transmitting its good characters to its
seedlings; some of course fall much below it, as a table or wine grape,
but a considerable number quite equal it, and a few surpass it, but all
resemble the parent vine much more than is common among grapes. While it
is from the species to which Taylor belongs that we must look for our
hardiest vines yet this grape and its offspring, though not particularly
tender to cold, do best in southern regions as they require a long, warm
summer and fall to mature properly. Taylor was long grown in both Europe
and California as a grafting stock for the Old World varieties as a
protection against phylloxera, and is still somewhat cultivated in these
regions for that purpose.

The quality of the fruit of Taylor is from fair to good, the flavor
being sweet, pure, delicate and spicy and the flesh tender and juicy,
but the bunches are small, the flowers infertile so that the berries do
not set well and give very imperfect and unsightly clusters. The skin is
such, too, that it cracks badly, a defect that is seemingly transmitted
to many of the seedlings of the variety. The vine is strong, healthy,
hardy but not very productive. Taylor is essentially a wine grape, and
it is not likely that it or many of the varieties bred from it will make
table grapes. The wine is said to be exceptionally good, of great body
and high flavor.

The original vine of Taylor was a wild seedling found in the early part
of the last century on the Cumberland Mountains near the
Kentucky-Tennessee line by a Mr. Cobb who planted the vine on his farm
in Shelby County, Kentucky. Later the farm was sold to Cuthbert Bullitt.
About 1840, the grape came to the attention of Judge John Taylor of
Jericho, Henry County, Kentucky, an enthusiastic amateur horticulturist
who secured the vine from Bullitt and sent cuttings to many
grape-growers for testing. It was early introduced into the grape region
of the middle West where it was widely tested but was never extensively
planted owing to its lack of productiveness. Its culture has been on the
wane for many years and only an occasional nurseryman in that section
handles the variety to-day. This variety has, at different times, passed
under the names Bullitt, Taylor, Taylor's Bullitt, with various
spellings of the name Bullitt.

The following description has been compiled from various sources:

     Vine vigorous to rank, healthy, hardy, variable in productiveness.
     Leaves small, attractive in color, smooth. Flowers bloom early;
     stamens reflexed. Fruit ripens about two weeks before Isabella.
     Clusters small to medium, shouldered, loose to moderately compact.
     Berries small to medium, roundish, pale greenish-white, sometimes
     tinged with amber. Skin very thin. Pulp sweet, spicy, fair to good
     in quality.


TELEGRAPH.

(Labrusca, Aestivalis.)

     =1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1863=:549. =2.= _Gar. Mon._, =9=:51.
     1867. =3.= _Ib._, =10=:19, 344. 1868. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1869=:42. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1869=:56. =6.= _Grape
     Cult._, =1=:44, 115, 296. 1869. =7.= _Gar. Mon._, =11=:83. 1869.
     =8.= _Horticulturist_, =30=:73. 1875. =9.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:82,
     139. =10.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =36=:43. 1891. =11.= _N. Y.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:637. 1892. =12.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol.
     =9=:187. 1896. =13.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:535, 546, 547,
     557. 1898. =14.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:41, 42, 44, 45. 1899. =15.=
     _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:237. 1902. =16.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1906=:65, 67.

     CHRISTINE (2, 3, 7). _Christine_ (4, 8, 9, 10, 12). _Telegraph_ (2,
     3).

The characters of Telegraph are not such as to give it high rank among
grapes and now that nearly forty years have passed since its origin, and
many better varieties have come into cultivation, the variety is worth
mentioning only as a matter of record. Its most remarkable character is
compact, well shouldered bunches, making them attractive in appearance
though somewhat small for a commercial variety. Telegraph is susceptible
to rot and the birds are particularly fond of its fruit. It ripens very
early and is of better quality than Hartford--not high praise. The
variety is peculiar in that the ripening season seems to vary from a
few days after Hartford to as late as Concord. It is earlier,
comparatively, in the South than in the North; that is, in cool summers
it matures slowly.

Telegraph, or Christine, as it appears to have first been called, is a
chance seedling which appeared about the middle of the last century in
the yard of a Mr. Christine, Hestonville, near Westchester, Chester
County, Pennsylvania. About 1860 P. R. Freas, editor of the _Germantown
Telegraph_, to whom fruit was sent, bestowed upon it the name of his
paper, which finally supplanted the original name. It was placed on the
grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1869 and
removed in 1899. Telegraph is apparently a Labrusca with a strain of
Aestivalis.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, usually healthy, very productive. Canes
     unusually long, medium to numerous; tendrils continuous, trifid to
     bifid. Leaves healthy, medium to large, inclined to roundish, light
     green; lower surface grayish-white, pubescent. Flowers fertile,
     open in mid-season or earlier; stamens upright. Fruit usually
     ripens soon after Hartford but sometimes later, a fair shipper and
     keeper. Clusters medium to small, often short, broad, cylindrical,
     blunt at ends, single-shouldered, very compact. Berries
     intermediate in size, roundish to slightly oval on account of
     compactness of cluster, dull black covered with a large amount of
     blue bloom, persistent. Skin intermediate in thickness, tough, does
     not adhere to the pulp, astringent. Flesh greenish, tough and
     solid, slightly foxy, pleasant flavor, sweet at skin to tart at
     center, fair to good in quality. Seeds somewhat adherent and
     numerous, medium to above in size, variable in shape and size.


TO-KALON.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =1=:459. 1835. =2.= _N. Y. Ag. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1847=:353. =3.= _Mag. Hort._, =21=:42, 1855. =4.= _Ib._, =22=:507.
     1856. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1856=:163. =6.= Downing,
     =1857=:345. =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1858=:72. =8.=
     _Horticulturist_, =14=:299. 1859. _fig._ =9.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1860=:81. =10.= _Ib._, =1862=:146. =11.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._,
     =1862=:90. =12.= _Gar. Mon._, =5=:73, 74. 1863. =13.= Grant,
     =1864=:11. =14.= _Gar. Mon._, =8=:362. 1866. =15.= _Grape Cult._,
     =1=:327. 1869. =16.= Downing, =1869=:556. =17.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1883=:139.

     _The Beautiful_ (16). CARTER (4). _Carter_ (7, 10, 16, 17, of
     Boston 12). _Spofford Seedling_ (16, 17). WYMAN (3). _Wyman_ (10,
     12, 16, 17).

The fruit characters of To-Kalon are so similar to those of Catawba that
it was hardly worthy of introduction. Beside duplicating the Catawba in
fruit the vines are not healthy, being very susceptible to mildew and
rot, the fruit drops badly, and the crop does not ripen well. The
quality of the fruit is very good, once it can be secured. A point in
its favor is that it ripens a little before Catawba. The variety long
since ceased to be of commercial importance and can now be found but
rarely in collections.

To-Kalon was originated in the early part of the last century by Dr.
Spofford of Lansingburg, New York. The originator states that it is a
seedling of a European grape, but from its resemblance to Catawba it is
supposed by many to have been a seedling of that variety. Wyman and
Carter are two varieties of later introduction which are said to be
identical with To-Kalon, but as the origin of each is apparently
authentic and distinct it appears more probable that they are merely
similar sorts. To-Kalon was placed on the list of sorts recommended by
the American Pomological Society in 1862 but was dropped from this list
in 1871.

The following description has been compiled from various sources:

     Vine vigorous to rank, variable in productiveness, hardy, often
     mildews badly. Foliage large, abundant. Flowers do not always set
     well. Fruit ripens somewhat earlier than Catawba. Clusters large,
     shouldered. Berries large, oval to oblate, darker than Catawba,
     covered with heavy bloom, shells. Pulp sweet, of pure flavor,
     melting, very good in quality.


TRIUMPH.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Grape Cult._, =2=:295. 1870. =2.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =9=:84.
     1871. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:33, 40, 162. =4.= Downing,
     =1881=:169 app. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1883=:26. =6.= _Bush.
     Cat._, =1883=:140, _fig._, 141. =7.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1884=:217. =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:104. =9.= _N. Y. Sta.
     An. Rpt._, =11=:637. 1892. =10.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:142. 1898.
     =11.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:535, 548, 557. 1898. =12.= _Miss.
     Sta. Bul._, =56=:17. 1899. =13.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:176.
     1899. =14.= _Ala. Sta. Bul._, =110=:89. 1900. =15.= _Ga. Sta.
     Bul._, =53=:49, 52, 59. 1901. =16.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:243.
     1902. =17.= _Traite gen. de vit._, =5=:186. 1903.

     _Campbell's Concord Hybrid No. 6_ (6). _Campbell's Seedling No. 6_
     (17). _Hybride de Concord No. 6_ (17).

When quality, color, shape and size of bunch and berry are all
considered, Triumph is one of the finest dessert grapes of America. When
at its best it is a magnificent bunch of golden grapes of highest
quality, esteemed even in southern Europe where it must compete with the
best of the Viniferas, though unfortunately it is nearly as susceptible
in that region to phylloxera as the Old World varieties, a defect which
has caused its relegation there from commercial vineyards to the
collections of experimenters and amateurs. In America its commercial
importance is curtailed by the fact that it requires a long season for
its proper development and the variety justifies its name only in the
South and more particularly in the Southwest. In the latitude of New
York it is doubtfully hardy and the short summer season never permits it
to attain the quality and beauty which characterize it further south.

Triumph has, in general, the vine characters of the Labrusca parent
Concord, especially its habit of growth, vigor, productiveness and
foliage characters, falling short in hardiness, resistance to fungal
diseases and earliness of maturity. Even in New York the vines are as
vigorous and set nearly as much fruit as Concord; but they are injured
in cold winters unless protected, and suffer in particular from the
mildews. The fruit matures with or a little later than the Catawba. It
proves, in regions where it is largely grown, to be quite adaptable to
different soils and locations and the small amount of data at hand on
this point in New York suggests that this adaptability holds for the
grape regions of this State as well. It prefers, if anything, a deep
soil to a shallow one and alluvial or clayey soils to lighter lands.

While the vine characters of Triumph are those of Labrusca there is
scarcely a suggestion of the coarseness, or of the foxy odor and taste
of Labrusca; and the objectionable seeds, pulp, and skin of the native
grape give way to the far less objectionable structures of Vinifera.
Grapes of this variety do not have the firm and often disagreeable
pulpiness of many other similar hybrids, as for instance most of Rogers'
hybrids. The flesh is tender and melting and the flavor rich, sweet,
vinous, pure and delicate, giving the variety high rank among the best
American grapes. In the North, as would be expected from its lack of
proper maturity, the flavor is insipid as compared with the same
character in the South. The skins of the berries are faulty being more
apparent in eating than those of Vinifera and under unfavorable
conditions crack badly; because of the tenderness of the skin the
variety neither ships nor keeps remarkably well. Triumph is not only one
of the best dessert grapes but it is said to make a very good white
wine.

[Illustration: TRIUMPH]

There are numerous pure-bred and cross-bred offsprings of Triumph in
America which indicate that this variety may be very successfully used
in grape-breeding. Munson of Texas, in particular, among other
viticulturists, has used it to advantage in breeding work, his Bailey,
Big Extra, Big Hope, Carman, Early Golden, Fern Munson, Governor Ross,
Newman, Ragan, Rommel, R. W. Munson, W. B. Munson, all having been bred
with Triumph as an ancestor.

When all of its qualities and characters are considered, and for all
parts of America, it can hardly be disputed that Triumph is the best of
the hybrids of the two species from which it comes that has been
produced by artificial fertilization. That it does not succeed better in
New York is a distinct loss to the viticulture of the State.

Triumph was originated nearly a half century ago by George W. Campbell
of Delaware, Ohio, from seed of Concord fertilized by Chasselas Musque
(Joslyn's St. Albans). The originator considered it of no value in his
vineyard but sent it to Samuel Miller of Bluffton, Missouri, who gave it
the name Triumph. It was placed on the grape list of the American
Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1883.

     Vine vigorous, doubtfully hardy, medium to very productive,
     somewhat subject to attacks of mildew. Canes medium to long,
     intermediate in number and thickness, moderately dark brown,
     surface covered with a slight amount of bloom; nodes enlarged,
     variable in shape; internodes medium to above in length; diaphragm
     thick; pith medium in size; shoots slightly pubescent; tendrils
     intermittent, medium to long, trifid, sometimes bifid.

     Leaf-buds large to medium, long and thick, obtuse to conical, open
     late. Young leaves tinged on under side and along margin of upper
     side with brownish-carmine. Leaves large, of average thickness;
     upper surface light green, dull, medium to slightly rugose; lower
     surface grayish-white, pubescent; veins distinct; leaf usually not
     lobed with terminus obtuse to acute; petiolar sinus medium to deep,
     narrow, often closed and overlapping; basal sinus absent; lateral
     sinus shallow and narrow when present; teeth deep, wide to medium.
     Flowers fertile, open late; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens with Catawba or later, does not rank among the best
     keepers. Clusters very large to medium, long, broad, tapering to
     cylindrical, sometimes single-shouldered, compact; peduncle short
     to medium, above average thickness; pedicel medium to short,
     slender, smooth, considerably enlarged at point of attachment to
     fruit; brush short, pale yellowish-green. Berries medium to above
     in size, oval, pale green or golden yellow, glossy, covered with
     heavy gray bloom, persistent, firm. Skin thin, variable in
     toughness, sometimes inclined to crack, adheres considerably to the
     pulp, contains no pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh light green,
     translucent, juicy, fine-grained, tender, somewhat vinous, good to
     very good. Seeds separate easily from the pulp, one to five,
     average three, below medium to small, intermediate in width, long,
     brownish; raphe sometimes visible being partly submerged in the
     short shallow groove; chalaza of average size, above center, oval
     to circular, distinct.


ULSTER.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:141. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1885=:104. =3.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885-6=:224. =4.= _Am.
     Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1889=:24. =5.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1891=:128.
     =6.= _Rural N. Y._, =50=:691. 1891. =7.= _Ib._, =51=:170, 681.
     1892. =8.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:637. 1892. =9.= _Ill. Sta.
     Bul._, =28=:262. 1893. =10.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:183. =11.= _W. N.
     Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =39=:26. 1894. =12.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:536, 548, 553, 557. 1898. =13.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:240.
     1902. =14.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =205=:41. 1903.

     ULSTER PROLIFIC (1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 11, 13). _Ulster Prolific_ (8, 10).

The accompanying color-plate does not do justice to Ulster as to size
and beauty of the fruit but it well illustrates one of the chief faults
of the variety. The vines usually set too much fruit in spite of efforts
to control the crop by pruning, and two undesirable results follow: The
bunches are small and the vines, lacking vigor at best, fail to fully
recover from the over-fruitfulness. Over-productiveness and lack of
vigor are the two defects in Ulster that have kept it from becoming of
more importance commercially and a greater favorite as a garden grape.
The quality of the fruit is very good, being much like that of Catawba
both in flesh characters and in flavor. The color of the berries seems
to vary greatly, sometimes being nearly as red as Catawba and under
other conditions an unattractive green with a reddish tinge. As a rule
the fruit keeps well but there are exceptions especially when the
variety is not grown under the conditions best suited to it. Ulster has
many good qualities but its deficiency in vigor and capriciousness in
both vine and fruit characters prevent its becoming a grape of value for
either vineyard or garden.

Ulster was originated by A. J. Caywood of Marlboro, New York, and was
introduced by the originator about 1885. It was included in the list of
sorts recommended by the American Pomological Society in 1899. Its
parents are said to be Catawba pollinated by a wild Aestivalis. Both
vine and fruit show unmistakable traces of Labrusca and Vinifera, but
the Aestivalis characters, if present, are not apparent.

[Illustration: ULSTER]

     Vine medium to weak, usually hardy, productive, often overbears,
     sometimes susceptible to attacks of mildew. Canes medium to short,
     not numerous, slender, moderately dark brown, surface roughened
     and covered with faint pubescence; nodes enlarged and flattened;
     internodes short; diaphragm of average thickness; pith intermediate
     in size; shoots pubescent; tendrils usually intermittent, of medium
     length, bifid, dehisce early.

     Leaf-buds intermediate in size, short to medium, thick, plump,
     conical to pointed, open rather late. Young leaves faintly tinged
     on under side and along margin of upper side, which is rather
     glossy, prevailing color pale green with considerable rose-carmine
     tinge. Leaves small to medium, thick; upper surface light green,
     glossy, somewhat smooth; lower surface grayish-white, pubescent;
     veins distinct; leaf usually not lobed with terminus acute to
     acuminate; petiolar sinus of average depth, medium to wide; basal
     sinus absent; lateral sinus a mere notch when present; teeth
     shallow to medium, above medium width. Flowers fertile or nearly
     so, open rather early; stamens upright.

     Fruit usually ripens with Concord or a little later, keeps and
     ships well. Clusters intermediate in size, above average length,
     intermediate in breadth, cylindrical to slightly tapering, often
     single-shouldered, compact; peduncle short, slender; pedicel
     intermediate in length, slender to medium, covered with numerous
     warts; brush short, yellowish-green. Berries above medium to medium
     in size, roundish to roundish-oval, rather dark dull red but do not
     always color well, covered with thin light to dark lilac bloom,
     persistent, of average firmness. Skin thick, tough, adheres
     slightly to the pulp, contains no pigment, somewhat astringent.
     Flesh pale green, translucent, juicy, tender, fine-grained, faintly
     aromatic, slightly foxy, sweet next the skin to tart at center,
     good to very good in quality. Seeds separate easily from the pulp,
     one to six, average three, medium to above in size, variable in
     length and breadth, somewhat plump, brownish; raphe obscure;
     chalaza intermediate in size, above center, oval to circular, not
     distinct; surface of seeds slightly roughened.


UNION VILLAGE.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= Elliott, =1854=:247. =2.= _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1856=:433.
     =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1856=:39, 165. =4.= Downing,
     =1857=:346. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1858=:69. =6.= _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Cat._, =1858=:235. =7.= _Mag. Hort._, =24=:92, 94. 1858. =8.=
     _Horticulturist_, =14=:74. 1859. _fig._ =9.= _Mass. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1860=:49. =10.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1860=:89. =11.=
     _Mag. Hort._, =27=:533. 1861. =12.= _Horticulturist_, =16=:234.
     1861. _fig._ =13.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1862=:146. =14.= _Mag.
     Hort._, =29=:422. 1863. =15.= _Ib._, =31=:103. 1865. =16.= Mead,
     =1867=:198. =17.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:43, 44, 151, 239, 262, 327.
     1869. =18.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:142. =19.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1883=:59.

     IMITATION HAMBURG (1). ONTARIO (8, 9, 10, 14). _Ontario_ (13, 15,
     16, 17, 18, 19). SHAKER (2). _Shaker_ (4, 17, 18).

Rampant in vine, with thick wood, large coarse leaves, bunches and
berries, Union Village is marked by grossness in all of its characters.
Its vigor of vine and showiness of fruit attracted the attention of the
viticulturists of a half century ago and it was then quite commonly
grown but has now been almost wholly discarded because of poor quality,
susceptibility to disease, and lack of hardiness. It ripens somewhat
late and quite unevenly. It might prove of some value in breeding for
the characters for which, even among the largest and most vigorous
grapes of to-day, it is distinguished.

This variety was originated by the Shakers at Union Village, Warren
County, Ohio. It was introduced by Nicholas Longworth of Cincinnati
about the middle of the last century. In 1858 it was placed on the
American Pomological Society's list of grapes that promise well and in
1862 was placed on the regular list of recommended sorts. Here it
remained until 1883, when it was dropped. Ontario, another grape of this
type, which was originated by W. H. Read of Port Dalhousie, Ontario, was
considered by many synonymous with Union Village but the evidence seems
to show that, though very similar, it had a distinct origin. Union
Village is said to be a seedling of Isabella. The characters generally
indicate Labrusca although the lobing of the leaves and the
susceptibility to fungi may indicate a strain of Vinifera.

The following description has been compiled from various sources:

     Vine vigorous to rank, usually productive, somewhat tender, subject
     to attacks of fungi. Canes large, long; internodes short. Leaves
     coarse and large. Fruit ripens about one week before Isabella,
     matures unevenly. Clusters large to very large, often shouldered,
     compact. Berries large to very large, roundish, dark purplish-black
     covered with heavy bloom, shell badly. Skin moderately thin. Flesh
     tart, resembling Isabella somewhat in flavor, quality fair to good.


VERGENNES.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:34, 117. =2.= Barry, =1883=:450.
     =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1883=:26. =4.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =29=:19, 112. 1884. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:103,
     105. =6.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1886-7=:172. =7.= _N. Y. Sta.
     An. Rpt._, =9=:330. 1890. =8.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:262. 1893.
     =9.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:184. _fig._ =10.= _Gar. and For._,
     =8=:487. 1895. =11.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:536, 542, 543,
     544, 548, 553. 1898. =12.= _Ib._, =18=:383, 389, 396. 1899. =13.=
     _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:41, 43, 44, 45, 53, 76. 1899. =14.= _Mich.
     Sta. Bul._, =169=:176. 1899. =15.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:237.
     1902. =16.= _Ont. Fr. Gr. Assoc. Rpt._, =34=:99. 1902.

[Illustration: VERGENNES]

While not one of the leading commercial varieties in New York, Vergennes
has steadily increased in popularity during the thirty years since its
introduction. One of the most valuable attributes of Vergennes is that
it seldom fails to bear a crop though it has a tendency to overbear
which causes it to be variable in size of fruits and in time of
ripening; with a moderate crop it ripens with Concord but with a heavy
load of grapes the crop matures from one to two weeks later. Vergennes
is somewhat unpopular with vineyardists because of the sprawling habit
of the vine making a vineyard of this grape untractable for vineyard
operations. This fault is obviated somewhat by grafting it on other
vines. In some of the grape regions of New York the vines are
precariously hardy though tenderness to cold can hardly be said to be a
serious fault of the variety.

The appearance of the fruit is attractive and while the quality is not
high, yet it is good; the flavor is agreeable, the flesh is tender and
seeds and skin are not objectionable. Considering all of its fruit
characters, Vergennes may be said to be more than an ordinary
grape--much better than several better known commercial varieties. The
variety is somewhat remarkable in being probably the best shipper and
the best keeper among the pure Labrusca varieties. Nearly all of the
grapes which ship and keep well have more or less Vinifera blood, but if
Vergennes has any foreign blood it shows it only in its keeping and
shipping qualities. At present Vergennes is the standard late-keeping
grape for this region being very commonly found in the markets as late
as January and sometimes February. A number of seedlings of Vergennes,
pure-bred and cross-bred, growing on the Station grounds, show that this
variety transmits its characters well to its offspring indicating that
it has value for grape-breeding. Vergennes may be recommended for its
intrinsic value for the vineyard and the garden and to the experimenter
as one of the best pure Labruscas for the production of new and improved
varieties.

The original vine of this variety was a chance seedling found in the
garden of William E. Greene, Vergennes, Vermont. It fruited for the
first time in 1874. It was placed on the list of sorts recommended by
the American Pomological Society in 1883 and is still retained.

     Vine variable in vigor, not always hardy, medium to very productive
     depending upon amount of winter injury, usually healthy. Canes long
     to medium, intermediate in number and size, dark dull brown; nodes
     enlarged, strongly flattened; internodes of average length;
     diaphragm thick; pith medium in thickness; shoots pubescent;
     tendrils continuous, long to medium, bifid or sometimes trifid.

     Leaf-buds large to medium, long, thick; open very late. Young
     leaves tinged on under side and along margin of upper side with
     rose-carmine. Leaves large to medium, thin; upper surface light
     green, glossy, somewhat rugose; lower surface pale green, very
     pubescent; veins indistinct; leaf usually not lobed with terminus
     broadly acute; petiolar sinus of average depth, medium to wide;
     teeth shallow, often wide. Flowers nearly sterile, open in
     mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit variable in season but usually ripens one to two weeks later
     than Concord, keeps and ships well. Clusters intermediate in size
     and length, broad, cylindrical to tapering, sometimes
     single-shouldered, variable in compactness but inclined to be
     loose; peduncle short to medium, thick; pedicel intermediate in
     length and thickness, covered with numerous small warts, enlarged
     at point of attachment to fruit; brush slender, short, pale green.
     Berries large to below medium, oval to roundish, light and dark
     red, covered with lilac bloom, persistent, medium in firmness. Skin
     does not crack, thick, tough, adheres considerably to the pulp,
     contains no pigment, astringent. Flesh pale green, juicy,
     fine-grained, somewhat stringy, tender, vinous, sweet next the
     skin, agreeably tart at center, good to very good in quality. Seeds
     separate easily from the pulp, one to five, average three, variable
     in size, length and breadth, not notched, usually blunt, brownish;
     raphe distinct; chalaza small, plainly above center, usually
     roundish, often with shallow radiating furrows, distinct.


VICTORIA.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:92. =2.= _Ib._, =1885=:104. =3.=
     _Mo. Hort Soc. Rpt._, =1891=:129. =4.= _Rural N. Y._, =50=:691,
     847. 1891. =5.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:637. 1892. =6.= _Del.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =7=:135, 139. 1895. =7.= _Rural N. Y._, =56=:822.
     1897. =8.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:536, 548, 557. 1898. =9.=
     _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:176. 1899. =10.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:49.
     1901.

As a green seedling of Concord, Victoria has much in common with others
of its kind that have come from this parent. In particular it resembles
Hayes but does not equal it, being of poorer quality and having smaller
and less attractive fruits; neither does it equal Martha. Victoria is
marked by having more foxiness in flavor than do most of the white
seedlings of Concord. In view of the many good green grapes, there is
little about Victoria to recommend it,--there are many commonplace
grapes of its color and season quite its equal.

This variety was originated by T. B. Miner of Linden, Union County, New
Jersey, about 1871.

     Vine of medium vigor, usually hardy, productive, subject to attacks
     of mildew in unfavorable locations. Canes medium to short, not
     numerous, slender; tendrils continuous, trifid to bifid. Leaves
     medium in size, dark green; lower surface pale green with tinge of
     bronze, covered with short down. Flowers nearly fertile, open in
     mid-season; stamens upright. Fruit ripens about with Concord, does
     not keep well. Clusters average in size, long, inclined to slender,
     often single-shouldered, compact. Berries intermediate in size,
     roundish, light green with pale yellow tinge, covered with thin
     gray bloom, persistent. Skin thin, tender. Flesh pale green,
     slightly tough, foxy, sweet at skin to acid at center, good in
     quality. Seeds do not separate readily from the pulp, medium to
     below in size, of average width and length.


WALTER.

(Vinifera, Labrusca, Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Mag. Hort._, =31=:120. 1865. =2.= _Ib._, =33=:7, 54. 1867.
     =3.= _Horticulturist_, =23=:359, 360. 1868. _fig._ =4.= _Grape
     Cult._, =1=:307, 327, 329. 1869. =5.= _Am. Jour. Hort._, =6=:342.
     1869. _fig._ =6.= _Ib._, =8=:144, 299. 1870. =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Cat._, =1871=:16. =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1875=:39. =9.= _Ib._,
     =1883=:59, 154. =10.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:185. _fig._ =11.= _Tex.
     Sta. Bul._, =48=:1151, 1163. 1898. =12.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._, =53=:49.
     1901. =13.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:243. 1902.

Were it not almost impossible to grow healthy vines of Walter it would
take rank among the best of our American grapes. But stunted by fungi
which nearly every year attack leaves, young wood and fruit, it is only
possible in exceptionally favorable seasons to produce a crop of grapes
with this variety. Not infrequently the attacks of mildew are so severe
that the vines are defoliated before mid-season. Besides its
susceptibility to cryptogamic diseases the variety is fastidious as to
soils and even in localities to which it seems adapted it is variable in
growth. While not to be classed among the tender grapes yet it is
injured in severe winters, and is almost certain to suffer some injury
after defoliation by fungi. There are several reports at hand which seem
to show that it is hardier and more vigorous on the roots of hardy,
strong-growing varieties.

As if to atone for the faults of the vine the fruit of Walter is almost
perfect, lacking only in the size of bunch and berry. The bunch and
berry resemble Delaware, one of its parents, while it has the peculiar
flavor of Diana, the other parent. Well grown, the fruit is more
attractive than that of Delaware but it cannot be said that the quality
is quite the equal of that of either of its parents. It does not have
the fault of ripening its berries unevenly, one of the defects which
debars Diana from profitable cultivation. Though more fastidious, Walter
is usually adapted to conditions under which Delaware thrives. The
variety has been cultivated for nearly half a century but is seemingly
less and less grown, a fact to be regretted; for there are few American
grapes of more exquisite flavor and aroma and more dainty appearance. It
is said that when protected from dew by walls or other shelter the vines
are not so badly attacked by fungi, if at all, and that Walter may thus
be grown to perfection. If this be true grape-lovers should see that the
variety is long retained in collections and for the garden.

A. J. Caywood originated this variety about 1850 from seed of Delaware
pollinated by Diana. It was placed on the grape list of the American
Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1871. Walter is still to be found
in an occasional varietal vineyard but it is seldom offered for sale by
nurserymen.

     Vine moderately vigorous, not hardy in exposed locations, variable
     in productiveness, subject to attacks of fungi. Canes medium to
     above in length and size, dark reddish-brown, surface covered with
     thin blue bloom; nodes enlarged, flattened; internodes medium to
     above in length; diaphragm thick; pith of fair size; shoots
     pubescent; tendrils intermittent, medium to above in length, bifid.

     Leaf-buds small, intermediate in length and thickness, pointed to
     conical. Foliage of average size, thick; upper surface dark green,
     glossy, smooth; lower surface tinged with bronze, heavily
     pubescent; lobes none to three with terminus acute; petiolar sinus
     of average depth, narrow to medium; basal sinus lacking; lateral
     sinus usually a notch if present; teeth intermediate in depth and
     width. Flowers open in mid-season; stamens upright.

     Fruit somewhat variable in season of ripening, averaging about with
     Delaware, keeps and ships well. Clusters medium in size and length,
     broad, cylindrical to tapering, usually single-shouldered, compact;
     peduncle short to medium, of average thickness; pedicel medium in
     length, slender, covered with small scattering warts; brush short,
     slender, green with brownish tinge. Berries small to medium, often
     strongly ovate, red, much like Delaware, glossy, covered with a
     moderate amount of lilac bloom, persistent, firm. Skin intermediate
     in thickness, very tough, adheres but slightly to the pulp,
     contains no pigment, without astringency. Flesh pale green,
     translucent, juicy, tough, somewhat foxy, vinous, quite strongly
     aromatic, sweet next the skin to tart at center, good to very good
     in quality. Seeds do not separate easily from the pulp, one to
     four, average three, below medium in size and length, intermediate
     in width, medium to sharp-pointed, light brown; raphe obscure;
     chalaza large, above center, irregularly circular, distinct. Must
     100 deg..

[Illustration: WALTER]


WAPANUKA.

(Labrusca, Riparia, Vinifera, Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:280. 1900. =2.= _Rural N. Y._,
     =60=:637. 1901. =3.= _Ib._, =62=:790. 1903. =4.= _Iowa Hort. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1904=:228. =5.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1904=:305. =6.=
     _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1905=:302.

Though there are many qualities to commend Wapanuka, yet it is not as
popular in the North as was expected it would become at the time of its
introduction. The chief reason for its failure is that it does not ship
well, seemingly a prime requisite for a commercial grape in New York,
though the markets are seldom far distant. It is probable, too, that the
flavor is not quite as high in this latitude as in the South, or it may
be that the grapes with which we compare it here are better flavored
than in the South. At any rate it does not have the comparatively high
quality in New York that it is reported to have elsewhere, being too
insipid. There is a tendency, too, for the grapes to shatter. The fruits
when well grown are attractive and the quality is from fair to good.
Wapanuka is worthy a trial in commercial vineyards; and because of the
handsome appearance and distinct flavor of the fruit it deserves a place
in the garden.

Munson of Texas, originated Wapanuka from seed of Rommel fertilized by
Brilliant. It was introduced by the originator in the fall of 1898.

     Vine vigorous, usually hardy, productive. Canes medium to short,
     intermediate in number and size, dark reddish-brown, often with
     ash-gray tinge; tendrils continuous, bifid to trifid. Leaves large,
     moderately light green, somewhat rugose on older leaves; lower
     surface dull green tinged with bronze, pubescent. Flowers fertile
     or nearly so, open before mid-season; stamens upright. Fruit ripens
     about with Concord, does not keep well. Clusters intermediate in
     size, long to medium, frequently with a long-peduncled single
     shoulder, compact. Berries large, roundish, very pale
     yellowish-green, covered with thin gray bloom, with a tendency to
     shatter, soft. Skin covered with few, small, dark dots, very thin
     and tender. Flesh unusually pale green, tender, somewhat foxy,
     sweet and mild, good in quality. Seeds separate easily from the
     pulp, intermediate in size, broad, distinctly notched, short.


WHITE IMPERIAL.

(Vinifera, Labrusca, Bourquiniana.)

     =1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:78. =2.= _Ib._, =1892=:270. =3.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:186. =4.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:142. 1898.
     =5.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:177. 1899. =6.= _Ga. Sta. Bul._,
     =53=:50. 1901.

White Imperial is one of Stayman's[213] numerous productions. The
originator thought it one of the most valuable, if not the most
valuable, of his white grapes. As the variety grows in the Station
vineyard the fruit is neither especially attractive in appearance nor of
very high quality though better in the latter respect than the average.
White Imperial is one of a somewhat large number of offspring of
Dutchess now known to viticulture in which the good qualities of the
parent have been transmitted in a large measure to the progeny. White
Beauty, described in the next chapter, is of the same parentage and is
similar in general characters of vine and fruit, though berries and
bunches are a little larger and the vines a little more vigorous. White
Imperial was introduced with great expectations in the West, but,
especially in the vineyards of Missouri, while still grown somewhat is
not holding its own with better known grapes of its class.

White Imperial was produced by Dr. J. Stayman of Leavenworth, Kansas,
from seed of Dutchess. The variety was introduced about twenty-five
years ago by Stayman & Black.

     Vine medium to very vigorous, hardy, variable in productiveness,
     susceptible to attacks of fungi under unfavorable conditions. Canes
     intermediate in length, rather numerous, inclined to slender;
     tendrils continuous to intermittent, bifid to trifid. Leaves above
     average size, intermediate in color and thickness; lower surface
     pale green, often with considerable pubescence, slightly cobwebby.
     Flowers partly sterile, open early; stamens upright. Fruit ripens
     about a week before Delaware, keeps well. Clusters variable in
     size, intermediate in length, slender, frequently
     single-shouldered, variable in compactness. Berries medium to
     small, oval to roundish, light green, sometimes with a yellow
     tinge, covered with thin gray bloom, persistent. Skin sprinkled
     with reddish-brown dots, thin, tender, without astringency. Flesh
     pale green, fine-grained, tough, sweet at skin to agreeably tart at
     center, somewhat sprightly, good to best in quality. Seeds not
     numerous, medium to small, sharp-pointed.


WILDER.

(Labrusca, Vinifera.)

     =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1861=:68. =2.= _Horticulturist_,
     =18=:98. 1863. =3.= _Ib._, =21=:325. 1866. _fig._ =4.= Mead,
     =1867=:205, 207. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1867=:44. =6.=
     _Horticulturist_, =24=:126. 1869. =7.= _Grape Cult._, =1=:181.
     1869. =8.= _Ib._, =2=:29, _fig._, 30. 1870. =9.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1881=:40, 42, 123, 138, 153, 162, 168. =10.= _Ill. Hort.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1883=:81. =11.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:187, _fig._, 188.
     =12.= _Va. Sta. Bul._, =94=:136. 1898. =13.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =17=:537, 548, 553. 1898. =14.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:41, 43, 44,
     46, 64, _fig._ 1899. =15.= _Ala. Sta. Bul._, =110=:70, 89. 1900.
     =16.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:243. 1902.

     ROGERS' NO. 4 (1, 2, 3, 4, 5). _Rogers' No. 4_ (6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
     15).

The accompanying color-plate scarcely does Wilder justice as to size of
bunch and berry but were the illustration somewhat enlarged it would be
very typical of the variety. The berries when fully ripe are quite
similar in size and color to Black Hamburg but the bunches have fewer
berries than the European parent and the quality, as would be expected,
is not so good, falling short chiefly in flesh characters. While Wilder
is surpassed in quality, and, as usually grown, in appearance by other
of Rogers' hybrids, it is one of the most reliable of all of them for
vineyard culture, the vines being vigorous, hardy, fairly productive,
and, though somewhat susceptible to mildew, as healthy as any of the
hybrids of Labrusca and Vinifera. Wilder is not as well known in the
markets as it should be, and now that fungal diseases can be controlled
by spraying, this, with other such hybrids, should be more generally
planted in commercial vineyards and especially for local and special
markets. The wine from this, and for that matter from any of Rogers'
grapes, is not of quality such as recommends it and neither are the
grapes suitable for grape juice. Surplus fruit would often, therefore,
be a loss in large plantations.

Wilder is one of the forty-five Labrusca-Vinifera hybrids raised by E.
S. Rogers of Salem, Massachusetts. For an account of its origin and
parentage, see Rogers' Hybrids. The first notes as to the qualities of
this variety were published in 1858. The variety was placed on the
American Pomological Society list of recommended sorts in 1867 and has
never been removed. In 1869, Rogers expressing a desire to name one of
his seedlings after Marshall P. Wilder, Mr. Wilder selected this one as
in his estimation the best of all Rogers' hybrids and it was given his
name.

     Vine medium to very vigorous, hardy, productive, somewhat
     susceptible to attacks of mildew. Canes long, moderately numerous,
     often below average thickness, ash-gray to dark reddish-brown with
     darker tinge at the nodes which are usually not flattened;
     internodes long; diaphragm of average thickness; pith intermediate
     in size; shoots thinly pubescent; tendrils intermittent, medium in
     length, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds of average size, short, thick, roundly obtuse to conical,
     open early. Young leaves tinged on lower side and along margin of
     upper side with rose-carmine. Leaves large, often irregularly
     roundish, of average thickness; upper surface dark green, glossy,
     smooth; lower surface pale green, pubescent; veins distinct;
     usually not lobed with terminus acute to obtuse; petiolar sinus
     deep, narrow, often closed and overlapping; basal sinus lacking;
     lateral sinus shallow, narrow, or a mere notch when present.
     Flowers sterile, open mid-season or earlier; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit ripens with Concord or earlier, keeps and ships fairly well.
     Clusters variable in size but are not large, short and broad,
     irregularly tapering, heavily single-shouldered, sometimes
     double-shouldered, loose; peduncle of average length, thick;
     pedicel long, thick, covered with numerous, prominent warts; brush
     of fair length, thick, green with tinge of light red. Berries
     large, slightly oval, purplish-black to black, not glossy, covered
     with heavy blue bloom, persistent, firm. Skin thick, variable in
     toughness, adheres somewhat to the pulp, with bright red pigment,
     astringent. Flesh greenish, translucent, juicy, tender, has some
     Vinifera sprightliness, sweet at skin to tart at the seeds, good
     in quality. Seeds adherent to the pulp, one to five, average three,
     above medium in size, often long, intermediate in breadth, light
     brown; raphe sometimes shows as a partially submerged cord; chalaza
     small, above center, oval, distinct.

[Illustration: WILDER]


WINCHELL.

(Labrusca, Vinifera, Aestivalis.)

     =1.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =4=:224. 1885. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1887=:91. =3.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =7=:105, 108. 1888.
     =4.= _Rural N. Y._, =47=:675. 1888. _fig._ =5.= _Gar. and For._,
     =2=:24, 432. 1889. =6.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Adv. Rpt._, =1890=:21.
     =7.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =9=:331. 1890. =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
     Rpt._, =1891=:151. =9.= _Rural N. Y._, =50=:691, 705. 1891. =10.=
     _Ib._, =51=:19, 63, 633, 681. _fig._ 1892. =11.= _Bush. Cat._,
     =1894=:130, 131, _fig._, 188. =12.= _Wis. Sta. An. Rpt._, =13=:223.
     1896. =13.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1897=:19. =14.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._,
     =46=:39, 42, 45, 46, 50, 54, 76. 1899. =15.= _Rural N. Y._,
     =58=:23. 1899. =16.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:177. 1889. =17.=
     _Ala. Sta. Bul._, =110=:82. 1900. =18.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._,
     =110=:236, 238. 1902.

     GREEN MOUNTAIN (3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 17, 18).
     _Green Mountain_ (10, 11, 12, 13, 16). _Winchell_ (6, 9, 14, 17,
     18).

Winchell is at once very early and of very good quality, characters
seldom found combined in grapes. But this is not all that can be said;
the vines are vigorous, hardy, healthy, productive, and the fruit keeps
and ships well, altogether making a most admirable early grape.
Unfortunately the berries, and under some conditions the bunches, are
small, and this, combined with the fact that green grapes are not as
popular as black and red ones, has kept Winchell from being as largely
planted as it otherwise would have been. Then, too, as has been noted
before, the competition from the South, in which larger, cheaper and as
good grapes compete with early northern crops of this fruit, is limiting
the production of early varieties of grapes in the North.

There are some minor faults, too, which under some conditions become
drawbacks to the culture of Winchell. At best the bunch of this variety
is loose and characterized by a large shoulder. Sometimes this looseness
becomes so pronounced as to give a straggling, poorly-formed cluster;
so, too, the shoulder when as large as the cluster itself, which often
happens, makes the cluster unsightly. There is a tendency, under some
conditions, for the grapes to shell when fully ripe and this is often a
serious fault. Again, while the crop usually ripens evenly yet there are
seasons when two pickings are needed because of unevenness in ripening.
Lastly the skin is thin and there is danger in unfavorable seasons, or
in shipping, of the berries cracking though this is seldom a serious
fault. These defects do not begin to offset the several good characters
of Winchell and it is, for New York at least, the standard early green
grape and deserving to rank with the best early grapes of any color.

The original vine of this variety was raised by James Milton Clough of
Stamford, Bennington County, Vermont, about the middle of the last
century from seed of an unknown purple grape. For some years it had a
local reputation and was propagated by some of Clough's neighbors. By
what name it was then known does not appear. In December, 1885,
according to their statements, Ellwanger & Barry of Rochester, New York,
received this variety from C. E. Winchell, then of Stamford. In 1888,
this firm introduced the variety to the trade. The same year there was
introduced by Stephen Hoyt's Sons of New Canaan, Connecticut, a variety
under the name Green Mountain. This firm states that they bought the
variety from James M. Paul, of North Adams, Massachusetts, in December,
1885. Previous to his sale Paul had sent a vine of the grape to this
Station; he exhibited fruit of Green Mountain before the American
Pomological Society in 1887, but without any name.

Later grape-growers found that Winchell and Green Mountain were very
similar or identical. Unfortunately, in the meantime, Paul had died and
no one knows positively where he secured his vines although there is
every reason to believe they were from Mr. Clough. Those who consider
the Winchell and Green Mountain separate varieties say the Winchell has
larger berries and is somewhat later in ripening than the Green
Mountain. Though unable to make a close comparison of vines and fruits
of the two supposed varieties, the authors of _The Grapes of New York_
choose to consider them so nearly identical, if not identical, as to
pass under one name which should be the one first published, Winchell.

Although the botanical characters of this variety are chiefly Labrusca,
the thin bloom which sometimes shows on the canes, the occasional
intermittent tendrils, and the lobing of the leaf, indicate slight
admixtures of Vinifera and Aestivalis.

[Illustration: WINCHELL]

     Vine vigorous, hardy, healthy, very productive. Canes long to
     medium, numerous, slender, medium dark brown, surface covered with
     very thin bloom; nodes enlarged, flattened; internodes above medium
     to short; diaphragm thick; pith medium to below in size; shoots
     pubescent; tendrils continuous, sometimes intermittent, of average
     length, bifid.

     Leaf-buds medium to below in size, short to medium, thick, open
     early. Young leaves faintly tinged on under side only with faint
     rose-carmine. Leaves large to medium, of average thickness; upper
     surface light green, glossy, smooth to medium; lower surface dull
     green, tinged with bronze, faintly pubescent; lobes three to five
     with terminal lobe acute to acuminate; petiolar sinus deep, of
     medium width; basal sinus shallow, intermediate in width; lateral
     sinus variable in depth and width; teeth shallow, moderately wide.
     Flowers fertile, open about mid-season or somewhat earlier; stamens
     upright.

     Fruit ripens very early, sometimes before Moore Early, keeps and
     ships well for an early grape. Clusters large to below medium,
     long, slender, cylindrical to slightly tapering, often with a long
     single shoulder, loose to moderately compact; peduncle long,
     moderately slender; pedicel short, slender, covered with few,
     small, inconspicuous warts; brush greenish-white. Berries above
     medium to small, roundish, light green, covered with thin white
     bloom, usually persistent, soft. Skin often marked with small
     reddish-brown spots, thin, tender, adheres very slightly to the
     pulp, contains no pigment, slightly astringent. Flesh greenish,
     translucent, juicy, tender, fine-grained, sweet; very good to best
     in quality. Seeds separate fairly well from the pulp, one to four,
     average two, small, plump, moderately wide and long, blunt,
     brownish; raphe obscure, chalaza small, slightly above center,
     circular, not distinct.


WOODRUFF.

(Labrusca, Vinifera?)

     =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:44, 65. =2.= _Ib._, =1885=:107,
     108. =3.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1887-8=:87, 209. =4.= _Ib._,
     =1888-9=:16. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1889=:24. =6.= _Gar. and
     For._, =3=:490, 599. 1890. =7.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1890=:179. =8.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =11=:638. 1892. =9.= _Ill.
     Sta. Bul._, =28=:262. 1893. =10.= _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:188. _fig._
     =11.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:537, 545, 546, 548, 553. 1898.
     =12.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:177. 1899. =13.= _Ib._, =194=:59.
     1901. =14.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._, =110=:238. 1902. =15.= _Kan. Hort.
     Soc. Rpt._, =1904-05=:228.

     WOODRUFF RED (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 14). _Woodruff Red_ (10).

Woodruff is a handsome, showy, brick-red grape with large clusters and
berries. While very attractive in appearance its taste belies its looks,
for the flesh is coarse and the flavor foxy. In spite of its attractive
appearance, Woodruff would scarcely be worth attention were it not for
its excellent vine characters. The vines are hardy, vigorous, productive
and fairly healthy. In appearance it is a typical strong-growing
Labrusca with the varied adaptabilities of that species for soils and
ability to withstand adverse conditions. It ripens a little before or
with Concord and comes on the market at a good time, especially for a
red grape. When introduced Woodruff promised to be a valuable commercial
grape but its poor quality, the fact that it does not keep well, and a
pronounced tendency to crack and shatter, have kept the variety from
becoming prominent for either vineyard or garden. While it is worthy of
attention under some conditions because of hardiness and possibly other
vine characters, yet it is hardly worth growing where other varieties of
its color and season can be had.

Woodruff, or as it was first known, Woodruff Red, came from C. H.
Woodruff of Ann Arbor, Michigan. He reported it as a chance seedling
which came up in 1874 and fruited for the first time in 1877. It was
supposed to be a cross of Catawba and Concord. It was introduced in 1885
and placed on the grape list of the American Pomological Society fruit
catalog in 1889.

     Vine very vigorous, hardy, produces as heavy or heavier crops than
     Concord, inclined to mildew in unfavorable locations. Canes
     intermediate in length, number and thickness, dark brown; nodes
     slightly enlarged, flattened; internodes medium to short; diaphragm
     medium to above in thickness; pith below average size; shoots
     pubescent; tendrils continuous, of mean length, bifid to trifid.

     Leaf-buds small, short to medium, slender, pointed to conical.
     Leaves intermediate in size, of average thickness, somewhat
     roundish; upper surface light green, dull, rugose; lower surface
     greenish-white to bronze, pubescent; veins indistinct; leaf usually
     not lobed with terminus acute to obtuse; petiolar sinus
     intermediate in depth, medium to wide; basal sinus lacking; lateral
     sinus shallow and narrow when present; teeth very shallow and
     narrow. Flowers semi-fertile, open moderately early; stamens
     upright.

     Fruit variable in season of ripening, usually shortly before
     Concord but sometimes slightly later, does not always keep well.
     Clusters variable in size, of fair length, broad, often widely
     tapering, usually single-shouldered or with largest clusters
     sometimes double-shouldered, compact; peduncle medium to long,
     variable in thickness; pedicel medium to short, thick, smooth, with
     scarcely any enlargement at point of attachment to fruit; brush
     long, pale green. Berries large to below medium, roundish to oval,
     dark red, dull, covered with thin lilac to faint blue bloom,
     sometimes drop badly from pedicel, firm. Skin thin, medium to
     tender, adheres strongly to the pulp, contains no pigment, slightly
     astringent. Flesh very pale green to nearly white, translucent,
     juicy, tough, coarse, very foxy, sweet at skin but quite tart at
     center, fair in quality. Seeds do not separate easily from the
     pulp, one to five, average, three or four, intermediate in size,
     medium to broad, short, rather plump, blunt, brownish; raphe
     obscure; chalaza small, slightly above center, oval, not distinct.

[Illustration: WOODRUFF]


WORDEN.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _Am. Hort. An._, =1870=:95. =2.= _Wis. Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1873=:71. =3.= _Mich. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1874=:258. =4.= _Am. Pom.
     Soc. Cat._, =1881=:24. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1881=:42, 115,
     121, 123, 136, 144, 168. =6.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =27=:30,
     97. 1882. =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:103, 106. =8.= _Wis.
     Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1885=:176. =9.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1886-7=:171. =10.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =1887=:91. =11.= _Wis.
     Sta. An. Rpt._, =5=:162. 1888. =12.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._,
     =9=:328. 1890. =13.= _Miss. Sta. Bul._, =22=:12, 13. 1892. =14.=
     _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:190. =15.= _Col. Sta. Bul._, =29=:20. 1894.
     =16.= _Tenn. Sta. Bul._, Vol. =9=:189. 1896. =17.= _Gar. and For._,
     =9=:300. 1896. =18.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:537, 542, 543,
     544, 545, 547, 553, 557. 1898. =19.= _Ev. Nat. Fruits_, =1898=:75.
     =20.= _Ont. Fr. Exp. Stas. Rpt._, =8=:11, _fig._, 49. 1901. =21.=
     _Mich. Sta. Sp. Bul._, =27=:10. 1904.

     WORDEN'S SEEDLING (1, 6). _Worden's Seedling_ (12, 14).

Worden possesses most of the good qualities of Concord and lacks some of
its bad ones. Of all the offspring of Concord, this variety is best
known and is most meritorious. It is of the type into which nearly all
of the black seedlings of Concord fall and surpasses all of these in
quality though it does not equal the best of the green seedlings of the
parent in fruit characters, especially in flavor. It differs chiefly
from Concord in having larger berries and bunches, in having better
quality and in being from a week to ten days earlier. It is equally
hardy, healthy, vigorous and productive. It is more fastidious in its
adaptations to soil and other conditions than its parents but now and
then it is found to do even better under some conditions.

Worden is not as good a grape in many minor characters as the Concord
and this is the chief reason why it is not grown as much as its
distinguished parent. Its chief fault is that the fruit cracks badly,
often preventing the profitable marketing of a crop. The Concord cracks
also in unfavorable weather but the cracked berries often, or nearly
always, partly or wholly recover from the injury through the growing
over of the wounds. The Worden lacks the power of overcoming the
cracking. Beside this tenderness of skin, the pulp of Worden is softer
than that of Concord, there is more juice and the keeping qualities are
not as good, so that the variety hardly ships as well as the more
commonly grown grape. In some seasons there is a decided tendency to
shell or shatter if the fruit is overripe. Worden is very popular in New
York and the North both for commercial plantations and the garden. It is
a more desirable inhabitant of the garden and for nearby markets,
because of higher quality, than Concord, and under conditions well
suited to it, is better as a commercial variety, as it is handsomer as
well as of better quality. In the markets it ought to sell for a higher
price than Concord if desired for immediate consumption and if it can be
promptly harvested, as it does not hang well on the vines. In many
markets Worden is sold as Concord and has the effect of extending the
Concord season. Its earlier season is against it for a commercial
variety in the great Chautauqua Grape Belt of New York and with the
defects mentioned will prevent its taking the place of Concord to a
great degree.

The Worden was originated by Schuyler Worden of Minetto, Oswego County,
New York, from seed of Concord planted about 1863. It bore its first
fruit when four years old. Its history is peculiar in that it was for
many years unappreciated, being confused with Concord, which was
frequently sent out as Worden. It was placed on the grape list of the
American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1881, where it still
remains. The variety was given its name by J. A. Place of Oswego, New
York, a local horticulturist of some note and a friend of Worden.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, healthy, productive, yielding as heavy crops
     as Concord. Canes above medium in size and number, thick, dark
     brown with reddish tinge; nodes enlarged, flattened; internodes
     intermediate in length; diaphragm thick; pith of fair size; shoots
     pubescent; tendrils continuous, somewhat slender, bifid, sometimes
     trifid.

     Leaf-buds small, short, slender, pointed, open in mid-season. Young
     leaves tinged on under side and along extreme margin of upper side
     with light rose-carmine. Leaves healthy, large, thick; upper
     surface dark green, glossy, smooth; lower surface light bronze,
     pubescent; leaf usually not lobed; petiolar sinus of average depth,
     medium to wide, often urn-shaped; teeth shallow, medium in width.
     Flowers fertile, open in mid-season or earlier; stamens upright.

     Fruit ripens one or two weeks earlier than Concord, does not keep
     long. Clusters large, medium to long, broad, tapering to
     cylindrical, usually single-shouldered, somewhat compact; peduncle
     short, thick; pedicel of medium length, slender, covered with few
     small warts; brush long, light green. Berries large, roundish to
     oval, dark purplish-black to black, glossy, covered with heavy blue
     bloom, not always persistent, moderately firm. Skin of average
     thickness, somewhat tender, cracks badly, adheres slightly to the
     pulp, contains considerable dark red pigment, astringent. Flesh
     greenish, translucent, juicy, fine-grained, tough, slightly foxy,
     sweet at skin to tart at center, mild, good to very good in
     quality. Seeds adherent, one to five, average three, large, broad,
     medium to short, blunt, brownish; raphe buried in a shallow groove;
     chalaza of average size, slightly above center, oval, somewhat
     obscure.

[Illustration: WORDEN]


WYOMING.

(Labrusca.)

     =1.= _N. Y. Ag. Soc. Rpt._, =1868=:230. =2.= Downing, =1869=:558.
     =3.= _Am. Hort. An._, =1871=:83. =4.= _Horticulturist_, =29=:339.
     =5.= _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:145. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._,
     =1885=:103. =7.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._, =30=:89. 1885. =8.=
     _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._, =1889=:24. =9.= _Am. Gard._, =12=:48. 1891.
     =10.= _Ill. Sta. Bul._, =28=:262. 1893. =11.= _Va. Sta. Bul._,
     =94=:139. 1898. =12.= _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:537, 548, 557.
     1898. =13.= _Mo. Sta. Bul._, =46=:41, 42, 44, 46, 54. 1899. =14.=
     _Mich. Sta. Bul._, =169=:178. 1899. =15.= _Kan. Sta. Bul._,
     =110=:238. 1902.

     _Hopkins Early Red_ (2). WILMINGTON RED (3, 5). WYOMING RED (1, 2,
     4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15). _Wyoming Red_ (5).

Such value as Wyoming has lies in its hardiness, productiveness,
healthiness and earliness. The general appearance of the fruit of the
variety is very good; the bunches are well-formed and composed of rich
amber-colored berries of medium size. But the quality is poor, being
that of the wild Labrusca in foxiness of flavor and in the flesh
characters. It is not nearly as valuable as some other of the red
Labruscas hitherto described and can hardly be recommended for either
the garden or the vineyard. It may be of value in breeding work and
possibly for localities in which grapes are precariously hardy or in
which more fastidious varieties cannot be grown. Wyoming is illustrated
in _The Grapes of New York_ chiefly because it is a typical red Labrusca
though in times past it has been of commercial importance and hence has
some historical interest.

Wyoming was introduced to public notice by Dr. S. J. Parker of Ithaca,
New York, who states that it came from northern Pennsylvania in 1861.
About 1870 it was fruited in central New York where it immediately
attracted attention and was exhibited at various fairs and horticultural
society meetings. It was named after the Wyoming Valley, beyond which
place it could not be traced, and where it presumably originated. The
variety was first known as Wyoming Red but later the Red was dropped.
Another variety under the name Wyoming preceded this. It was a
black-fruited sort of apparently no value and seems now to be obsolete.
The name Wilmington Red has been used to designate this variety, by what
authority does not appear, as it was apparently first described under
the name Wyoming Red. The Wyoming was placed on the grape list of the
American Pomological Society fruit catalog in 1889 and removed in 1899.
In spite of the fact that this variety has been discarded by the
American Pomological Society, it is still offered for sale by many grape
nurserymen.

     Vine vigorous, hardy, healthy, productive to very productive. Canes
     medium to below in length, numerous, slender, dark reddish-brown,
     surface covered with a slight amount of blue bloom; nodes enlarged,
     frequently flattened; internodes short to medium; diaphragm medium
     to below in thickness; pith medium in size; shoots thinly
     pubescent; tendrils continuous, rather short, bifid.

     Leaf-buds small, short, slender, pointed to conical, open late.
     Young leaves slightly tinged on under side only with faint
     rose-carmine. Leaves medium in size, of average thickness; upper
     surface light green, dull, smooth; lower surface dull green with
     tinge of bronze, slightly pubescent; lobes none to three with
     terminus acute to acuminate; petiolar sinus medium to shallow, wide
     to medium; basal sinus usually none; lateral sinus shallow and wide
     when present; teeth shallow, of average width. Flowers sterile,
     open in mid-season; stamens reflexed.

     Fruit usually ripens from a week to ten days earlier than Concord,
     keeps and ships well for a grape of its species. Clusters medium to
     small, frequently below average length, medium to rather slender,
     slightly cylindrical to tapering, usually not shouldered but
     sometimes with a small single shoulder, compact to medium. Peduncle
     short to medium, slender; pedicel short, slender, covered with few
     small warts; brush slender, medium in length, pale green with
     brownish tinge. Berries above medium to small, roundish, dark dull
     red to rich amber red, covered with thin lilac bloom, persistent,
     firm. Skin medium in thickness, tender, adheres slightly to the
     pulp, contains no pigment, astringent. Flesh pale green,
     translucent, juicy, tough and solid, strongly foxy, vinous, sweet
     at skin to tart at center, poor in quality. Seeds do not separate
     easily from the pulp, one to three, average two and three,
     intermediate in size, breadth and length, slightly notched, usually
     rather blunt, light brown; raphe buried in a narrow, shallow
     groove; chalaza of average size, slightly above center, irregularly
     circular to oval, obscure.

[Illustration: WYOMING]




CHAPTER VI

THE MINOR VARIETIES OF AMERICAN GRAPES.


=Abby Clingotten.= (Lab.) Noted by Prince in 1863 as a worthless
Labrusca.

=Ada.= (Vin. Lab.) _Valk's Seedling._ (See page 56.) Originated in 1845
by Dr. Valk, of Flushing, Long Island, from Isabella fertilized by Black
Hamburg. Vigorous, hardy; bunches very large, compact to loose; berries
large; skin thin, almost black; vinous flavor. This is the first
recorded hybrid between Labrusca and Vinifera.

=Adelaide.= (Vin. Lab.) A hybrid between Concord and Muscat Hamburg, by
Ricketts; brought to notice in 1870. Bunch shouldered, loose; berries
large, oval, black; sweet and sprightly.

=Adelia.= (=Rip.=?) _Petit Noir._ Noted in the _United States Patent
Office Report_, 1859, as a small black native grape, raised in Orange
County, New Jersey.

=Adeline.= (Lab.) One of T. B. Miner's seedlings of Concord. Vigorous;
berry large, light green.

=Admirable.= (Linc. Aest.) From Munson; introduced in 1894. Vigorous;
leaves large, smooth; stamens reflexed; bunch medium, shouldered,
moderately compact; berry small, black; sweet and sprightly.

=Adobe.= (Long.) A wild variety of _Vitis longii_; found by Munson in
Hutchinson County, Texas. Stamens reflexed; cluster small; berry small,
black; ripens early.

=Aiken.= (Lab. Vin.?) Closely resembles Isabella and is the same variety
or a seedling.

=Albaiis.= Noted by Warder in 1867 as follows: "Vine thrifty, hardy;
bunch large; berry large, round, black; good."

=Albania.= (Linc. Aest. Lab. Bourq.) Parents, Post-oak, Norton, and
Herbemont; from Munson. Very vigorous, prolific; cluster large to very
large, shouldered; berry medium, translucent white; juicy, tender,
sprightly; very late.

=Albert.= (Lab.) From Theophile Huber, of Illinois City, Illinois.
Vigorous; leaf large, healthy; bunch small, compact; berry very large,
round, red with bluish bloom; skin thin, tender; sweet, spicy, vinous;
season about with Concord.

=Albino.= (Lab. Vin.?) _Garber's Albino_; _Garber's White_. From J. B.
Garber, Columbia, Pennsylvania, previous to 1830, from the seed of York
Madeira. Bunch medium; berry medium, oval, greenish-white; sweet.

=Aledo.= (Lab.) From B. F. Stinger, Charlottesville, Indiana, about
1887. Bunch medium, compact; berry medium to large, green, tinged with
yellow, nearly round, oblate; ripens with Concord.

=Aletha.= (Lab. Vin.) Brought to notice about 1870, at Ottawa, Illinois;
said to be a Catawba seedling. Bunch medium; berries purple, nearly
black; flesh pulpy, foxy; early.

=Alfarata.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Brighton crossed with
Delaware; from Henry B. Spencer, Rocky River, Ohio, about 1890. Berries
small, dark red with a rich, vinous flavor.

=Alice Lee.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Lady Washington; from W. H.
Lightfoot, Springfield, Illinois. Vigorous, moderately productive;
clusters medium, compact; berries large, golden yellow; very good;
ripens with Concord.

=Allair.= Described by Downing in 1869. "Bunch small, loose; berry
medium, reddish-brown; flesh pulpy, harsh, poor."

=Alma.= (Rip. Lab. Vin.?) A seedling of Bacchus fertilized with a
doubtful hybrid seedling; from Ricketts. Vigorous, healthy; bunch
medium, compact, seldom shouldered; berry medium, black, blue bloom;
spicy, very sweet; season with or after Hartford.

=Alphonse.= (Lab. Rip. Vin.) From Theophile Huber, Illinois City,
Illinois. Strong open grower; leaf subject to disease; a shy bearer;
bunch medium, loose; berry large, oval, yellowish; later than Concord.

=Aluwe.= (Linc. Vin. Lab. Bourq.?) A seedling of Lucky pollinated by
Carman; from Munson in 1899. Stamens reflexed; cluster large; berry
medium, black; ripens late.

=Alvey.= (Aest. Vin.) _Hagar._ From Dr. Harvey, of Hagerstown, Maryland.
Brought to notice about 1860; in 1867 listed by the American Pomological
Society but dropped in 1883. Medium in vigor, uncertainly productive,
mildews; stamens reflexed; bunches medium, loose, shouldered; berries
small, round, black; juicy, sweet, vinous; very good; skin thin; ripens
early.

=Amalia.= (Lab. Rip.) _Amelia._ A cross between Rommel's Faith and Ives;
from F. E. L. Rautenberg, Lincoln, Illinois. Very hardy, healthy;
leathery foliage; bunch above medium; berries medium, round, black; good
quality; almost like Rogers' Aminia.

=Amanda.= (Lab.) From Missouri, about 1868. Strong grower, productive;
bunches large, compact, shouldered; berries large, black, blue bloom,
hard pulp, thick skinned; poor quality; may be the same as August
Pioneer.

=Ambecon.= (Linc. Lab. Rup.) Parentage, America crossed with Beacon;
from Munson in 1897. Stamens reflexed; cluster large; berry medium,
black; ripens late.

=Amber.= (Rip. Lab.) _Rommel's Amber._ The same parentage as Elvira;
from Jacob Rommel. Vigorous, hardy, moderately productive; bunches long,
shouldered, somewhat loose; berry medium, oblong, pale amber; pulp
tender, sweet, juicy; skin thin; season between Concord and Catawba.

=Amberbonte.= (Bourq. Linc. Rup.) A cross between America and Herbemont;
from Munson. Vigorous and prolific; cluster very large; berry small to
medium, dark red; skin thin, tough; flesh tender, juicy; fine quality;
ripens with Herbemont.

=American Hamburg.= (Lab.) A large black grape pronounced a worthless
Labrusca by Prince in 1863.

=Amersion.= (Linc. Lab. Rup.) Parentage, America pollinated by
Profusion; from Munson in 1899. Stamens reflexed; cluster large; berry
medium, black; ripens late.

=Amonta.= (Mont. Rup. Linc.) A seedling of _Vitis monticola_ pollinated
by America; from Munson in 1899. Cluster medium; berry medium, black;
ripens late.

=Amos.= (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) A Delaware seedling grown in 1865 by W. W.
Jones, Douglas County, Illinois. Vigorous, productive; berry medium;
good keeper.

=Amy.= (Lab.) A seedling of Concord; from W. H. Lightfoot, Springfield,
Illinois. Healthy, hardy; berries greenish-yellow; ripens with parent.

=Andover.= (Lab.) According to Mitzky, 1893, a black fox grape of no
value.

=Anida.= Mentioned in the _Arkansas Experiment Station Report_ for 1890
as "a variety, the foliage of which was but little affected by the grape
leaf folder."

=Anna.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Catawba; from Eli Hasbrouck, of
Newburgh, New York, fruited in 1851 and later introduced by Dr. Grant of
Iona. Resembles the Catawba in appearance of vine but is unhealthy and
feeble; bunches medium, loose; berries medium, pale amber; meaty,
vinous; ripens with Catawba.

=Annie M.= (Lab.) A chance seedling from L. C. Chisholm. Vigorous,
unproductive; stamens upright; bunch medium, compact; berry medium,
whitish-green; sweet; ripens with Diamond.

=Anuta.= (Linc. Rup. Lab.) Parentage, America crossed with Beacon; from
Munson in 1899. Stamens reflexed; cluster large; berry large, black;
ripens medium late.

=Arbeka.= (Linc. Lab. Rup.) Parentage, America crossed with Profusion;
from Munson in 1899. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry medium, black;
ripens late.

=Archer.= (Vin. Lab.?) A chance seedling which fruited about 1851 in the
garden of Ellis S. Archer, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Foliage shows
Vinifera; bunch above medium; berry medium, round, inclining to oval,
greenish-white to amber; juicy, sweet; very good; ripens late.

=Ariadne.= (Vin. Rip. Lab.) A seedling of Clinton and a Vinifera; from
Ricketts. Vine moderately vigorous; bunch small to medium, compact;
berry small, round, black.

=Arkansaw.= (Lab.) _Wells Seedling._ From Joseph Hart, Fayetteville,
Arkansas, in 1893. Vigorous, productive; bunch medium, moderately
compact; berry medium to large, round, dull pink with minute red dots;
sweet, very foxy; hardly fair in quality.

=Armalaga.= (Vin. Linc. Lab.) From Munson, about 1907, who gives it as a
hybrid of Armlong and Malaga. Very vigorous, healthy; cluster large,
compact; berry large, yellowish-green.

=Armbrilong.= (Linc. Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Armlong crossed
with Brilliant; from Munson in 1899. Stamens erect; cluster very large;
berry medium, red; ripens late.

=Armlong.= (Linc. Vin. Lab.) A hybrid of Ten-Dollar-Prize crossed with
Black Eagle; from Munson. On account of its large clusters, used largely
by the originator in crossing.

=Aroma.= (Lab.) Noted in the _Hermann Grape Nurseries Catalog_ for 1906
as a new red variety; bunches medium; berries very large; fine aroma.

=Arrold.= (Lab. Vin.) According to Husmann in 1870, "so much like
Cassady that it will not pay to cultivate the two."

=Atavite.= (Lab.) A Concord seedling; from Munson, in 1885. Lacks vigor,
unproductive; stamens erect; cluster small, irregular; berries small,
black; good; very early; now discarded by Munson.

=Atoka.= (Linc. Rup. Bourq. Lab.) A cross-breed of America and Delaware;
listed by Munson in 1899. Vigorous, healthy; clusters large, often with
short shoulder, moderately compact; berries small to medium, globular,
dark purplish-red; skin thin; juicy, sprightly; good.

=Auburn Pearl.= (Lab.) Noted by Dr. Parker of Ithaca, New York, as from
a Mr. Cox of Auburn, New York. White; mild, sweet; early.

=Aughwick.= (Rip.) Found wild in the Aughwick Valley, Pennsylvania, by
William A. Fraker of Shirleysburg. Resembles Clinton; berries larger and
vine less productive.

=August Coral.= (Lab.) Noted by Prince in 1858 as from North Carolina.
Hardy; berries bright red; early, sweet.

=August Pioneer.= (Lab.) Origin unknown; introduced about 1867. A
coarse, large, black grape with firm, hard, pulpy flesh; early.

=Augusta.= (Lab.) A seedling of Concord; from T. B. Miner. Vigorous,
hardy, unproductive; bunch medium; berries medium, white; fair quality;
early.

=Augusta.= (Lab.) From a Mr. Broderick of St. Catherines, Ontario. Noted
only as having been exhibited by Ontario at the World's Fair in 1893.

=Augustina.= (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) By Munson; from Delaware, Goethe and
Brilliant. Introduced in 1901 under the name Augusta but changed to the
above. Vigorous, very prolific; cluster large; berry very large,
translucent, carmine; pulp meaty, tender, juicy.

=Australis.= (Long.) A wild variety of _Vitis longii_ found by Munson on
the Red River in Texas. Stamens reflexed; cluster small to medium; berry
very small, black; ripens very early.

=Auteonello.= Mentioned in the _Ontario Fruit Growers' Association
Report_ for 1887 as a variety of medium vigor.

=Avery Prolific.= (Lab.?) Noted in the _American Horticultural Annual_
for 1870 as a black grape received from John P. Avery, Norwich,
Connecticut, and as very early, a great bearer, and of poor quality.

=Avilla.= (Aest.) Noted in the _Missouri Horticultural Society Report_
for 1891 as a black grape of the same type and character as Cynthiana; a
native of southern Kansas. Vigorous, productive, hardy, healthy; fruit
black; sweet, sprightly, vinous.

=Ayres Pride.= (Lab. Vin.) From E. J. Ayres, Villa Ridge, Illinois,
about 1890. Healthy; bunch large; berry large, black; quality best;
resembles Norfolk.

=Azure.= (Aest.) Noted in the _United States Department of Agriculture
Report_ for 1893, as from J. S. Breece, Fayetteville, North Carolina.
Cluster medium, cylindrical, small shoulders, moderately compact; berry
medium to below, roundish, adhering firmly, black; meaty, sweet with
pleasant aroma; season with Catawba.

=Badart.= (Linc. Lab. Vin.) Parentage, Ten-Dollar-Prize crossed with
Triumph; from Munson in 1899. Stamens reflexed; cluster large; berry
large; ripens late.

=Bailey Prolific.= (Lab.?) A Mr. Weis, in the _Illinois Horticultural
Society Report_ for 1865, speaks of Bailey Prolific. Productive, hardy,
healthy, superior in flavor to Hartford. May be the same as Avery
Prolific.

=Bailie.= From Samuel Bailie, of Virginia, about 1830. Fruit of medium
size, red, free from pulp.

=Baker.= (Lab. Vin.) Mentioned by Mitzky in 1893 as a seedling of
Isabella which it resembles.

=Baldwin Lenoir.= (Bourq.) A supposed seedling of Lenoir from
Westchester, Pennsylvania. Foliage and habit of growth like Lincoln;
bunch small, loose; berries small, black, sugary; a wine grape.

=Balziger.= (Lab. Aest.) A cross between Norton and Martha; from J.
Balziger, Highland, Illinois. Of agreeable taste, ripens very late.

_Balziger's Concord Seedling No. 2._ (Lab.) Resembles Concord; ripens
later.

_Balziger's No. 32._ (Lab.) A fine-flavored white Concord seedling; must
84 deg..

=Baltimore Seedling.= Noted in the _United States Patent Office Report_
for 1845 as from Sidney Weller, Brinkleyville, North Carolina.

=Barbara.= From Theophile Huber. Moderately vigorous; shy bearer; bunch
small and irregular; berry medium, greenish-white; sweet, rich, tender
pulp; ripens with Agawam.

=Barnes.= (Lab. Vin.) From Parker Barnes, Boston, Massachusetts, about
1864. Bunches shouldered; berries medium, oval, black; sweet; good; in
season with Hartford.

=Barnes.= (Champ.) A wild vine of _Vitis champini_; found in Bell
County, Texas, by Munson. Stamens reflexed; clusters small; berry
medium, black; ripens mid-season.

=Baroness.= (Lab.) From Dr. H. Schroeder, Bloomington, Illinois.
Resembles Moore Early in vine and fruit.

=Bartlett.= (Lab.) A pale red variety found in the woods at Lexington,
Massachusetts, by Elias Phinney. Pronounced a worthless Labrusca by
Prince in 1863.

=Bates.= (Lab.) Given in the _United States Department of Agriculture
Report_ for 1869 as a Labrusca.

=Bauchman Red Fox.= (Lab.) Prince states in 1830 that he received this
vine from C. Bauchman of Pennsylvania. Fruit of large size, resembling
the common red fox in flavor and color.

=Baxter.= (Aest.) A southern grape considered worthless by Prince in
1863. Clusters large; berries small, black; season very late.

=Bay State.= (Vin. Rip. Lab.) From N. B. White; parents, Marion crossed
by Black Hamburg. Vigorous, hardy; bunch medium, shouldered; berry
slightly oblong, red; juicy, sweet, sprightly; season early.

=Beach.= (Linc. Lab. Vin.) Parentage, Post-oak No. 3 crossed with
Triumph; from Munson in 1889. Stamens reflexed; clusters large; berry
medium, black; ripens early.

=Beagle.= (Rip. Lab.) A seedling of Elvira crossed with Ives; from
Munson, about 1888. Vigorous, moderately productive; bunch medium,
sometimes shouldered; berry small to medium, oblong, black with heavy
bloom; pulp firm, sweet; ripens about with Moore Early.

=Beansville.= Mentioned by William Saunders of the United States
Department of Agriculture in 1864, as not being worthy of further
attention.

=Beaufort.= (Rot.) Given in the _United States Department of Agriculture
Report_ for 1871 as a cultivated variety of Rotundifolia.

=Beauty of Minnesota.= (Lab. Bourq.) From J. C. Kramer of La Crescent,
Minnesota, about 1866; supposed parents, Delaware and Concord. Vigorous,
healthy; bunch large, compact, often shouldered; berry greenish-yellow;
good; ripens early.

=Beaverdam.= (Lab.? Vin.?) Prince, in 1830, gives this variety as from
Virginia, and states that vine and fruit resemble Bland.

=Beeby Black.= Described in the _Illinois Horticultural Society Report_
for 1897 as more productive than Moore Early; bunch and berry not as
large; ripens a little earlier; hardly as good.

=Belinda.= (Lab.) From T. B. Miner; a white seedling of Concord with
large, juicy, sweet, slightly foxy fruit; ripens shortly after Lady.

=Belton.= (Champ. Vin. Lab. Bourq.) Parentage, De Grasset crossed with
Brilliant; from Munson. Stamens erect; cluster medium; berry medium,
black; ripens medium early.

=Belvidere.= (Lab.) Supposed to be a seedling of Concord or Hartford
from Belvidere, Illinois; brought to notice by Dr. L. L. Lake in 1870.
Resembles the Hartford in vine and fruit; early.

=Belvin.= (Linc. Rip. Lab.) From Munson. Very strong grower; large,
loose, oblong bunches; berries medium, black with blue bloom; quality
fair; ripens very late.

=Ben.= (Linc. Aest. Lab.) A seedling of Ten-Dollar-Prize crossed with
Norton; from Munson in 1889. Stamens reflexed; cluster large; berry
medium, black; ripens late.

=Ben Hur.= (Linc. Aest. Lab. Bourq.) A combination of Post-oak with
Norton and Herbemont; from Munson. Exhibited at the American Pomological
Society in 1903 and introduced about 1904. Vigorous, prolific, healthy;
cluster large, rather loose; berry small, black; shells; good; ripens
late.

=Benjamin.= (Lab.) From W. H. Lightfoot, Springfield, Illinois;
offspring of Northern Muscadine. Vigorous; cluster large, loose to
compact; berry large, black with blue bloom, pulpy; flavor similar to
Woodruff; ripens with Concord.

=Berks.= (Lab. Vin.) _Lehigh._ A seedling of Catawba; from Berks County,
Pennsylvania, about 1863. Vigorous, vine similar to parent; bunch large,
shouldered, compact; berry large, red; of Catawba flavor.

=Berlaussel.= (Berland. Linc. Lab.) A seedling of _Vitis berlandieri_
and Laussel; from Munson. Stamens reflexed; clusters large; berry
medium, purple; ripens very late.

=Berlin.= (Lab.) A seedling of Concord; from Geo. Hosford, Ionia,
Michigan. Vigorous, hardy, unproductive; bunch large, small-shouldered;
berry medium to large, round, greenish-yellow; sweet, vinous, with
slight foxiness; quality fair to good; ripens mid-season.

=Bertha.= (Lab.) From Theophile Huber, Illinois City, Illinois; about
1892. Vigorous; self-fertile; clusters medium to large, compact; berry
medium, white with yellowish tinge; of fair quality; ripens with Worden.

=Bertha.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Roenbeck; from Fred Roenbeck,
Bayonne, New Jersey. Bunch and berries not as large as the parent;
white; sweet; of fair quality.

=Beta.= (Lab. Rip.?) A cross between Carver and Concord; from L.
Snelter, Carver, Minnesota. Very hardy, productive; fruit of fair
quality; early.

=Beta.= A Labrusca-Vinifera hybrid given by the _Canada Experimental
Farms Report_, 1896, as originating in London, Ontario. A table grape,
neither large nor attractive.

=Bettina.= (Vin. Lab. Rip.) Parentage, Hartford crossed with Muscat
Hamburg; from G. W. Campbell, Delaware, Ohio. In appearance and quality
intermediate between the two parents.

=Big Berry.= (Linc.) _Big Bunch; Great Cluster?_ A variety of the north
Texas glaucous form of Lincecumii considerably used by Munson in his
breeding work. It is characterized by great vigor of vine and large
bunch and berry. One parent of Bailey, Collier, R. W. Munson, and many
others.

=Big Black.= (Linc. Lab.) From Munson. Vigorous; bunches large, loose to
compact, shouldered; berries very large, black, similar to Concord in
appearance; poor in quality; ripens after Concord; good shipper.

=Big Cluster.= (Mont.) A variety of _Vitis monticola_; found by Munson
in Bell County, Texas. Stamens reflexed; cluster large to medium; berry
small, purple; ripens very late.

=Big Hope.= (Linc. Lab. Vin.) From Munson, about 1889; parents, Big
Berry crossed with Triumph. Vigorous; clusters medium to large, variable
in compactness; berries small to medium, purplish; fair in quality.

=Big Ozark.= (Lab.) In 1863, Prince noted this as a worthless Labrusca.

=Bird's Egg.= (Lab. Vin.) Downing, in 1869, described Bird's Egg as
follows: "Bunch long, pointed; berry long, oval, whitish, with brown
specks; flesh pulpy; only good as a curiosity." Resembles Catawba.

=Bishop.= (Lab. Vin.) A chance seedling from D. Bishop, Leavenworth,
Kansas, about 1905. A supposed offspring of Brighton fertilized by
Diamond. Fruit much like Diamond in color and size but less compact;
ripens with Winchell.

=Bismarck.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Brighton; produced by F. E. L.
Rautenberg, of Lincoln, Illinois. Almost a reproduction of its parent
except that it is hardier.

=Bismarck.= (Lab.?) A chance seedling from Fred Roenbeck, Bayonne, New
Jersey. Healthy, vigorous, productive; bunch large; berries large,
black, agreeable aroma.

=Black Bear.= Mentioned in _Texas Station Bulletin No. 48_, 1898, as
"hardly desirable"; bunch oblong, loose; berries size of Lenoir, black
with blue bloom; acid but rather pleasant; self-sterile; ripens
mid-season.

=Black Claret.= (Lab.) Noted by W. R. Prince in 1863 as a worthless
Labrusca.

=Black Cluster.= A very hardy, very productive, black, medium-sized
native raised at an early day in the Northwest.

=Black Delaware.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware raised by
Rommel of Missouri over thirty years ago. Fruit resembles Delaware very
closely except for the color which is black. Vine mildews in some
neighborhoods.

=Black Heart.= (Vin. Rip. Lab.) Parentage, Marion crossed with Black
Hamburg; originated by N. B. White of Norwood, Massachusetts; exhibited
at the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1872. Berry medium; sweet
and juicy.

=Black Herbemont.= (Bourq. Aest.? Lab.?) Either a Herbemont seedling or
Herbemont crossed with Norton; from Munson, in 1893. Vigorous,
productive, healthy; stamens upright; clusters large, loose; berry
small, black; poor quality; ripens late.

=Black King.= (Rip. Lab.?) First noticed by Prince in 1863, who
describes it as an early, small, good table and wine grape. Fuller
received the variety from Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and in _Record of
Horticulture_ for 1868 he writes: "Said to be a fox grape; but the
specimen vines we received from a very reliable source, have persisted
in bearing Clinton grapes."

=Black Madeira.= (Vin. Rip. Lab.) _Madeira_. Parentage, Marion crossed
with Black Hamburg; originated by N. B. White; exhibited before the
Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1873. Large, open bunch; berry
very small; sprightly flavor; good.

=Black Rose.= (Lab. Vin.) Parentage, Concord crossed with Salem; raised
by Rautenberg, of Lincoln, Illinois, in 1884. Vine resembles Concord,
hardy, subject to mildew; bunch similar to Concord; berries large,
black; of fine flavor.

=Black September.= (Rip.?) Given in the _United States Patent Office
Report_ for 1860 as a small, juicy, unproductive native grape under test
by the Department of Agriculture.

=Blackstone.= (Lab.) An early black grape of poor quality, pronounced a
worthless Labrusca by Prince in 1863.

=Black Taylor.= (Rip. Lab.) _Rommel's No. 19._ From Rommel, about 1882;
similar to Montefiore.

=Black Tennessee.= (Aest.) According to _Gardener's Monthly_, 1859:
Bunch large, long, shouldered, compact; berries medium, brownish-crimson
with blue bloom; very juicy, sweet.

=Black Virginia.= (Rip.) A wild frost grape of Virginia; said to have
been disseminated by Peter Raabe as the Emily.

=Blackwood.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) Parentage, Delago by Governor Ireland;
from Munson, in 1897. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry large, black;
ripens early.

=Blanco.= (Rip. Vin. Lab.) Seedling of Elvira crossed with Triumph; from
Munson. Unproductive, self-sterile; cluster medium, cylindrical, loose;
berry medium, oval, purple with blue bloom, moderately juicy, somewhat
vinous, sweet; good; season about with Concord.

=Bland.= (Lab. Vin.) _Bland's Fox_; _Bland's Madeira_; _Bland's Pale
Red_; _Bland's Virginia_; _Carolina Powel_; _Powell_; _Red Bland_; _Red
Scuppernong_; _Rose Grape_; _Virginia Muscadell_. An old variety brought
to notice by Colonel Bland of Virginia in the latter part of the
eighteenth century. Moderately vigorous; leaves lobed, light green,
smooth, delicate; cluster long, loose, often with imperfect berries;
berries large, round; pedicels long; skin thick, light red to dark
purple; flesh pulpy, sprightly, slightly foxy; ripens late. Many of the
early authorities consider Bland a probable Vinifera hybrid on account
of its resemblance to the European Chasselas.

=Blondin.= (Bourq. Aest. Linc. Lab.) A combination of Ten-Dollar-Prize,
Post-oak, Norton and Herbemont; from Munson in 1899. Very vigorous,
prolific; cluster large, compact, shouldered; berry medium, white,
translucent; juicy, sprightly, acid; ripens with Catawba.

=Blood.= (Linc. Bourq.) A seedling of Lincecumii fertilized with
Herbemont; from Munson. Moderate in vigor and productiveness; bunch
small to medium, compact; berry small, black, juicy, with a sprightly
subacid flavor, seedy; ripens a week later than Concord.

=Blood Black.= (Lab.) From a Mr. Blood, Newburyport, Massachusetts,
about 1854. Hardy, vigorous, productive; bunch medium, compact; berry
medium, round, black; sweet, with strong, foxy flavor; ripens early.

=Blood White.= (Lab.) From Blood, Newburyport, Massachusetts, about
1854. A red grape with the same general characters as Blood Black.

=Blue Dyer.= (Rip.) According to _Bushberg Catalogue_, 1883: Bunch
medium; berries small, black.

=Blue Favorite.= (Aest.?) _Purple Favorite._ From Georgia, about 1825 or
earlier. Very vigorous, resembling Cunningham but not so prolific;
cluster large, conical; berries small, round, black; juicy, vinous;
good; ripens with Herbemont.

=Blue Imperial.= (Lab.) Described by Downing in 1869 as follows:
"Vigorous, healthy, unproductive; bunch medium, short; berry large,
round, black, hard pulp; poor in quality; ripens with Hartford."

=Boadicea.= (Lab. Vin.) A cross of Telegraph with Black Hamburg; from
Chas. J. Copley, Stapleton, New York. Of medium vigor; bunch medium,
compact; berry oval; meaty, sweet with a rich, aromatic flavor; good
keeper; ripens with Isabella.

=Boadicea.= (Lab.) A Concord seedling; from T. B. Miner of New Jersey.
Vigorous, unproductive; bunch small; berry small, white.

=Bokchito.= (Linc. Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Early Purple crossed
with Brilliant; from Munson in 1899. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry
medium, black; ripens mid-season.

=Bonne Madame.= Listed with varieties which ripened earliest at the
Experimental Farms, Canada, in 1905.

=Bottsi.= (Bourq.) From South Carolina. Very vigorous, productive; bunch
very large, loose; berry below medium, light to dark pink, susceptible
to black-rot. Very similar to Herbemont and names by some believed to be
synonymous.

=Boulevard.= (Lab. Vin.) From A. Koeth, Charlotte, New York; Concord
crossed with Brighton. Vigorous, productive; bunch large, compact,
shouldered; berry medium, round, greenish-white; juicy, sweet, vinous;
ripens with Concord.

=Bowman.= (Lab.) Described in _Magazine of Horticulture_, 1863, by
Prince as a dark purple, early table grape of good quality.

=Braddock.= (Lab.) W. R. Prince, in _Magazine of Horticulture_ for 1863,
notes this as a purplish, early sweet table grape; hardy and adapted to
New England.

=Bradley.= (Lab. Vin.?) Described by A. C. Hubbard of Troy, Michigan, in
the _United States Patent Office Report_ for 1849 as a grape of the
Isabella type but three or four weeks earlier.

=Braendly.= (Lab.? Vin.?) From Illinois. Very weak, unproductive;
stamens upright; bunch small, irregularly loose; berry small, yellow; of
poor quality; ripens with Cynthiana.

=Brand White.= (Lab. Vin.) Resembles Cassady; exhibited before the
Mississippi Valley Grape Growers' Association in 1867.

=Breck.= (Lab.) Exhibited before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society
in 1855 by Thomas Waterman who gave it the above name. Resembles Winne.
Hardy; early.

=Bridgewater.= (Lab.) Supposed to be a sport of Worden, received at this
Station in 1901 from J. B. Tuckerman, Cassville, New York. Very similar
to Worden but said by the originator to be a week or ten days earlier.

=Brunk.= (Linc. Vin. Lab.) A seedling of Lincecumii crossed with
Triumph; from Texas. Medium in vigor and productiveness; stamens
upright; bunch medium, irregularly loose; berry medium, black; poor
quality; susceptible to black-rot.

=Buist.= (Lab. Vin.) Supposed to be a cross between Catawba and
Brighton; from H. B. Buist, Greenville, South Carolina, about 1878.
Vigorous, hardy, inclined to mildew; late in ripening.

=Bumper.= (Linc. Aest. Lab.) Post-oak crossed with Norton; from Texas.
Very vigorous; stamens reflexed; bunch large, irregular, very loose;
berry medium, black; of poor quality; susceptible to black-rot; season
with Cynthiana.

=Buncombe.= (Lab.) A variety of _Vitis labrusca_ found in North Carolina
and used by Munson in his breeding work. Stamens reflexed; cluster
small; berry large, black; ripens mid-season.

=Bundy.= (Lab.) A black seedling of Concord from the same lot of seeds
as Colerain; from David Bundy, Colerain, Ohio. Vigorous, productive,
hardy, healthy; bunch and berry resemble parent in appearance and
quality; ripens with Moore Early.

=Burlington.= Given in _American Farmer_, 1822, as a New Jersey grape of
high quality.

=Burlington.= (Lab.) A seedling from A. Taylor, Burlington, Vermont,
about 1871. Reported hardy in northern New England and equal to
Adirondac as a table grape.

=Burnet.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Hartford crossed with Black Hamburg;
from P. C. Dempsey, Albury, Prince Edward County, Ontario. Vigorous,
productive, mildews; stamens reflexed; cluster large, shouldered, loose;
berry large, oval, black; juicy; earlier than Concord.

=Burroughs.= (Rip. Lab.?) According to Downing, 1869, from Vermont. Vine
like Clinton; bunch small; berry round, black with thick bloom; harsh,
acid; ripens earlier than Isabella.

_Burrows No. 42C._ (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Concord crossed with
Jefferson; from J. G. Burrows, Fishkill, New York, received at this
Station in 1888. Sometimes unproductive; bunch medium, very compact,
handsome; berry medium or above, dark red with lilac bloom; juicy,
sweet, tender, slightly vinous, fine flavor; ripens about with Concord.

=Burton Early.= (Lab.) Downing notes in 1869: A large, early grape;
unworthy of culture.

=Bush.= (Bourq. Linc.) Parentage, Herbemont crossed with a Post-oak;
from Munson. Stamens erect; cluster medium; berry medium, black; ripens
very late.

=Bushberg.= (Aest. Lab.) A seedling of Willie crossed with an
Aestivalis; from Dr. L. C. Chisholm, Tennessee. Aestivalis characters
are predominant in both vine and fruit. Described by the originator as
vigorous, healthy; clusters above medium, long, loose, shouldered;
berries large, oblong, black, adherent; sprightly, vinous, tender;
ripens about with Concord.

=Cabot.= (Lab. Vin.) _Stetson No. 1._ A seedling from A. W. Stetson,
Braintree, Massachusetts, about 1853; a cross of a native Labrusca and
Grizzly Frontignan. Bunch long, firm, short shoulder; berries medium,
round, black with thick bloom; skin thick; musky, sweet.

=Cairnano.= Tested by the United States Department of Agriculture in
1864 and discarded as worthless.

=California Rosea.= Described by Warder in 1867 as: "Bunch large,
compact; berry large, round, black, sweet."

=California White.= Noted by Warder in 1867. Bunch full, medium; berry
large, yellow; very fine.

=Calloway.= (Bourq. Vin.?) Possibly a synonym of Ruckland. Vigorous,
healthy, productive; cluster small to medium, compact; berries medium,
oval, red; skin thin, tough; quality good; ripens very late.

=Calypso.= (Lab. Vin.) Produced by Chas. J. Copley, of Stapleton, New
York, from seed of Lady crossed with Secretary; fruited in 1887. Hardy,
strong in growth; bunches large, heavily shouldered; berries large,
black; juicy, vinous; good; ripens with or after Concord.

=Camaks.= Found growing in the garden of James Camaks, about 1847. Bunch
shouldered, long, loose, tapering; berries small, round, brownish-red;
flesh tender, melting, sweet; good.

=Cambridge.= (Lab.) Originated in the garden of Francis Houghton,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, about 1867. Vigorous; bunch large, shouldered,
compact; berry large, black, covered with heavy bloom; similar to
Concord; ripens four days earlier.

=Camden.= (Lab.) Bunch medium; berry large, greenish-white; flesh with
hard center, acid; poor.

=Canaan.= Mentioned in the _United States Patent Office Report_ in 1843,
as one of the varieties grown at that time.

=Canby.= (Lab. Vin.) From W. Canby, Wilmington, Delaware; probably a
seedling of Isabella, brought to notice about 1852. Hardy, vigorous;
cluster medium size, compact; berry medium size, purple; flavor sweet;
quality "best."

=Canonicus.= (Lab. Vin.) From D. S. Marvin, Watertown, New York, about
1888. Vigorous and productive; stamens upright; bunch loose, medium;
berry medium, round, pale green, translucent, whitish bloom; skin thin;
pulp sweet, tender, juicy, sprightly; ripens with Concord.

=Cape May Prolific.= _Large Blue English._ Mentioned by Prince in 1863
in a list of varieties in _Gardener's Monthly_.

=Capital.= (Lab.) Given in _Bushberg Catalogue_ in 1894 as a white
Concord seedling raised by W. H. Lightfoot of Illinois.

=Carlotte.= (Lab.) Produced by T. B. Miner of Linden, New Jersey, from
seed of Concord. Vigorous, hardy; greenish-white; good.

=Carminet.= (Bourq.?) Bunches small, ragged; berries small, black;
sweet; skin and pulp tender.

=Carolina Blue Muscadine.= _Jones' Perfumed._ Mentioned by Prince in
_Gardener's Monthly_, 1863.

=Caroline.= _Carolina._ Said by Husmann in 1871 to be the same as
Concord.

=Carter.= (Lab. Vin.?) An old variety mentioned as early as 1831; a
seedling of Isabella. Bunch large, shouldered; berries large, round,
black, heavy bloom; good, very similar to Isabella with which it ripens.

=Carter.= (Lab.) _Mammoth Globe._ A large-fruited red Labrusca used by
Rogers.

=Carver.= Given as one of the parents of Beta. Not described.

=Case.= (Rip.) Mentioned by the United States Department of Agriculture
in 1869.

=Case Crystal.= (Lab.) Noted in the _United States Patent Office Report_
for 1859 as a reliable variety for New England.

=Caspar.= (Bourq.) A seedling of Louisiana; from A. Caspar of New
Orleans, supposed to be a cross with Herbemont. Vigorous; cluster
medium, compact; berries brownish-red, small; juice white; good; ripens
late.

=Cassady.= (Lab. Vin.) _Arcott_; _Arnott_; _Arrott_. A chance seedling
from H. P. Cassady, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; fruited in 1852. Medium
in vigor, productive; stamens upright; cluster medium, compact,
sometimes shouldered; berry medium, round, greenish-white, covered with
white bloom; skin thick, tough; flesh juicy, tender, pleasant; very
good; ripens with Catawba.

=Catarobe.= Mentioned in the _Horticulturist_ of 1850 as growing well in
Illinois.

=Catherine.= (Lab. Vin.) From Gen. N. M. Waterman of Hartford,
Connecticut, 1854. Clusters small, compact, firm; berries medium,
slightly oval, green, translucent; skin thin; pulp soft, sweet, well
flavored, foxy.

=Catoosa.= (Linc. Vin. Lab. Bourq.?) Parentage, Lucky crossed with
Carman; from Munson in 1899. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry medium,
black; ripens late.

_Caywood No. 1._ (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) From A. J. Caywood, Marlboro, New
York; a red seedling of Poughkeepsie fertilized with Iona.

_Caywood No. 50._ (Lab. Vin.) From A. J. Caywood, about 1888. Vigorous,
healthy, productive; stamens upright; cluster medium, compact, often
shouldered; berry large, roundish, black with abundant bloom; shatters;
skin thick, tender; pulp juicy, sweet, tough, vinous; good; ripens a
little before Worden.

=Chambersburg White.= Mentioned in _Gardener's Monthly_ in 1863 in a
list of worthless varieties.

=Chambril.= (Champ. Lab. Vin. Bourq.) Parentage, _Vitis champini_
crossed with Brilliant; from Munson. Stamens upright; cluster medium or
above; berry small, purplish-black, thin bloom; skin thin, tough; pulp
tender, not juicy, vinous; good.

=Champanel.= (Champ. Lab.) Parents, _Vitis champini_ crossed with
Worden; from Munson. Vigorous; clusters large, conical; berries
globular, large, black; season with Concord.

=Champovo.= (Champ. Vin. Lab. Bourq.) Parentage, De Grasset crossed with
Brilliant; from Munson. Stamens reflexed; cluster medium; berry large,
black; ripens mid-season.

=Chandler.= (Lab.) A chance seedling from N. M. Chandler, Ottawa,
Kansas, about 1886; probably from Worden. Vigorous, productive; stamens
upright; cluster medium, shouldered, compact; berry above medium, round,
rich yellow; good.

=Chapin.= Noted in _Gardener's Monthly, 1863_, as worthless.

=Charles.= (Rip. Lab.?) Mentioned by Joseph Hobbins about 1869 as having
been injured by winter; exhibited at Wisconsin State Fair that year.
Resembles Clinton.

=Charles A. Green.= A white grape originated by P. W. Loudon,
Janesville, Wisconsin; introduced by the Chas. A. Green Nursery Company
of Rochester, New York. Said to be "a vigorous grower, and an enormous
yielder of very large and beautiful clusters of excellent fruit."

=Charlotte.= (Lab. Vin.) From Edmund Ward, Kelleys Island, Ohio; a
seedling of Catawba. Bunch medium, not shouldered; berries medium,
roundish, pale red; flesh tender, sweet, vinous; skin thick; season with
Delaware.

=Charlton.= (Vin. Lab.) A cross between Brighton and Mills; from John
Charlton, Rochester, New York; fruited about 1893. Vigorous, productive,
hardy; clusters large, generally well shouldered, compact; berry large
to medium, roundish-oval, dark red; skin rather thin, tough; pulp meaty,
tender releases seeds easily; juicy, sweet, rich, vinous; ripens a week
before Concord; keeps well; promising.

=Charter Oak.= (Lab. Aest.) A large coarse, foxy grape from Connecticut.
Vigorous, hardy; canes long with blue bloom; tendrils continuous;
clusters small, loose; berries large, roundish, dull dark amber;
shatter; flesh soft, tough, foxy; fair quality; ripens with Concord.

=Chavoush.= Exhibited before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in
1868. Productive; bunch large; berry large, oval, white; keeps well.

=Cheowa.= Noted in the _United States Department of Agriculture Report_
for 1863 as a variety to be discarded.

=Cherokee.= (Aest. Lab.) From Stayman, of Kansas; the same parentage as
Ozark. Vigorous; free from rot and mildew; bunch large, compact; berry
medium, black; tender, juicy, sweet; season with Cynthiana.

=Chicago.= (Lab.) A chance seedling found in Lincoln, Illinois, by F. E.
L. Rautenberg. Vigorous, productive, hardy; bunch medium, sometimes
double; berries medium, round; skin tough; color red resembling
Delaware; sweet, rich; ripens early; ships well.

=Chidester's Seedlings.= Produced by C. P. Chidester, Battle Creek,
Michigan, about thirty years ago. All are apparently second generation
Vinifera-native hybrids. They are of high quality but all seem to have
some weakness which makes their permanent popularity doubtful. These
varieties appear to have become confused, as the Michigan Experiment
Station Bulletins, our chief source of information, have published
contradictory descriptions in different places.

_No. 1._ See Lyon.

_No. 2._ (Lab. Vin.) Moderately vigorous, hardy; stamens reflexed;
cluster medium, compact; berry medium, round, dark red; flesh soft,
sweet, vinous; good; ripens early; shatters somewhat.

_No. 3._ Vigorous; cluster large, loose, shouldered; berry large, dark
purple; flesh firm, juicy, sweet; keeps well.

_No. 4._ Vigorous; cluster medium, roundish, shouldered, loose; berries
large, round, nearly black; flesh tender, vinous; good; ripens just
after Concord.

=Chillicothe.= (Lab. Vin.) From Ohio. Mentioned in the _United States
Department of Agriculture Report_ in 1863. Bunch long, loose; berry
medium, oval, dark purple.

=Chippewa.= Found growing on the banks of Chippewa Creek, Ontario;
described in 1858 by W. H. Read. Bunch large, compact, heavily
shouldered; berry medium, black; flesh tender, sweet, good.

=Chisholm's Seedlings.= Produced by Dr. L. C. Chisholm, Spring Hill,
Tennessee. Of his named sorts there are: Annie M., Bushberg, Delawba,
Gilt Edge, La Marie, Lutie, and Willie, the best known being Lutie. The
following unnamed seedlings from Chisholm have been tested and
described:

_No. 1._ (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) A Delaware seedling. Weak, healthy; stamens
reflexed; cluster small, very loose; berry medium, purple; quality poor;
ripens with Worden.

_No. 3._ (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware. Medium in vigor,
healthy; stamens upright; cluster small, compact; berry small,
reddish-purple; quality fair; ripens with Worden.

_No. 4._ (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware. Vigorous; cluster
medium size; berries light green, sprightly, vinous; good; ripens with
Delaware.

_No. 5._ (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) A Delaware seedling. Moderately vigorous;
berry light red; good quality; ripens just before Concord.

_No. 6._ (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware. Weak, apparently
healthy, a shy bearer; stamens reflexed; cluster small, loose; berry
medium, purple; fair quality; ripens with Worden; not a good keeper.

_No. 8._ (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) A Delaware seedling. Vigorous, hardy,
productive; cluster medium; berry medium, black; very good; ripens with
Moore Early.

_No. 9._ (Aest.) Moderately vigorous, attacked somewhat by black-rot,
hardy; stamens upright; cluster medium; berry medium, red; quality
hardly fair; ripens with Concord.

=Chocolate.= Mentioned in a list of worthless varieties in _Gardener's
Monthly_ in 1863.

=Choteau.= (Linc. Vin. Lab. Bourq.?) Parentage, Lucky crossed with
Carman; from Munson in 1899. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry medium,
black; ripens late.

=Church Seedling.= (Lab.) From Dr. Durfee, Fall River, Massachusetts; a
seedling of a wild grape unworthy of cultivation.

=Claret.= (Rip.) From Charles Carpenter, Kelleys Island, Ohio. Vigorous;
bunch and berry medium; claret red; acid; resembles Clinton.

=Clarissa.= (Lab. Vin.) A white seedling of Salem; from F. E. L.
Rautenberg, Lincoln, Illinois.

=Clark.= (Lab. Vin.) From J. S. Phelps, Washington, District of
Columbia. Cluster of medium length, sometimes shouldered, compact; berry
medium, oval, dull red, heavy bloom; sweet, foxy.

=Clark Seedling.= (Lab.) From a Mr. Clark of Framingham, Massachusetts;
described in _Magazine of Horticulture_ in 1861. Hardy and early; bunch
loose; berry reddish; quality excellent.

=Clarkes.= Mentioned by Prince in 1830 as being grown in Virginia. Bunch
and berry large; early; keeps well.

=Claude.= (Lab.) From Georgia. Vigorous; stamens upright; bunch medium,
loose; berry large, black; poor quality; ripens a little before Norton.

=Cleopatra.= (Lab. Rip.) Parentage, Ives crossed with Faith; from F. E.
L. Rautenberg, Lincoln, Illinois. Vigorous, hardy, productive; bunch and
berry medium; black; early.

=Clifton.= (Lab. Vin.) Parents, Telegraph crossed with White Frontignan;
from C. J. Copley, Stapleton, New York. Vigorous, productive; bunch
large, compact; berries white, large; ripens in September.

=Climax.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling from A. Reisinger of Naples, New York,
about 1883; supposed to be a seedling of Catawba. Vigorous; berry medium
to large, red; tender, sweet, sprightly; ripens with Concord.

=Clinton-Vialia.= (Rip.) Probably identical with Franklin. Used in
France as a grafting stock.

=Cloantha.= (Vin. Lab.) An Isabella seedling from Kentucky. Vigorous;
berry black, small; foxy.

=Clover Street Black.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Diana crossed with
Black Hamburg; from Jacob Moore. Bunches large, compact; berries large,
round, black; flesh tender, sweet, ripens with Concord.

=Clover Street Red.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Diana crossed with Black
Hamburg; from Jacob Moore. Vigorous; berries large, roundish-oval,
crimson; Diana flavor and season.

=Cluster.= Mentioned in the _United States Patent Office Report_, 1852,
as a native grape.

=Clyde.= (Lab.? Vin.?) From John Burr, Leavenworth, Kansas. Bunch
medium, compact; berry large, red; tender, juicy, sweet.

=Cochee.= (Lab. Bourq.) From John Burr, Leavenworth, Kansas, 1887.
Vigorous; tendrils intermittent; cluster medium to small, compact; berry
medium, dark red, lilac bloom; flesh tender, fine, vinous, sweet; good;
ripens about with Concord.

=Coe.= (Lab.) From Iowa. Hardy, vigorous; cluster small, compact, rarely
shouldered; berries small to medium, black; a week earlier than Concord.

=Colesvine.= (Lab.? Vin.?) Enumerated in a list of unpromising grapes
for North Carolina by Sidney Weller in 1845.

=Collier.= (Linc. Lab.) _Big Red; Dr. Collier._ A seedling of Post-oak
by Concord; from Munson. Vigorous, productive; tendrils intermittent;
stamens upright; cluster medium to large, variable in compactness;
berries large, roundish, dark reddish-purple, heavy bloom; flesh tender,
fine-grained, vinous, nearly sweet; quality good; ripens just after
Concord.

=Collina.= _Hill Grape of Ohio._ Listed by Prince in _Gardeners'
Monthly_ in 1863.

=Colorado.= From John Gravestock, Canon City, Colorado. Vigorous;
cluster medium, long, shouldered, compact; berries medium; sweet,
tender; late.

=Colp.= (Lab.) A wild vine of _Vitis labrusca_ found in Maryland and
used by Munson. Stamens depressed; cluster medium; berry large, white;
ripens mid-season.

=Columbia.= (Rip.) Said to have been found by Major Adlum on his farm at
Georgetown, District of Columbia, previous to 1830. Vigorous,
productive; cluster small, loose; berries round, black, small; quality
poor.

=Columbia.= (Lab.) From J. T. C. Clark, Washington, before 1883.
Vigorous; cluster and berry medium, white; good; late.

=Columbian.= Originated about the same time as Columbian Imperial and
probably identical with it. The literature of the two is so confused,
Columbian Imperial having been sold as Columbian, that it is impossible
to determine whether they are distinct.

=Columbus.= (Bourq. Aest. Rip.) From John Hertlein, Spielerville,
Arkansas; parents, Delaware and Norton. Vigorous; bunches large, nearly
compact; berries medium, black; sweet, pleasant flavor; ripens with
Delaware.

=Compacta.= (Bourq. Vin. Lab.) A seedling of Herbemont crossed with
Triumph; from Munson. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry small, white;
ripens very late. Now discarded by originator.

=Concord Chasselas.= (Vin. Lab.) From G. W. Campbell, Delaware, Ohio,
1881; a cross between Golden Chasselas and Concord. Vigorous; cluster
long, moderately compact, sometimes shouldered; berries large, oval,
greenish-white; pure flavor; good; ripens with Concord.

=Concord Muscat.= (Vin. Lab.) A seedling of Concord crossed with Muscat;
from G. W. Campbell. Vigorous; cluster compact, long, sometimes
shouldered; berries large, oval, light greenish-white; flesh tender and
melting; quality very good; ripens with Concord.

=Concordia.= (Lab. Bourq.) From Dr. J. Stayman, Leavenworth, Kansas.
Vigorous, hardy; bunch large, compact; berry large, black; pulp tender,
juicy, sweet, vinous; very good; ripens about with Concord.

=Conelva.= (Lab. Rip.) A seedling of Concord crossed with Elvira; from
Munson. Vigorous, hardy; stamens upright; cluster medium, compact; berry
medium, round, black; quality fair; ripens with Cottage.

=Connecticut.= Mentioned by Prince in a list of worthless varieties in
_Gardener's Monthly_ for 1863.

=Connecticut Seedling.= Cited in the _Illinois Horticultural Society
Report_ for 1868 as a promising table grape.

=Conqueror.= (Vin. Lab.) From Rev. Archer Moore, New Jersey, about 1868;
supposed by him to be a cross between Concord and Royal Muscadine.
Vigorous; stamens upright; bunch medium, loose; berries medium, oval,
black, pulpy; quality fair; ripens about with Concord.

=Cooper Wine.= From Joseph Cooper, Gloucester County, New Jersey, about
1800. Vigorous; berry round, medium, purple; quality fair.

=Copley's Hybrids.= Chas. J. Copley of Stapleton, Staten Island, New
York, about thirty years ago originated and exhibited a large number of
hybrid grapes. His productions were chiefly the result of fertilizing
cultivated American varieties with pollen of standard Viniferas,
particularly the White Frontignan. His seedlings which received names
are Boadicea, Calypso, Clifton, Cornelia, Daphne, D'Elboux, Lulie,
Mineola, Paragon, and Zelia. They show too many Vinifera weaknesses,
particularly a tendency to mildew, to become popular. None of them was
ever introduced.

=Coppermine.= Discarded as worthless from test vineyards of the
Department of Agriculture in 1864.

=Corby.= (Lab. Vin.) From C. C. Corby, Montclair, New Jersey. Vigorous,
hardy, productive; blooms mid-season; stamens upright; clusters above
medium, variable in compactness; berries intermediate in size, oval to
roundish, dull black with heavy blue bloom; flesh fine-grained, sweet,
resembles Concord in flavor; good; ripens about with Concord.

=Coriel.= (Lab. Vin.) From New Jersey. Hardy; bunch medium; berry small,
oval, black; good.

=Cornelia.= (Vin. Lab.) A seedling of Telegraph crossed with White
Frontignan; from Chas. J. Copley, Stapleton, New York. Bunch large,
shouldered; berries round, white with amber tint; juicy, rich, sweet.

=Cornucopia.= (Vin. Rip.) _Arnold's No. 2._ Parents, Clinton crossed
with Black St. Peters; from Charles Arnold, Paris, Ontario, 1859.
Vigorous; stamens upright; cluster large, shouldered, compact; berry
medium to large, black; flesh tender, vinous, juicy; good; ripens with
Concord.

=Corporal.= (Lab. Aest. Vin.) Parents, Eumelan crossed with Worden; from
D. S. Marvin, about 1881. Bunch and berry medium, loose; black; vinous;
good.

=Corsican.= From Ohio. Hardy; bunch large; berry small, round, red; very
good.

=Cortland.= (Lab.) _Courtland._ A seedling of Concord crossed with
Hartford; from M. F. Cleary, Cortland, New York, about 1863. Believed by
some to be identical with Champion. Vigorous; clusters large, compact;
berry large, black; sweet; early.

=Cotoctin.= Described by Fuller in 1867 as a chance seedling from
Pennsylvania. Bunch large, shouldered; berries large, white; good; late.

=Covert.= (Lab.) A chance seedling; from N. B. Covert, Ann Arbor,
Michigan. Bunch large, compact; berries large, greenish-white; sweet;
ripens with Concord.

=Cowan.= (Rip.) _McCowan_; _McGowan_; _McOwen_. An old variety of
unknown origin; once raised on Lake Champlain. Very hardy; clusters
medium; berries small, black, heavy bloom; juicy, sour; very early.

=Cozy.= (Lab. Vin.) From J. S. Breece, Fayetteville, North Carolina.
Cluster large, compact; berry oval, medium, black, blue bloom; flesh
translucent, tender; good; ripens a week before Ives.

=Craig.= (Rip.?) _French Grape._ A variety found growing at Franklin,
Pennsylvania, about 1809; perhaps synonymous with Franklin. Fruit
dark-colored; bunch and berry medium; juicy; good.

=Critic.= (Lab. Vin.?) A seedling of Jefferson; from J. S. Breece,
Fayetteville, North Carolina; described in 1892. Cluster large,
shouldered, compact; berries round, medium, dull red; foxy; good;
earlier than Brighton.

=Crown.= (Linc. Vin. Lab.) From Munson; parents, Post-oak crossed with
Triumph. Vigorous; stamens upright; cluster large, compact; berry large,
black; good; ripens with Catawba.

=Crystal.= (Lab.) A native grape found by S. D. Case, Canton Center,
Connecticut. Vigorous; cluster medium; berries large, oblate, green with
white dots; sweet, juicy.

=Culbert Seedling.= (Lab. Vin.) From Dr. W. A. M. Culbert, Newburgh, New
York. Parents, Iona crossed with Muscat Hamburg. Bunch and berry large;
purplish-black; good.

=Curtis.= _Stetson's Seedling No. 4._ From Nahum Stetson, Bridgewater,
Massachusetts; mentioned in the _Magazine of Horticulture_ in 1857 as
being a seedling of "superior flavor".

=Curtis.= (Linc. Vin. Lab.) Parentage, Post-oak No. 3 crossed with
Triumph; from Munson in 1889. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry
medium, black; ripens mid-season.

=Cuyahoga.= (Lab. Vin.?) _Coleman's White_; _Wemple_; _Wemple's
Seedling_. Found by a Mr. Wemple at Euclid, Ohio, previous to 1859, and
named after the county in which it was found. Vigorous; cluster large,
shouldered, compact; berries large, round, covered with bloom, pale
yellowish-green tinged with amber; pulp melting, juicy, sweet, fine
musky flavor; ripens about with Catawba.

=Cuyarano.= (Lab.) Given in a list of native fox grapes in the report of
the Department of Agriculture in 1869.

=Cyncon.= (Lab. Aest.) A seedling of Cynthiana crossed with Concord;
from Munson. Vigorous, healthy, dark green foliage; bunch long; berry
black; late.

=Dana.= (Lab.) A seedling from Francis Dana, Roxbury, Massachusetts,
about 1860. Vigorous, hardy, mildews slightly; bunch medium, shouldered,
compact; berries large, nearly round, red with heavy bloom; free from
pulp as Delaware, not as sweet; ripens about with Concord.

=Danbury.= (Lab.) A chance seedling from H. C. Coble, Danbury,
Connecticut. Hardy, healthy; bunches medium, compact, sometimes
shouldered; berries large, black; flesh tender, mild, sweet; good;
ripens earlier than Hartford.

=Daphne.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Telegraph crossed with White
Frontignan; from Chas. J. Copley, Stapleton, New York, about 1875. Very
vigorous, hardy, healthy, productive; bunch medium to large with very
long stem; berry medium to large, white; without pulp, sweet, rich,
Muscat flavor; ripens early.

=Dartmouth.= (Lab.) Listed by Prince in _Gardener's Monthly_ for 1863 as
a worthless variety.

=Darwin.= (Aest. Bourq. Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware crossed with
some vigorous Aestivalis; from Dr. J. Stayman. Vigorous, hardy, healthy,
productive; foliage of Aestivalis type; bunch large, compact,
double-shouldered; berry medium, red; tender, juicy, vinous; ripens with
Delaware.

=Davis.= (Long.) A variety of _Vitis longii_ found by Munson in
Hutchinson County, Texas. Stamens reflexed; cluster small; berry small,
black; ripens early.

=Davkina.= (Linc. Rup. Lab.) A cross of America and Beacon; from Munson
in 1899. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry large, black; ripens
mid-season.

=De Grasset.= A variety of Champini, noted by Munson in _Texas Station
Bulletin No. 56_ as the female parent for a few of his crosses.

=Delago.= (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware cross-pollinated by
Goethe; from Munson in 1883; introduced in 1896. Medium in growth and
productiveness, not hardy, susceptible to mildew; stamens reflexed;
clusters below medium to small, often oval, variable in compactness;
berries medium to above, roundish to oval, dark red, lilac bloom, very
persistent; meaty, vinous, sweet; very good; ripens late.

=Delaware Seedling.= (Bourq. Vin. Lab.) J. A. Warder in 1867 describes a
"Delaware Seedling" from Ohio. Healthy; bunch short; berry medium, dull
red; rich, sweet, somewhat foxy; very early.

=Delaware Seedling.= (Vin. Bourq. Lab.) _Delaware Seedling No. 4._ A
seedling of Delaware crossed with Gen. Marmora; from Dr. W. A. M.
Culbert, Newburgh, New York. More vigorous grower than Delaware, hardy,
prolific.

_Delaware Seedling No. 2._ (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) From Jacob Rommel.
Vigorous, healthy, productive; bunch above medium, compact, shouldered;
berry medium, black; pulpy, sweet; very good; ripens earlier than
Hartford.

_Delaware Seedling No. 9._ (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) From Jacob Rommel.
Moderate grower, healthy, hardy, very productive; bunch medium, compact;
berry medium, black, firm, sweet; ripens before Concord; good keeper and
shipper.

_Delaware Seedling No. 16._ (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) From Jacob Rommel.
Moderate grower, very productive, healthy; bunch medium; berry medium,
white with white bloom; very sweet, pure flavor, pulpless; ripens with
Concord; fine keeper and shipper.

=D'Elboux.= (Vin. Lab.) _D'Elboux Seedling._ A seedling of Telegraph
crossed with Black Hamburg; from C. J. Copley, Stapleton, New York, in
1876. Very vigorous, productive, hardy, healthy; foliage like Labrusca
except smooth underneath; bunch very large, sometimes slightly
shouldered, compact, handsome; berries very large, black with blue
bloom, oval, persistent; juicy, sweet, rich, vinous; skin thick; ripens
with Hartford.

=Delgoethe.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delaware crossed with
Goethe; from Munson; possibly same as Delago. Noted by Mitzky in 1893 as
still under test.

=Delicious.= (Linc. Bourq.) Big Berry crossed with Herbemont; from
Munson in 1887, introduced about 1894. Vigorous, productive, healthy;
stamens upright; bunch medium, moderately compact; berry medium, round,
black with blue bloom; sprightly, sweet; skin thin, tough; ripens a
little after Concord.

=Delmar.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) Mentioned by Mitzky in 1893 as a seedling
of Delaware crossed with Martha; from Munson.

=Delmerlie.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delago crossed with
Governor Ireland; from Munson, in 1898. Stamens erect; cluster large;
berry large, black; ripens mid-season.

=Dempsey's Seedlings.= P. C. Dempsey, Albury, Prince Edward County,
Ontario, a noted Canadian hybridist of various cultivated plants, has
produced several hybrid grapes which are mentioned in grape literature
as follows:

_No. 4._ (Lab. Vin.) Medium in vigor.

_No. 5._ (Lab. Vin.) Resembles Massasoit in some respects but earlier.

_No. 18._ (Lab. Vin.) Failure.

_No. 25._ (Lab. Vin.) Failure.

_No. 60._ (Lab. Vin.) Hardy; white, vinous, very good.

Apparently none of these were ever introduced. Besides these he
originated Burnet. (See p. 443.) Dempsey's work with grapes was done
about thirty years ago.

=Denison.= (Lab.) A seedling of Moore Early; from Munson. Medium in
vigor, unproductive, usually healthy; bunch medium in size and
compactness; berry large, round, black with blue bloom, of Concord
flavor.

=Dennis Seedling.= (Lab.) Found growing wild on the bank of a river by
John Dennis, Hillsborough, New Hampshire. Compact grower, hardy,
productive; fruit large, amber-colored, of fine flavor.

=Denniston.= (Lab.) A native grape found on an island in the Hudson
River below Albany, by Isaac Denniston about 1823. Very vigorous, hardy;
berry large, yellowish-red; slight musky flavor.

=De Soto.= (Rot. Muns.) A seedling of Scuppernong pollinated by _Vitis
munsoniana_; from Munson in 1896. Stamens reflexed; cluster small; berry
medium, black; ripens very late.

=Detroit.= (Lab. Vin.) Supposed to be a Catawba seedling; found in the
garden of T. R. Chase, Detroit, Michigan, about 1860. Vigorous, hardy,
with foliage like Catawba; bunch large, very compact; berry medium,
round, darker than Catawba; rich, sweet, sprightly Catawba flavor;
earlier than its parent.

=Diller.= (Lab.) According to Strong, 1866, pulpy and inferior to
Isabella which it resembles.

=Dingwall White.= (Lab.) Vigorous, healthy; bunch short, compact; berry
large, round, white; quality poor; late.

=Dinkel.= (Lab. Vin.) A Catawba seedling; from Munson. Vine and leaf
much like parent; bunch medium to large, compact, slightly shouldered;
berry medium, round, deep coppery red with thick bloom; much like
Catawba in flavor; ripens with parent.

=Dixie.= (Rot. Linc. Lab. Vin. Bourq.) Parents, San Jacinto crossed with
Brilliant, from Munson in 1899. Stamens reflexed; cluster small; berry
large, amber-colored; ripens late.

=Dr. Bain.= (Lab.) A white seedling of Concord; from Illinois.

=Dr. Kemp.= (Linc. Bourq.) A seedling of Post-oak crossed with
Herbemont; from Munson; introduced in 1896. Vigorous and productive,
subject to downy mildew; stamens upright; bunch medium, loose,
shouldered; berry small, purple; poor quality; ripens a week after
Concord.

=Dr. Robinson Seedling.= (Lab.?) Described by Wisconsin Experiment
Station in 1888. Productive; bunch medium, compact; berry medium, round,
black, purple bloom; poor quality; ripens with Concord.

=Dr. Warder.= (Lab.) Of unknown parentage; from Theophile Huber,
Illinois City, Illinois. Vigorous, hardy, healthy; cluster medium to
large, compact, often heavily shouldered; berries large, round, black,
heavy bloom; pulp tough, juicy, sprightly, sweet; good; said to ripen
before Hartford which it closely resembles.

=Doder.= _Washington._ Noted in the _American Pomological Society
Report_ for 1877 as a seedling from a Mr. Doder, Washington County,
Iowa.

=Dog Ridge.= (Champ.) A variety of _Vitis champini_ found by Munson in
Bell County, Texas. Stamens depressed; cluster small; berry medium,
black; ripens mid-season.

=Dolle.= According to W. F. Bassett in _Rural New Yorker_ for 1885,
supposed to have come from Germany but it has none of the characters of
Vinifera. Vigorous; clusters sometimes loose; berry larger than Moore
Early; of good quality, persistent; ripens early.

=Dorinda.= (Lab.) Said to be a seedling of Rebecca; from Hudson, New
York, about 1858. Bunch medium; berry oval, greenish-white, sweet,
sprightly, with scarcely any pulp.

=Dorr Seedling.= (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) Said to be a seedling of Delaware;
from Livingston County, New York. Resembles Delaware in form, color, and
bunch but the berries are larger and have a foxy odor.

=Dry Hill Beauty.= Described in _Hermann Grape Nursery Catalog_ for 1906
as a red, very sweet grape with medium bunches and small berries.

=Dufour.= (Linc. Aest.) _Jaeger No. 56._ A seedling of Post-oak (No. 43)
crossed with Aestivalis; from Hermann Jaeger. Resembles Herbemont in
quality and size of bunch and berries, but is of Catawba color; ripens
two weeks after Norton.

=Dunlap.= (Lab. Vin.) One of Rickett's hybrids; probably the same as
Lady Dunlap.

=Dunn.= (Bourq.?) G. Onderdonk, of Texas, obtained this variety from a
Mr. Dunn, of western Texas. It resembles Herbemont but has larger,
paler-colored berries and ripens two weeks later.

=Duquett.= (Lab. Vin.) _Duquett's Seedling._ Noted in the _Rural New
Yorker_, 1868, as a new variety from Orleans County, New York. Hardy;
berries large, white, transparent; of White Chasselas flavor.

=Eames Seedling.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A cross between Concord and
Delaware; from Luther Eames, Framingham, Massachusetts, about 1887.
Bunch large, double-shouldered; berry large, light amber; pulp tender
with Muscat flavor.

=Early.= (Lab.) A pure seedling of Pierce; from Luther Burbank, Santa
Rosa, California. According to originator, the variety is vigorous,
productive, and ripens two weeks earlier than Concord; berries large,
black with lilac bloom; sweet and meaty.

=Early Amber.= (Lab.) _Amber._ A native grape from the United Society of
Shakers, Harvard, Massachusetts; possibly same as Sage. Hardy,
productive, healthy; fruit dark amber; sweet, slightly foxy.

=Early August.= (Lab.) _Burton's Early August._ A native seedling from
the United Society of Shakers, Lebanon, New York. Large; early; foxy.

=Early August.= (Lab.) A twin seedling of Pocklington, offspring of
Concord; from John Pocklington, Sandy Hill, New York. Vigorous,
productive, healthy, hardy, Concord foliage; bunch medium to large,
moderately compact, sometimes shouldered; berry medium, round,
greenish-yellow, white bloom; translucent, juicy, sweet, slightly acid
flavor; ripens before Moore Early.

=Early Bird.= (Vin. Lab. Bourq.) A dark red grape from Munson, the
parentage being a Lincecumii seedling crossed with Agawam for one
parent, and Brilliant for the other.

=Early Black.= Mentioned in _United States Patent Office Report_ for
1853 as an early foreign variety which always ripens in Utica, New York.
Ten years later Prince pronounced this Early Black a worthless Labrusca.

=Early Black.= (Lab.) A seedling from J. B. Moore, Concord,
Massachusetts; exhibited before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society
in 1880. Bunch and berry large; quality similar to Hartford.

=Early Black.= (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) According to Mitzky, 1893, a seedling
of Delaware; from Jacob Rommel. Vigorous, productive, healthy; bunch
medium, compact, shouldered; berries medium, black; firm, sweet; ripens
with Hartford.

=Early Black July.= (Rip. Vin.?) Described by Dufour in 1826 as a
prolific bearer; bunches small; berries small, round, black; season
early. Dufour suspects it to be a Riparia-Vinifera hybrid.

=Early Black Summer Grape.= (Lab.?) Noted by Prince in 1830 as an early
Virginia variety with fruit of large size.

=Early Concord.= (Lab.) A seedling from John Kready, Mt. Joy, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania in 1874. Vigorous, hardy; bunch and berries
resembling Concord in size, color, taste, and substance; ripens early.

=Early Delmonico.= (Lab. Vin.) Noted in _Rural New Yorker_ for 1886 as a
variety resembling Brighton; from Wm. E. Green, Vermont. Green states
that the variety is very early and superior to Vergennes or Brighton.

=Early Golden.= (Lab. Vin.) _Campbell._ A seedling of Triumph; from
Munson from seed planted in 1883; disseminated as Campbell but the name
was changed in 1894 to Early Golden to avoid confusion with Campbell
Early. Weak grower, productive; bunch large, usually shouldered,
compact; berry medium, roundish, yellowish-green, gray bloom, usually
persistent; later than Catawba.

=Early Harvest.= (Lab.) Noted in _United States Patent Office Report_
for 1855 as an early grape grown in Indiana. Fruit larger and rounder
than Isabella; light purple to amber; sweet, juicy, musky flavor.

=Early Hudson.= (Lab.?) Mentioned by Prince in 1863 as a worthless
variety. Berries medium, round, black; early; frequently seedless.

=Early June.= (Rip.? Lab.?) Described by Warder in 1867 as like _Vitis
cordifolia_. Bunch large; berry large, dark; sweet; very early.

=Early Lebanon.= Given by Warder in 1867 as from Pennsylvania. Bunch
medium; berry medium, blue; good; very early.

=Early Malvasia.= (Vin.?) Noted in _United States Patent Office Report_
for 1853 as a foreign variety that habitually ripens at Utica, New
York.

=Early Market.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Elvira, crossed with Bacchus;
from Munson, in 1885. Vigorous, productive; subject to mildew; bunch
small to medium, moderately compact; berry small, round, black; of fair
quality; ripens with Moore Early.

=Early Prolific.= (Lab.) Supposed to be a Concord seedling. Described in
_Missouri Horticultural Society Report_ for 1892, as vigorous, very
hardy, productive; bunch large, shouldered, compact, handsome; berry
large, black, tender, juicy, sprightly, sweet; very good; ripens a few
days after Jewel.

=Early Purple.= (Linc.) A Post-oak native grape found in the woods near
Denison, Texas; used by Munson in grape-breeding. Described in his
catalog for 1901 as vigorous, healthy; stamens reflexed; clusters large,
cylindrical, shouldered; berry large, purple, persistent; of fair
quality.

=Early Vicks.= Noted in the _Wisconsin Horticultural Society Report_ for
1886 as a desirable red grape.

=Early Wine.= (Linc. Rup.) Parentage, _Jaeger No. 70_ crossed with a
Rupestris seedling; from Munson about 1894. Very vigorous, productive;
clusters small to medium, moderately compact; berries medium, black with
heavy bloom; fair quality.

=Ebony.= One of Munson's grapes which was not introduced on account of
reflexed stamens. Vines tested at Wisconsin Experiment Station proved
very vigorous and productive; bunch and berry medium; black; fair
quality.

=Echland.= Mentioned in the _Ontario Fruit Growers' Association Report_
for 1887 as a variety of medium vigor.

=Eden.= (Rot.) Exhibited by Dr. Samuel Hape, Hapeville, Georgia, before
the American Pomological Society in 1887 as a new fruit. Very vigorous,
productive; bunches contain from four to twelve black berries; good
quality; ripens late.

=Edmeston.= (Lab.) _Edmeston No. 1._ Supposed to be a pure Concord
seedling; from D. G. Edmeston, Adrian, Michigan, in 1890. Vigorous;
stamens upright; bunch medium, moderately compact; berry medium to
large, dark purple with blue bloom; pulp moderately tough, juicy,
vinous, sweet, good; ripens with Concord.

=Edward.= (Lab.) From Theophile Huber, Illinois City, Illinois.
Vigorous; stamens upright; bunch medium, compact, shouldered; berry
medium, golden yellow; tender, sweet; ripens about with Concord.

=Elaine.= (Lab. Vin.) Supposed to be a seedling of Salem; from C. Engle,
Paw Paw, Michigan, about 1890. Vigorous, unproductive, hardy, healthy;
stamens reflexed; bunch long, loose; berry medium, dark red with
bluish-white bloom; juicy, rich, sprightly; very good; ripens early.

=Elbling.= (Lab.) Mentioned in the _United States Patent Office Report_
for 1859 as a northern grape under test in the government experimental
garden.

=Eleala.= (Lab.? Vin.? Bourq.?) Described in the _Missouri Horticultural
Society Report_, 1904. Very vigorous; bunch and berry much like Concord;
white; quality similar to Wapanuka but flesh is more meaty.

=Electra.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Brighton crossed with
Delaware; from Henry B. Spencer, Rocky River, Ohio, about 1890. The
berries resemble Delaware but the bunches are larger.

=Elizabeth.= (Lab. Vin.) From Joseph Hart, near Rochester, New York,
about 1845. Productive, medium hardy; bunches large, compact, sometimes
shouldered; berries large, oval, greenish-white with reddish tinge in
the sun; juicy, pleasant, brisk acid flavor.

=Elkton.= (Lab.) Described by Adlum in 1828 as an uncommonly large fox
grape of a deep purple color.

=Ellen.= (Lab. Vin.?) From Charles Carpenter, Kelleys Island, Ohio,
exhibited as a new variety before the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society in 1862. Berries small, amber-colored; subacid, with slight
Catawba flavor.

=Elpo.= (Linc. Rip. Lab.) A seedling of Elvira crossed with Lincecumii;
from Munson. Described by the Virginia Experiment Station in 1898 as
vigorous, productive; bunch long, rather loose, sometimes shouldered;
berry small, globular, pale green, not adherent; skin thin, tough; pulp
firm, meaty, tender, mild subacid, almost sweet, agreeable; good;
resembles Elvira.

=Elsmere.= From Texas. Described by Georgia Experiment Station in 1901
as very vigorous, productive; stamens upright; bunch large, moderately
compact; berry small, black; ripens just after Concord.

=Elvibach.= (Rip. Lab.) A seedling of Elvira crossed with Bacchus; from
Munson. Vigorous and hardy, very productive; stamens reflexed; clusters
medium, sometimes single-shouldered, compact; berries medium to small,
roundish, black, heavy blue bloom, not adherent; spicy, good in flavor
and quality; skin thin, tender; ripens before Concord.

=Elvin.= (Lab. Rip. Vin.) Parentage, Elvira crossed with Irving; from
Munson in 1885. Stamens erect; cluster medium; berry large, white;
ripens mid-season.

=Emerald.= (Vin. Bourq. Lab.) A supposed cross of Delaware and some
foreign variety, possibly Buckland Sweetwater; from Dr. William
Saunders, Ottawa, Canada, about 1886. Vigorous, hardy, not productive;
stamens upright; clusters small to medium, cylindrical, usually not
shouldered, medium to compact; berries small, roundish, jet-black with
heavy bloom; juicy, tender, spicy, vinous, mildly sweet.

=Emma.= (Lab.) Of unknown parentage; from Theophile Huber, Illinois
City, Illinois. Lacking in vigor; stamens upright; bunch medium to
small, shouldered, compact; berry round, translucent, yellow; rich,
sweet, tender pulp; skin very thin, tender.

=Enfield.= Mentioned in the _United States Patent Office Report_ for
1845 as a select American grape grown in North Carolina.

=Engle's Seedlings.= C. Engle, of Paw Paw, Michigan, about twenty-five
years ago originated Elaine, Guinevra, Honey, Iris, Metis, Michigan,
Pulpless, Themis, and Vesta. They are all seedlings of Salem. None of
them has ever been regularly introduced although some have been sent out
for testing.

=Ensenberger's Seedlings.= About twenty-five years ago, G. A.
Ensenberger, of Bloomington, Illinois, originated several varieties of
grapes from seed of standard sorts. Of his varieties which received
names there are: Herald, Hercules, Isabella Seedling, Juno and Mathilde.
None of them has apparently been introduced and none has qualities which
would make it permanently popular.

=Eolia.= (Lab.) According to Mitzky, 1893, a seedling of Concord; from
Robert Linville, Forsyth County, North Carolina, and introduced by N. W.
Craft, Shore, North Carolina. Hardy; bunch large, compact, shouldered;
berry medium, greenish-white; tender, sweet; ripens with Concord.

=Epurill.= (Linc. Vin. Lab. Bourq.) A seedling of Early Purple crossed
with Brilliant; from Munson in 1897. Stamens reflexed; cluster medium;
berry very large, red; ripens late.

=Erickson.= (Lab.) Pronounced a worthless Labrusca by Prince in 1863.

=Essex County= (Mass.) =Seedling.= (Lab.) Given in the _American
Pomological Society Report_, 1862, as from Thomas C. Thurlow; a variety
of fox grape; common all through the country.

=Estella.= (Linc. Rup. Rip. Lab. Vin.) A seedling of _Jaeger No. 72_
crossed with Rommel; from Munson in 1899. Stamens erect; cluster medium;
berry medium, white; ripens late.

=Etawa.= (Lab. Vin.?) _Woodruff's No. 1._ Described in the _American
Pomological Society Report_, 1883, as an accidental seedling from W. W.
Woodruff, Vineyard P. O., near Griffin, Georgia. Vigorous, foliage
luxuriant, shows Labrusca characters; bunch large; berry large, round,
blue; pulp dissolving, vinous; best; fruit showy and hangs on the vines
for two months.

=Eudora.= (Lab.) Noted as a worthless Labrusca by Prince in _Gardener's
Monthly_ for 1863.

=Eufaula.= (Linc. Rup. Bourq. Lab. Aest. Vin.) A seedling of America
crossed with Laura; from Munson in 1895. Weak grower; stamens erect;
cluster large, loose; berry small, red; ripens late.

=Eugenia.= (Vin. Lab.) A seedling of White Frontignan crossed with
Catawba; from J. T. Clark, of Washington. Said to have been raised from
seed of the same berry that produced the Columbia, a white grape. A red
grape of good quality; late.

=Eugenia.= (Lab.) A seedling of Concord; from T. B. Miner. Vigorous,
hardy; bunch medium; berry medium, white; fair quality; ripens early.

=Eumedel.= (Lab. Vin. Aest. Bourq.) A seedling of Eumelan crossed with
Delaware; from Munson. Of medium growth, usually hardy, variable in
productiveness, susceptible to mildew; stamens upright; clusters medium
to small, shouldered, compact; berries small, roundish, black, heavy
blue bloom, persistent; flesh tender, slightly foxy, sweet to agreeably
tart; good. The vine has pronounced Labrusca characters.

=Eumorely.= (Lab. Aest. Vin.) Parents, Eumelan crossed with Moore Early;
from Munson, in 1887. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry large, black;
ripens early. Discarded by originator.

=Eva.= (Lab.) _Miller's No. 2._ A Concord seedling; from Samuel Miller,
Calmdale, Pennsylvania, about 1860. On account of its close resemblance
to its sister Martha, it was dropped by the originator. Medium in vigor,
tender; stamens upright; bunch small, compact; berries medium,
greenish-yellow, sweet, of mild flavor, lacks sprightliness; ripens
about with Martha.

=Evaline.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Ideal; from John Burr, Leavenworth,
Kansas. Vigorous, hardy, productive; bunch medium, compact; berry
medium, white with light bloom; very tender, juicy, sweet, sprightly,
vinous; skin thin, tough; ripens before Concord.

=Everett.= Noted in the _United States Patent Office Report_, 1860, as a
native grape under propagation at the government experimental garden.

=Ewing.= (Lab. Vin.) _Ewing's Seedling._ A seedling of Isabella; from
Jefferson City, Missouri. Husmann, in 1869, considered this variety an
improvement on its parent which it resembles.

=Exquisite.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware; from J. Stayman,
Leavenworth, Kansas. Moderate grower, hardy, healthy, productive; bunch
medium, compact; berry small, black, slight bloom; very tender, juicy,
sweet, sprightly, vinous; ripens with Delaware.

=Extra.= (Linc. Lab. Vin.) _Big Extra._ A seedling of Post-oak crossed
with Triumph; from Munson. Vigorous, healthy, productive; cluster large,
usually shouldered, compact; berry medium to large, dark purple or
black; good in quality in the South; does not mature at Geneva.

=Fallwicke.= An undescribed variety from Joseph Fallwicke, Wartburg,
Morgan County, Tennessee, about 1860.

=Fancher.= (Lab. Vin.) _Saratoga._ Introduced by T. B. Fancher of
Lansingburg, New York, over fifty years ago. A seedling of Catawba and
so similar to it that many consider them identical.

=Fanny Hoke.= A chance seedling of Aestivalis or Bourquiniana reported
from North Carolina in 1871. Vigorous, short-jointed; cluster rather
large, not shouldered; berry medium, black; sweet, sprightly.

=Farmers Club.= A seedling from David Thompson of Green Island, near
Troy, New York, over forty years ago. A green grape, undescribed.

=Farrell.= A seedling found in the garden of a Dr. Farrell and
introduced by Dr. Stayman of Leavenworth, Kansas, about 1880. Hardy,
vigorous, productive; clusters medium, tapering; berries large, light
yellowish-green, roundish or slightly oblate; pulp firm, moderately
juicy, sweet; good; skin thin, tender; ripens with Concord.

=Far West.= (Aest.) A variety of Aestivalis; found by Hermann Jaeger in
the woods of southwest Missouri, about 1870. Vigorous, hardy; leaves
large; clusters large, shouldered; berries small; skin thin, tough,
black with blue bloom; pulp soft, tender, meaty, sweet and spicy; seeds
few; ripens with Norton.

=Feemster.= (Lab.) Cluster and berry small; foxy and worthless.

=Feemster Favorite.= (Lab.) From Indiana. Hardy; cluster medium; berry
large, green.

=Fena.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A seedling of Jewel; from Ludwig Hencke,
Collinsville, Illinois. Similar to its parent but more vigorous and with
fruit larger in bunch and berry.

=Fisk.= (Lab. Vin.) Probably a seedling of Isabella which it resembles
very closely. It was originated by John Fisk Allen of Salem,
Massachusetts, about fifty years ago.

=Fitchburg.= (Lab.) _Fox; Free Black._ A local New England variety of
Labrusca, apparently never known in cultivation.

=Flickwir.= (Rip. Lab.) Tested by the United States Department of
Agriculture about 1860 and proved to be the same as Clinton.

=Flora.= (Vin. Lab.) A Vinifera hybrid; from A. M. Spangler of
Philadelphia, about the middle of the last century. Vine hardy and
productive; cluster small, compact; berry medium, oval, dark
purplish-red; somewhat pulpy, juicy; late.

=Florence.= (Lab. Vin. Aest.) Originated by Marine, about 1875. It is a
probable cross between Eumelan and Union Village and is a large,
handsome grape, resembling in some respects the Isabella.

=Florence.= (Lab.) A variety known for about thirty years and which has
attracted considerable attention on account of its extreme earliness,
ripening earlier even than Hartford. Hardy, vigorous; bunches small,
imperfect; berries medium, black; resembles Hartford in quality.

=Flower of Missouri.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A Delaware seedling; from
William Poeschel, Hermann, Missouri. Said to resemble Walter.

=Flowers.= (Rot.) A Rotundifolia, the origin of which is unknown;
introduced about 1850. Vine tender, very vigorous, very productive;
berries large, oval, growing in clusters of twelve to fifteen; blossoms
self-sterile; ripens very late; quality not as good as Scuppernong.
Probably a strain of other than Rotundifolia blood is present.

=Fluke's Hybrids.= Newton K. Fluke, of Davenport, Iowa, has originated a
series of hybrids which are now being tested but as yet none has been
introduced.

=Foster.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Niagara; from John Reichenbach,
Columbus, Ohio. A white grape said by the originator to be of high
quality.

=Fox.= This name has been applied to many varieties of Labrusca and
Rotundifolia. It does not indicate any particular variety.

=Framingham.= (Lab.) Resembles Hartford so closely that they can hardly
be distinguished. It was raised by J. G. Morneberg, Saxonville,
Massachusetts, about 1850.

=Frances E. Willard.= (Lab.? Bourq.? Vin.) A seedling noted in the
_Rural New Yorker_ for 1894. Said to resemble Delaware but with a
thicker skin.

=Franklin.= _French grape._ A wild grape found at least sixty years ago
on an island in French Creek, Crawford County, Pennsylvania. It
resembles Clinton very closely but the wood is of lighter color, the
fruit sweeter, and it matures earlier.

=Fredonia.= (Lab. Vin.) From Seth Avery of Fredonia, New York. Vigorous,
hardy, productive; tendrils continuous, sometimes intermittent; leaves
of the Labrusca type; clusters medium, sometimes shouldered; berries
medium, oval, light green with gray bloom, some small, dark-colored
dots; sweet; good.

=Fritz.= A seedling of Roenbeck; raised by F. Roenbeck, of Bergen Point,
New Jersey. Vigorous; cluster large, compact; berry white; skin thin,
tough; juicy; ripens with Concord.

=Frost.= A class name commonly applied in America to varieties of
Cordifolia though sometimes to those of Riparia.

=Gallup Seedling.= (Lab. Vin.) Probably a seedling of Salem; from Adams
Basin, New York. Resembles Salem; berries a little larger; quality good;
excellent keeper; ripens with Concord.

=Garber.= (Lab.) A seedling from J. B. Garber, Columbia, Pennsylvania.
Vigorous, hardy, very productive; bunch below medium, compact; berries
medium, black, with very dark juice; fair quality; ripens early.

=Garber Red Fox.= (Lab. Vin.?) Produced by J. B. Garber, of
Pennsylvania, from the same lot of seed as Albino. Fruit resembles the
wild red Labrusca, except that it ripens later and is sweeter.

=Garfield.= (Rip. Lab.) A seedling of Missouri Riesling, from John
Reichenbach, Columbus, Ohio, about 1902. Vigorous; berries large, green;
rich and sweet.

=Garnet.= (Vin. Rip. Lab.) A seedling of Red Frontignan and Clinton;
from Dr. A. P. Wylie, Chester, South Carolina. Bunch and berries larger
than Clinton; deep garnet color; flavor and texture that of a Vinifera
but foliage that of Clinton.

=Garrigues.= (Lab. Vin.?) Probably a seedling of Isabella; from Edward
G. Kingsessing, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Resembles Isabella but is a
few days earlier.

=Gassman.= (Aest.) Noted in the _United States Department of Agriculture
Report_ for 1869 as a variety of Aestivalis.

=Gauger.= Described in the _Illinois Horticultural Society Report_ for
1901 as vigorous and healthy, but too poor in flavor to be desirable.

=Gazelle.= A seedling from J. H. Ricketts. Vigorous, healthy and
productive; bunches medium, compact; berry small, greenish-white;
sprightly, sweet, pleasant.

=General Pope.= (Aest.) A seedling from John Burr, of Leavenworth,
Kansas, about 1880. Very vigorous, hardy, healthy and productive; bunch
and berries smaller than those of Concord; without foxiness.

=Genesee.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delaware crossed with Iona;
from near Rochester, New York, about 1880. Vigorous, productive,
healthy; bunch large, compact; berries large, red; high quality.

_Gerbig No. 2._ (Lab. Vin. Aest.) A seedling of Eumelan, open to cross
fertilization; from A. V. Gerbig, Archbald, Pennsylvania, about 1890.

_Gerbig No. 10._ (Lab. Vin. Aest.) A seedling of _Gerbig No. 2_, open to
cross fertilization; from A. V. Gerbig, about 1892. Vigorous, hardy,
productive; cluster small, compact; berry medium, slightly oval,
yellowish-green; juicy, slightly meaty, sweet, mild; good.

=German Seedling.= (Rip.) Noted in the _Illinois Horticultural Society
Report_, 1871, as much like Clinton but not as productive.

=Giant.= (Rup.) A wild male Rupestris; found by Munson in Missouri. It
is now discarded by him.

=Gibb.= (Rip.) From Magloire Dery, St. Hilaire, Canada. Slow in growth,
hardy; bunch small, loose, sometimes shouldered; berry small, black with
heavy bloom; melting, juicy; good.

=Gilbert's White Shonga.= (Lab. Vin.) According to Floy-Lindley, 1833,
this is a wild grape found by Garret Gilbert on the Shonga Mountains,
New York, in 1825. Similar to Isabella in habits; bunch and berries
resemble Isabella in size and shape; white with purple tinge on sunny
side; sweet; good.

=Gill Wylie.= (Lab. Vin.) Noted in the _Bushberg Catalogue_, 1883, as a
new grape from Dr. A. P. Wylie, Chester, South Carolina. Foliage
healthy, of Labrusca type; bunch large, loose, shouldered; berry large,
oblong; texture soft, rich; ripens with Concord.

=Gilt Edge.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware; from Dr. L. C.
Chisholm. Medium in vigor, shy bearer; stamens upright; bunch small,
compact; berries small, yellowish-green; subacid, delicate flavor;
ripens a few days later than its parent.

=Gold Dust.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) _Munson No. 22._ A seedling of Lindley
crossed with Delaware; from Munson, about 1880. Vigorous, productive;
stamens upright; clusters medium to above, usually shouldered, loose;
berries medium, roundish, yellowish-green with thin gray bloom,
persistent, with tendency to shrivel before ripening; juicy, foxy, mild;
fair in quality.

=Golden Beauty.= (Lab.) A seedling of Perkins; from J. B. Miller, Anna,
Illinois. Bunches short; berries medium; sweet; good; long keeper.

=Golden Berry.= (Vin. Lab.) _Culbert No. 5._ A white seedling of
Hartford and General Marmora; from Dr. W. A. M. Culbert, Newburgh, New
York; exhibited as a new fruit before the American Pomological Society
in 1877; hardy and a free bearer.

=Golden Clinton.= (Rip.) _King._ A chance seedling, probably of Clinton,
found in a garden in Rochester; fruited in 1857; introduced by William
King. Apparently the same as Clinton except that it is less productive
and the berries are greenish-white.

=Golden Concord.= (Lab.) _Valle's White Concord._ A white seedling of
Concord; from John Valle, New Haven, Missouri. Reported as inferior to
Martha.

=Golden Drop.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Adirondac crossed with
Delaware, from C. G. Pringle, Vermont, in 1869. Medium in vigor, shy
bearer; stamens upright; clusters small, loose; berries small, roundish,
greenish-yellow, persistent; firm, juicy; tender, sweet, mild; good.

=Golden Gem.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delaware crossed with
Iona; from J. H. Ricketts; first exhibited before American Pomological
Society in 1881. Vigorous, hardy, productive; clusters small,
shouldered, compact; berries small, roundish, golden yellow, thin bloom;
juicy, sweet, vinous; very good; ripens with Concord.

=Golden Grain.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Lindley crossed with
Delaware; from Munson. Vigorous, doubtfully hardy, productive; stamens
upright; clusters medium, frequently shouldered, compact; berries small,
oval, light green, thin bloom, inclined to drop and to shrivel;
moderately juicy, foxy, sweet; fair quality.

=Goldstein.= (Lab.) _Goldstein's Early._ From Mississippi, about 1897;
similar to Champion. Vigorous, hardy, productive; stamens upright;
clusters medium, shouldered, compact; berries large, round, black; poor
quality; ripens early.

=Good Adle.= (Vin.?) Noted in the _Wisconsin Horticultural Society
Report_ for 1872 as a fine white German grape; exhibited by a Mrs.
Curtis, Milwaukee.

=Goodman.= (Lab.) Noted by Prince in _Gardener's Monthly_ for 1863 as a
worthless Labrusca.

=Governor Ireland.= (Lab.) A pure seedling of Moore Early; from Munson.
Lacks vigor, medium in productiveness; bunch large, loose; berry large,
globular, black with whitish bloom; resembles Concord but is much
coarser; subject to rot.

=Governor Ross.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Triumph; from Munson and
introduced in 1894. Weak to medium in growth, not productive; stamens
upright; nearly self-sterile; bunch large, oblong, compact; berries
large, oval; sprightly, sweet; good; rots badly.

=Graham.= An accidental seedling, supposed to have been a cross of Bland
and Elsinburgh; from W. Graham of Philadelphia, about 1850. Cluster of
medium size, shouldered, not compact; berry large, round, purple; juicy,
sweet, sprightly; very good.

=Gravel.= Received by the United States Department of Agriculture in
1863 for testing.

=Grayson.= (Lab.) Seedling of Moore Early; raised by Munson. A black,
large-berried variety with clusters medium to large; moderately vigorous
and productive; flavor sweet but lacks character; good.

=Gray's Seedlings.= A number of seedlings of Concord were raised by W.
C. Gray of Atwood, Illinois, about 1890. None attained prominence.

=Green Castle.= (Lab.) A large-clustered, large-berried black seedling
of Concord; from D. S. Marvin.

=Green Ulster.= (Lab.) A light green seedling of Concord; from J. B.
Moore, of Concord, Massachusetts, about 1870.

=Greer.= (Doan.) A wild male vine of _Vitis doaniana_ found by Munson in
Greer County, Oklahoma.

=Grein Extra Early.= (Rip. Lab.) _Grein No. 7._ A yellowish-green
seedling of Taylor; from Nicholas Grein. Vigorous, productive; bunch
medium; berry small with speck at distal end; good; ripens with Concord.

=Grein's Seedlings.= Nicholas Grein, of Hermann, Missouri, over thirty
years ago planted a number of seeds of the European Riesling, and also
seeds of Taylor. He stated that the Taylor seedlings failed to germinate
but that the European Riesling seeds germinated and of the resulting
seedlings Missouri Riesling, Grein Golden and Grein Extra Early were
named and introduced. As they are all of the Riparia type, very similar
to Taylor, and show no trace of Vinifera, it has always been supposed
that Grein had his seeds confused and that it was the European Riesling
that failed to germinate, Taylor being the real parent of these
varieties.

=Grevaduly.= A Massachusetts seedling of over fifty years ago, mentioned
in the _United States Patent Office Report_ of 1859.

=Greverson.= A seedling received by the United States Department of
Agriculture over fifty years ago.

=Grote.= (Rip.) A wild variety of _Vitis riparia_ secured by Munson from
Mauston, Wisconsin. Stamens reflexed; cluster small; berry small, black;
ripens early.

=Grove.= (Lab. Vin.) A cross of Clinton with Concord. Vigorous, hardy,
productive; cluster and berry of medium size and of pale green to amber
color; flesh tender, sweet and spicy; ripens shortly after Concord.

=Guesta.= A variety mentioned in the _United States Patent Office
Report_ for 1860 as being blue; sweet, slightly pulpy, of agreeable
flavor.

=Guignard.= _Black Guignard._ Origin unknown but at one time raised by
Longworth, of Ohio. Vigorous, productive; small, brown berries; high
quality.

=Guinevra.= (Lab. Vin.) From C. Engle, of Paw Paw, Michigan; a seedling
of Salem. Hardy, vigorous, productive; clusters large, sometimes
shouldered, compact; berry large, yellowish-green; very late.

=Gula.= (Linc. Lab. Rup.) A seedling of America crossed with Beacon;
from Munson in 1899. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry large, black;
ripens mid-season.

=Gulch.= (Linc. Rup.) Parents, _Jaeger No. 70_ crossed with a seedling
Rupestris; from Munson in 1888. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry
medium, black; ripens late; now discarded by the originator.

=Hadden Seedling.= (Lab. Vin.) From a Mr. Hadden, of Pulteney, New York,
about 1890. Vigorous; cluster small, compact; berries red with a
peculiarly wrinkled skin; pleasant, sweet, Muscat flavor.

=Hagar.= Noted in the _Illinois Horticultural Society Report, 1893_, as
one of the varieties exhibited at the World's Fair.

=Halifax.= (Lab.) _Weller's Halifax._ Noted by Sidney Weller,
Brinkleyville, Halifax County, North Carolina, in _United States Patent
Office Report_ for 1845, as a native grape.

=Halifax Seedling.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Halifax by a Vinifera;
from Sidney Weller, about 1840. Fruit like Catawba but sweeter. Used by
Dr. A. P. Wylie in the production of new varieties.

=Hall.= A seedling from David Hall, Urbana, Ohio; first mentioned in
1858. Berries larger and better flavored than Clinton, but not equal to
Isabella; nearly black; ripens earlier than Isabella.

=Hall.= (Lab.) From a Mr. Hall, Michigan; received at the Michigan
Experiment Station in 1893. Very vigorous, productive; bunches below
medium, cylindrical, compact, shouldered; berries above medium, round,
black; ripens with Early Victor.

=Hamilton.= (Vin. Lab.) A seedling of Mills; from a Mr. Gardner, of
Rochester, New York. Less vigorous than parent; bunches large,
shouldered, compact, attractive; berries adherent; pulp tougher than
Mills and the flavor is inferior; keeps well.

=Hamill Seedling.= (Lab. Vin.?) Tested by the United States Department
of Agriculture about 1860 and proved to be so near like Isabella that
the two could not be distinguished.

=Hardy Chasselas.= (Vin. Lab.) From a cross between Diana and Royal
Muscadine; from Jacob Moore; exhibited before the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society, 1865. Hardy, with Vinifera foliage; juicy; good.

=Harmer.= (Lab. Rip.) A cross between _Vitis labrusca_ and _Vitis
riparia_, found in Hartford County, Connecticut, by D. Alderton,
Marlboro, New York. Very vigorous, healthy, hardy, medium in
productiveness; bunch small, compact; berries black with hard pulp;
sweet, spicy; late.

=Harmer Seedling.= (Lab. Vin.) Noted in the _American Horticultural
Annual_ for 1870 as a native red grape with a small Catawba-like berry
having hard pulp.

=Harrell.= (Lab.) A chance seedling; from Obed Harrell, Chrisman,
Illinois, about 1890. Vigorous, productive; cluster medium, compact;
berry medium, white, round; very sweet.

=Harriet Beecher.= From William M. Marine. Bunch small; berry large,
round, dark red; pulp soft; skin thick; good.

=Harris.= (Bourq.?) _Old House Grape._ Found growing near a deserted
house by a Mr. Harris of Milledgeville, Georgia. Described in
_Horticulturist_ for 1857 as vigorous; clusters medium, shouldered,
compact; berries small to medium, round, black with blue bloom; a little
pulpy, sweet, juicy, agreeable; very good.

=Harrison.= (Lab.) A seedling of Concord; from Isaac Staples, Dayton,
Ohio. Thrifty as Concord, hardy; foliage thick, healthy; bunch large,
compact; berries medium, red, pure flavor; ripens with Concord.

=Harrison.= (Lab.) T. T. Lyon, in the _Michigan Horticultural Society
Report_ for 1881, thinks this is _Woodruff's No. 2._ A black grape of
the character of Concord, but larger in both berry and bunch and a week
earlier.

=Harvard Seedling.= (Lab.) Noted in the _United States Patent Office
Report_ for 1853 as a native seedling raised at Harvard, Worcester
County, Massachusetts; may be synonymous with Northern Muscadine.

=Harwood.= (Bourq.) _Improved Warren; Sacks of Wine._ From Major
Harwood, Gonzales, Texas; noted in the _American Pomological Society
Report_ for 1881. Like Herbemont but not as vigorous and the fruit is
about twice as large, lighter purple, and ripens four or five days
earlier.

=Haskell's Seedlings.= George Haskell, of Ipswich, Massachusetts, was
one of the early and persistent grape-breeders of the last century. His
efforts were similar to those of Rogers in that he produced direct
hybrids of Vinifera with early ripening selected Labruscas. He used
several varieties of both parent species and produced several thousand
seedlings. Experts to whom samples were sent affirmed that their quality
was of the best. A few were sent out for testing but the most of them
were destroyed as Mr. Haskell did not think that any of the offers would
recompense him for the cost of production. Those sent out were highly
commended at first but soon dropped from sight. The only named variety
of his is Ruby.

=Haskew.= Noted in the _American Horticultural Annual_ for 1871 as a
native grape from W. B. Kelly, Abingdon, Virginia.

=Hattie.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Michigan or Catawba; from N. R.
Haskell, Monroe, Michigan; fruited in 1861. Leaves similar to Catawba
but smaller; bunch medium, loose; berries medium, slightly oval, red
with white bloom; little pulp, pleasantly vinous; ripens with Concord.

=Hattie.= (Lab.) Given by Mitzky, 1893, as a chance seedling from J. A.
Putnam, Fredonia, New York. Productive; bunch short, compact; berries
medium, black; very sweet, flavor similar to Aminia; ripens with Moore
Early.

=Hattie.= (Lab.) Noted by Mitzky, in 1893, as a supposed seedling of
Concord; from Benjamin Stratton, Richmond, Indiana; nearly identical
with Concord. Probably the same variety that Bush mentions as being
introduced by E. Y. Teas, of Richmond.

=Hatton.= (Lab. Rip.) A cross between Faith and Ives; from F. E. L.
Rautenberg, Lincoln, Illinois. Vigorous, hardy, healthy, very
productive; foliage resembles Faith, and fruit, Telegraph; bunch medium,
compact; berry medium, black; vinous; ripens a little after Concord; a
better keeper.

=Hattus.= (Lab. Vin.?) Noted by Mead in 1867 as perhaps the same as
Hattie. Said to be a seedling of Catawba, but of smaller size and quite
acid; of claret color.

_Hawkins No. 3._ From William Hawkins, Hamilton, Ontario. Exhibited as a
new grape at the American Pomological Society meeting in 1879. Described
as hardy; bunch and berry large; white; vinous, high flavored; best.

_Hawkins No. 10._ From same grower as above and exhibited at the same
time and place. Hardy; bunch and berry small; white; sweet, very good;
skin tough.

=Hearthenge.= Listed with varieties of grapes under test by the United
States Department of Agriculture in 1863.

=Helen.= Noted by Buchanan as a grape grown and exhibited by N.
Longworth in 1846.

=Helen Keller.= (Lab. Vin. Aest.?) Said to be an accidental seedling
from James Nicholson; sent out in 1895 by P. R. De Muth, Connellsville,
Pennsylvania. Very vigorous, hardy, usually productive; stamens
reflexed; clusters medium, usually shouldered, loose; berries large,
roundish, dark dull red with lilac bloom, persistent; juicy, tender,
vinous, good; skin thick, rather tender, inclined to crack. Resembles
Salem in appearance; worthy of further trial.

=Helpfer.= (Lab.) According to Mitzky, 1893, from Theophile Huber,
Illinois City, Illinois. Medium in vigor and hardiness; bunch and
berries medium, white; good.

=Henrico.= Noted by Prince in his _Treatise on the Vine_, 1830, as a
native grape found in Henrico County, Virginia. Berries size of Bland;
clusters half the size; pale blue or purplish; sweet, agreeable.

=Henry.= (Lab.) From Theophile Huber. Described by Mitzky in 1893; bunch
size of Concord; berry large, round, white; juicy, sweet, foxy; ripens
with Concord.

=Henshaw.= A native grape from Martinsburg, Virginia. Described in
_United States Patent Office Report_ for 1859 as purple and of medium
size.

=Herald.= (Lab.) Received from G. A. Ensenberger, Bloomington, Illinois,
in 1889. Vigorous, productive; foliage good; stamens upright; bunch
medium, compact; berry large, poor in quality; ripens early.

=Herbemont Seedling.= (Bourq.) Noted by Warder in 1867 as from Ohio;
like its parent; very good; promising for wine.

=Hero.= (Lab.) A bud variation of Concord; introduced by Ludwig Hencke,
Collinsville, Illinois; exhibited at World's Fair in 1893. Moderate in
growth; apt to overbear; foliage healthy; bunch large, showy; berry very
large, black; in flavor similar to Concord.

=Hertia.= (Lab.) A seedling from C. Engle, Paw Paw, Michigan; brought to
notice in 1890. Bunch medium, compact; berry large, round, purple;
juicy, sweet, slightly foxy; good; mid-season.

=Hettie.= Husmann in the _Grape Culturist_ for 1869 describes this
variety as much like Isabella, but not better. This may be the grape
which Downing in 1869 describes as "bunch small; berry black; flesh
somewhat pulpy; a poor grower and bearer; ripens early."

=Heunis.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware; from W. W. Jones,
Douglas County, Illinois, about 1870. Hardy, productive; bunch resembles
Clinton in shape; berry medium, white; good.

=Hexamer.= (Linc. Lab. Vin.) _Dr. Hexamer._ A seedling of a wild
Post-oak crossed with Triumph; from Munson, introduced in 1893.
Vigorous, hardy, productive, similar to America in foliage and fruit
characters; tendrils intermittent; stamens reflexed; clusters medium,
often shouldered, variable in compactness; berries medium to below,
slightly oblate, black with heavy bloom, persistent; tender, spicy,
nearly sweet, with Post-oak flavor.

=Hiawasse.= Discarded by the United States Department of Agriculture in
1863.

=Hine.= (Lab. Vin.) _Hine Seedling._ Raised by Jason Brown (son of the
patriot, John Brown), at Put-in-Bay, Ohio, in 1851, from seed of Catawba
and Isabella grapes growing close together. Hardy, productive; bunch and
berry much like Catawba in size and form, but darker; tender, sprightly,
sweet, rich; ripens earlier than Catawba.

=Hock.= (Bourq. Aest. Lab.) A seedling of Herbemont crossed with Norton;
from Munson about 1890.

_Hofer Seedling No. 2._ (Lab.) A volunteer grape from the Concord
vineyard of A. F. Hofer, Iowa, in 1876. Described as an improved
Concord; berries larger and the clusters more compact; ripens with
Worden.

=Holmes.= (Bourq. Lab.) A chance seedling believed to be a cross between
a variety of the Herbemont group and a Labrusca; from Galveston, Texas.
Onderdonk states that it combines, in its growth and appearance, both
Aestivalis and Labrusca blood. Very productive; fruit about the size and
color of Lindley.

=Honey.= Given in Prince's _Treatise on the Vine_ as a native variety,
grown near Philadelphia about 1827. Leaves deeply five-lobed, indentures
irregular, under surface covered with down; clusters medium, compact;
sweet.

=Honey.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Salem; from C. Engle, Paw Paw,
Michigan, about 1890. Vigorous, hardy, very productive; bunch medium,
compact, shouldered; berry medium to large, white, almost translucent;
of honeyed sweetness; ripens with Worden.

=Honey Dew.= (Lab.) _Yonker's Honey Dew; Youngken's Honey Dew; Yunker's
Honey Dew._ A seedling of Concord which was thought to have been
fertilized by Delaware; from David Youngken, Richlandtown, Pennsylvania.
Lacks vigor; fairly productive, foliage healthy; bunch medium, long,
compact; berry large, round, black with blue bloom; pulpy, very foxy,
sweet; ripens after Hartford.

=Hooker.= Given in the _United States Department of Agriculture Report_
for 1869 as a Labrusca.

=Hopeon.= (Linc. Lab. Vin. Bourq.?) A seedling of Big Hope crossed with
Carman; from Munson in 1899. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry large,
white; ripens late.

=Hopherbe.= (Linc. Bourq.) A seedling of Post-oak crossed with
Herbemont; from Munson. Very vigorous, productive; stamens upright;
bunch large, very compact; berry medium, of dark copper color; quality
fair; ripens late.

=Hopican.= (Lab. Vin. Aest. Rip.) A seedling of Eumelan fertilized by
Elvira; from D. S. Marvin, Watertown, New York, about 1889. Vigorous,
not always hardy, productive; stamens upright; clusters large, sometimes
shouldered, compact; berries medium, roundish, unattractive
yellowish-green, persistent, moderately juicy, tender; fair in quality;
skin thin, adheres to pulp; ripens with Concord.

=Hopkins.= (Linc. Aest. Lab.) A seedling of Post-oak crossed with
Cynthiana; from Munson. Vigorous, not always hardy, variable in
productiveness, susceptible to mildew; stamens upright; clusters small,
frequently shouldered, very compact; berries small, oblate, black with
heavy bloom, persistent; soft, juicy, tough, spicy, vinous; fair in
flavor; ripens after Catawba.

=Horner.= (Lab.) A seedling of Concord; from Joel Horner, Delair, New
Jersey; received at this Station in 1894. Moderately vigorous; bunch
large; berries small, round, black with blue bloom; sweet, slightly
foxy; skin thick, tough; ripens early.

=Hoskins Seedling.= A seedling which came up between an Alvey and a
Delaware; from A. Hoskins, Toronto, Ontario, in 1886. Bunches large,
compact; berries similar to Clinton in size and color but inferior in
quality; ripens unevenly and late.

=Howell.= From Edward Tatnall, Wilmington, Delaware, about 1860. Bunch
large; berries medium, black; pulp firm; skin thick; good; ripens early.

=Hubbard Seedless.= (Lab.) Grown by the T. S. Hubbard Company, Fredonia,
New York, but has not been disseminated. Vigorous, very hardy, somewhat
unproductive, of Labrusca type; quality equal to Delaware; berries the
size of Delaware but darker in color.

=Huber.= (Rip. Lab.) A seedling of Taylor; from Jacob Rommel, Morrison,
Missouri. Vigorous, healthy; bunch smaller than Concord; color of
Catawba; late.

=Huber's Seedlings.= Theophile Huber of Illinois City, Illinois,
something over twenty years ago originated a large number of seedlings
which he sent out for testing. He writes that, with the exception of
_Huber No. 12_, which is from Hartford, his seedlings are from mixed
seed of Concord, Clinton, Marion, Rebecca, Isabella, Delaware, Catawba
and Creveling. Of his named sorts there are: Albert, Alphonse, Bertha,
Braendly, Doctor Warder, Edward, Emma, Illinois City, Marguerite, Marie
Louise, and Theophile. Most of Huber's grapes were named before
disseminating but a few, as follows, have gone out with numbers.

_No. 11._ As tested by the Virginia Experiment Station, weak,
unproductive; stamens upright; bunch small, loose; berries large, black;
poor quality; ripens between Concord and Catawba.

_No. 12._ Described by Illinois Experiment Station as very vigorous,
healthy, promising; bunch medium, oblong, sometimes shouldered, compact;
berry small to large, round, black with heavy bloom; juicy, tender,
sweet, very rich; skin tender; about a week later than Concord.

_No. 13._ Described by the Virginia Experiment Station as weak; stamens
upright; bunch small, compact; berry medium, coppery in color; ripens
late.

=Hudson.= (Lab.) Given by Downing in 1857 as from Mr. Calkins, Hudson,
New York. Growth similar to Isabella; two or three weeks earlier; bunch
and berry much the same, but less sprightly and not quite so rich.

=Hudson.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Rebecca; from A. J. Caywood,
Marlboro, New York, about 1870. According to Caywood and several
prominent horticulturists, this variety is identical with Prentiss.
Caywood says he refrained from introducing this grape on the advice of
several grape experts but sent it out for testing to several persons
amongst whom was J. W. Prentiss, introducer of the Prentiss.

=Hulkerson's Seedlings.= (Lab. Vin.) Twenty-one seedlings from a single
bunch of Wilder, from W. G. Hulkerson and Company, Oriel, Michigan, were
shown before the American Pomological Society in 1879. None was better
than the parent, but all were interesting as they showed much variation
in size of berries and in color, the latter ranging from black to red.

=Humboldt.= (Rip. Bourq.?) A seedling of Louisiana, probably crossed
with Riparia; from Frederick Muench, Marthasville, Warren County,
Missouri. Vigorous vine of Riparia character, hardy, healthy; stamens
upright; cluster medium, sometimes shouldered, compact; berries medium,
oblate, dull golden green with thick bloom, amber when fully ripe;
sweet, of Elvira flavor; ripens with Catawba.

=Hunterville.= Mentioned by Sidney Weller, in the _United States Patent
Office Report_ for 1845, as a native variety, subject to rot, grown in
North Carolina.

=Huntingdon.= (Rip.) _Australian._ Vigorous, hardy, productive, subject
to mildew; resembles Clinton; bunch small, shouldered, compact; berry
small, round, black; juicy, vinous; drops badly; ripens unevenly.

=Husmann.= (Linc. Vin. Lab.) A seedling of Armlong crossed with Perry;
from Munson, introduced in 1900. Vigorous, prolific, subject to mildew;
clusters very large, long, cylindrical, compact; berries medium,
globular, black, with tendency to drop; juicy, tender, more vinous than
Black Eagle but less sweet; skin thin, tough; ripens with Herbemont.

=Hutchinson.= (Long.) A wild variety of _Vitis longii_; secured from
Hutchinson County, Texas, by Munson. Stamens reflexed; cluster small;
berry small, black; ripens mid-season.

=Hutporup.= (Long. Linc. Rup.) A seedling of Hutchinson fertilized by
Porup; from Munson. Stamens reflexed; cluster small; berry small, black;
ripens early.

=Hyde Black.= (Lab.) Given in Prince's _Treatise on the Vine_, 1830, as
a native variety found on the farm of Wilkes Hyde, near Catskill, New
York. Very vigorous and productive; berries medium, black; juicy,
tender, rather astringent, foxy.

=Hyde Eliza.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling from Wilkes Hyde, about 1828. This
variety so closely resembles York Madeira that it has caused much
confusion. Charles Downing in the _Horticulturist_ for 1860 says that
it is more vigorous; bunch and berry larger, somewhat like the Isabella,
but a week or two earlier.

=Icterida.= (Aest. Lab. Linc. Bourq.) A cross of Gold Coin with Bull;
from Munson, about 1899. Vigorous, healthy; cluster medium, well-formed;
berry large, light yellow, persistent; skin thin, tough; pulp of medium
tenderness, juicy, sweet; good; ripens about with Gold Coin.

=Ida.= (Lab.) A white seedling produced by T. B. Miner, from seed of
Concord. Vigorous, hardy but not productive; cluster large; berry large
and of light green color; late.

=Iden.= _Lake._ Noted in the _American Pomological Society Report_ for
1858 as worthless.

=Illinois City.= (Lab.) A seedling of Concord; from Theophile Huber,
about thirty years ago. Vigorous, not always hardy, unproductive;
cluster small; berries medium, dull yellowish-green; skin thin and
tender; foxy, mild, sweet; good. The flowers are sterile and the fruit
ripens with Concord.

=Illinois Early.= From G. A. Ensenberger, Bloomington, Illinois, about
1897. Vigorous; clusters small; berries medium, black; ripens a few days
later than Moore Early.

=Illinois Prolific.= Noted as worthless in _Gardener's Monthly_ for
1863.

=Improved Purple Fox.= (Lab.) Buchanan mentions this variety as having
been raised and exhibited by Longworth in 1846.

=Indiana.= Mentioned by Buchanan in 1852 as having been tested by Warder
in 1846 and found worthless.

=Indian Field.= A staminate vine mentioned in _Gardener's Monthly_ for
1863.

=International.= (Vin. Rip. Lab.) A seedling of Marion fertilized by
White Frontignan; from N. B. White, Norwood, Massachusetts, about 1888.
Vigorous, not always hardy, very productive; clusters large; berries
large, light red; flavor resembles Delaware but with an Aestivalis
taste; very good.

=Iola.= (Rip.) Originated by John Burr. Described by Stayman: "bunch
medium, compact; berry medium, white; skin thin, tough; pulp tender,
juicy, sprightly, rich, sweet, best; vigorous, hardy, healthy and
productive, free from rot and mildew; ripe before Concord. * * * of the
Riparia class."

=Iowa.= Mentioned about forty years ago as being of very high quality.

=Iowa Excelsior.= (Lab. Vin.) Originated by Professor Mathews, of Iowa,
about 1880. Clusters medium; berries large, red; high quality; ripens
early; self-sterile.

=Iris.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of one of Rogers' hybrids; from C. Engle,
Paw Paw, Michigan, about 1888. Vigorous; cluster large, long, compact;
berry large, round, dark amber, thin bluish bloom; skin thin; pulp
tough, slightly astringent, sweet, vinous, foxy; good.

=Irvin October.= (Bourq.) Originated on the Irvin farm in Guilford
County, North Carolina, about 1885. Vigorous but inclined to mildew;
cluster large, long, tapering; berries medium in size, of dingy red
color; sweet; good; very late.

=Irving.= (Vin. Lab.) A seedling of Catawba fertilized by Chasselas de
Fontainbleau; from S. W. Underhill in 1868. Vigorous canes,
short-jointed; clusters large, long, shouldered, not well filled; berry
large, round, yellowish-green, thick bloom; skin thick, tough; flesh
tender, melting; flavor vinous, sweet; very good; rots and mildews
badly.

=Ithaca.= (Vin. Bourq. Lab.) _Parker; Tucker's Parker._ A seedling of
Delaware fertilized by Chasselas Musque; from a Mr. Tucker, of Ithaca,
New York, about 1868. Of moderate vigor; cluster large; berry large,
pale green with amber tinge; skin thick; pulp tender, juicy, sweet; high
quality.

=Jacent.= (Rip. Lab.) Noted by T. V. Munson in _Gardener's Monthly_ for
1884, as undistinguishable from Bacchus, except that the saccharometer
shows less sugar.

=Jaeger's Seedlings.= About forty years ago Hermann Jaeger, of Neosho,
Missouri, became interested in the horticultural possibilities of the
wild grapes of his neighborhood. He corresponded with Frederick Muench,
of Marthasville, who encouraged him in his efforts. Beside selecting
various vines from the woods he made crosses of species. His object was
to secure more vigorous, productive and disease-resistant sorts than any
of our standard varieties. He was particularly impressed with the
Lincecumii or so-called Summer grapes of his section. His selections of
this species are notable for their extreme vigor but many of them are
susceptible to fungi and as they are all self-sterile they are uncertain
bearers when removed from the wild male vines. His most promising
seedlings are as follows:

_No. 9._ Productive; subject to black-rot; cluster large; berry below
medium; juicy, sweet; good.

_No. 12._ Cluster and berry medium; sweet.

_No. 13._ Hardy, prolific; as large as Ives and of no better quality.

_No. 17._ Cluster large; berries medium; sweet; good.

_No. 42._ Cluster very large; berry medium; very sweet and juicy; good.

_No. 43._ (Linc.) One of Jaeger's selections from the woods. Rank
grower; canes thick, numerous, glaucous; diaphragm thick; shoots
glabrous, spiny; tendrils intermittent; leaves large, thick, glossy
green, glaucous below, not lobed; cluster large; berry medium, oblate,
black; ripens too late for this section. Does not ripen its wood well
and is slightly tender and very susceptible to leaf-hopper here.
Self-sterile.

_No. 50._ See Longworth.

_No. 56._ See Dufour.

_No. 70._ See Munson.

_No. 72._ (Linc. Rup.) A seedling of _No. 43_ crossed with a male vine
of _Vitis rupestris_. Bunch medium, very compact; berry size of Concord,
black with pale bloom; sweet, of pure flavor; ripens with Norton.

_No. 100._ (Rip. Lab.) A seedling of Elvira. Vine shows Labrusca
characters, very hardy, productive; bunch and berry as large as
Concord, yellowish with reddish tinge; quality and flavor similar to
Catawba; cracks when ripe; season with Delaware.

=James Seedling.= (Lab. Vin.) From J. H. James, Urbana, Ohio. Resembles
Catawba but is hardier and healthier.

=Jane Wylie.= (Rip. Vin. Lab.) _Janie Wylie._ A hybrid between Clinton
and a foreign grape; from Dr. A. P. Wylie, Chester, South Carolina,
about 1870. Vigorous, productive; bunch large, shouldered; berry large,
globular to oval, dark red with thick bloom; pulp firm, meaty, juicy,
sweet, rich, vinous; skin thick, tender; early.

=Jelly.= Exhibited before the American Pomological Society in 1856 and
described by William G. Waring of Pennsylvania as "extremely productive,
good; especially valuable for culinary use. Very good when dried."

=Jemina.= (Rip. Lab.) A seedling of Elvira crossed with an unknown
variety; from D. S. Marvin, Watertown, New York, about 1891. Vigorous,
hardy, healthy; bunch short, compact; berry medium, black, delicious;
skin thin, liable to crack; much earlier than Elvira.

=Jennie May.= (Lab.) Mitzky, in 1893, states that this variety is a
Concord seedling grown by John Laws, Geneva, New York. Apparently
identical with Concord.

=Jennings.= (Lab.) A native grape from Lexington, Massachusetts, noted
in _Magazine of Horticulture_ for 1860. Hardy, productive, free from
mildew; bunch medium; berries black; pulpy, foxy; ripens very early.

=Jessie.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A seedling of a cross between Delaware and
Diana; received by the _Gardener's Monthly_ in 1879, from F. W. Loudon,
Janesville, Wisconsin. Described as looking like Diana but of better
flavor.

=Jeter.= (Rot.) Described in _South Carolina Station Bulletin No. 132._
Vigorous, very productive; bunches contain three to eight large,
brownish-black berries; skin thick, very tough; pulp tender, juicy;
quality good; ripens about August 25th.

=Joen.= Noted by Prince in _Gardener's Monthly_ for 1863 as a worthless
variety.

=John Burr.= (Lab.) Noted by Mitzky, in 1893, as "a Concord seedling
grown by the late John Burr, of Leavenworth, Kansas."

=Johnson.= A South Carolina seedling. Mentioned in the American
Pomological Society catalogs for 1875 and 1881.

=Jolly.= A Pennsylvania grape noted by Waring in 1851.

=Joly.= (Champ.) A wild vine of _Vitis champini_ secured by Munson from
Lampasas County, Texas. Stamens reflexed; cluster small; berry medium,
black; ripens early.

=Jonathan.= Noted by S. J. Parker of Ithaca, New York, in the _United
States Patent Office Report_ for 1861 as a grape that "grew well and
ripened its wood."

=Joplin's Peaks of Otter.= A native grape of the Blue Ridge Mountains,
Virginia, from J. Joplin. Noted in _Gardener's Monthly_ for 1869 as
having been in cultivation for thirty-five years. Very vigorous, very
productive, healthy; fine wine grape.

=Jordan Large Blue.= _Jordan's Blue._ Prince in 1830 states that this
grape is an exotic but that a Mr. Smith of New Jersey believed it to be
a native of New England. Bunches large; berries large, blue; flesh
pulpy.

=Joseph Henry.= A seedling from D. J. Piper, Illinois; received first
premium at the State Fair in Freeport, Illinois, in 1877, as the best
new grape. Said to be very early and as of high quality as Delaware.

=Judd.= Noted in the _American Horticultural Annual_ for 1871, as a
seedling raised by P. Stewart of Mt. Lebanon, New York.

=Judge.= (Doan.) A wild male vine of _Vitis doaniana_ secured by Munson
from Greer County, Oklahoma.

=Judge Miller.= (Bourq. Lab.) A seedling of Herbemont crossed with
Martha; from Munson. Described by the Georgia Experiment Station as
moderately vigorous; stamens upright; bunch large, moderately compact;
berries medium, greenish-yellow, of good quality; ripens a little
earlier than Catawba.

=July.= C. E. Goodrich of Utica, New York, mentions this variety, in the
_United States Patent Office Report_ for 1853, as valuable because of
ripening early.

=July Twenty-fifth.= (Rip. Lab.) According to Mitzky, 1893, this is an
Elvira seedling; from Jacob Rommel, Morrison, Missouri.

=Jumbo.= (Lab.) _Big Concord._ Probably a Concord seedling; from Reuben
Rose, Marlboro, New York. Vigorous, hardy, productive; bunches and
berries vary in size from year to year; ripens a week earlier than
Concord.

=Juno.= (Bourq. Lab.) A seedling of Delaware; from G. A. Ensenberger,
Bloomington, Illinois, 1882. Vigorous and productive; cluster medium,
sometimes shouldered; berry white, translucent with yellow tinge, round,
medium; pulp tender; good.

=Juno.= (Vin. Lab.) _Uno._ A cross between Muscat Hamburg and Belvidere;
from G. W. Campbell, Delaware, Ohio, about 1882. Rich and sweet.

=Juno's Sister.= (Vin. Lab.) The same origin and parentage as the
preceding. Berry black, blue bloom; flesh meaty; seeds part readily; no
acidity.

=Kalamazoo.= (Lab. Vin.) From a Mr. Dixon of Steubenville, Jefferson
County, Ohio, about 1860, from seed of Catawba. Resembles Catawba
closely but is larger in bunch and berry; not of as high quality and
ripens ten days earlier.

=Kalista.= (Bourq. Lab.) A white-fruited seedling of Delaware produced
by J. Sacksteder of Louisville, Kentucky. Resembles the parent except
for the color of fruit and greater vigor of vine.

=Kansas July.= (Rip.?) A variety mentioned by Mead forty years ago as an
early grape from Kansas with small bunches of very small sweet berries.
Vine vigorous.

=Kay Seedling.= (Bourq.) A seedling of Herbemont from Kentucky.

=Keller.= _Dr. Keller._ Noted in _Gardener's Monthly_ in 1863.

=Keller White.= (Lab. Vin.) Noted by Mitzky in 1893 as a seedling of
Catawba inferior to the parent.

=Kellog.= (Lab.) A wild Labrusca from New Canaan, Connecticut, and
described by Prince in 1830 as having large, purple, foxy fruit of
oblate form.

=Kemp.= (Linc. Bourq.) A seedling of Post-oak crossed with Herbemont;
from Munson in 1885. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry medium, dark
red; ripens very late.

=Kendall.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Isabella; from Brooklyn, New York,
about 1865. Resembles Isabella very closely but larger in bunch and
berry.

=Kenena.= (Linc. Rup.) A cross between Munson of America and a Post-oak
hybrid, about 1898. Very vigorous; canes smooth, much branched; leaves
rather small, deeply four- to seven-lobed; cluster above medium; berries
small, purple, round, persistent; skin thin, tough; flesh tender, juicy;
good; seeds small; ripens just before Herbemont.

=Kenrick's Native.= (Lab.) Noted by Prince in 1830 as a wild Labrusca
found near Newton, Massachusetts. Fruit light green, oval.

=Kentucky.= (Aest. Lab.) A supposed seedling of Norton; found by James
Childers of Auburn, Kentucky, in 1887. Very vigorous, hardy, healthy and
productive; canes rather slender; tendrils continuous; leaves large;
flowers self-sterile; clusters large, shouldered, tapering; berries
small, oblate, purplish-black, persistent; moderately juicy, tough,
mild, somewhat insipid, hardly fair in quality; seeds numerous, medium
size to above; raphe a cord; ripens late.

=Kentucky Wine.= Mentioned by Prince in _Gardener's Monthly_ for 1863.

=Ketchum.= Received by the United States Department of Agriculture about
1860 from an unknown source. Fruit described as black, sweet, pulpy, of
medium size.

=Keystone.= (Lab.) A seedling of Concord; from John Kready, Mount Joy,
Pennsylvania. Resembles Concord very closely but considered by some as
of better quality and as a better keeper.

=Kiamichi.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) Parents, Delago crossed with Brilliant;
from Munson, in 1899. Stamens reflexed; cluster medium; berry large,
purple; ripens mid-season.

=Kilvington.= (Lab. Vin.) Bought by a Mr. Cassady of Philadelphia for an
Isabella, in 1847. Grant considers it a seedling of Catawba which it
resembles in every respect except that the berries are smaller, rounder
and of a duller red.

=King Philip.= (Vin. Lab. Rip.) A second generation
Vinifera-Labrusca-Riparia hybrid; produced by N. B. White of Norwood,
Massachusetts, about ten years ago. Vine vigorous, resembling Labrusca;
cluster large; berry large, roundish or slightly oval, purple; flesh
solid, tender; flavor vinous, sweet; very good.

=Kingsessing.= (Lab. Vin.?) Of unknown origin, mentioned in 1866 by
Husmann. Vine tender, subject to mildew and rot; cluster large, loose,
shouldered; berries medium, round, pale red with lilac bloom; fair
quality.

=King William.= One of Marine's seedlings, not disseminated.

=Kinney's Seedlings.= According to Mitzky, I. Kinney of Zanesville,
Ohio, has produced two seedlings as follows:

_Kinney No. 1._ (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Vergennes. "Bunch medium to
large, compact; berries large, round; skin tough; very fine flavor; good
keeper; ripens early."

_Kinney No. 2._ (Lab.) A seedling of Concord. "Bunch medium, compact;
berries small, round, white, transparent, but few seeds, very sweet,
without any disagreeable taste; leaf similar to Concord; healthy; good
grower."

=Kiowa.= (Linc. Bourq.) A seedling of _Jaeger No. 43_ crossed with
Herbemont; from Munson, in 1898. Described by him as follows: "Growth
very strong and healthy, much branched, leaves small to medium, 5 to 7
lobed; cluster medium to large, with long peduncle; berry small to
medium, nearly black, round; skin thin, tough; flesh tender, juicy,
sprightly, agreeable quality; ripens just before Herbemont."

=Kitchen.= (Rip.) A seedling of Franklin, about 1865. Cluster medium;
berry medium to small, round, black; skin thin, tough; flesh tender;
very late.

=Knob Mountain.= A variety mentioned in 1869 by the United States
Department of Agriculture as under trial.

=Kosomo.= (Lab. Linc. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delago crossed with
Beacon; from Munson in 1899. Stamens reflexed; cluster large; berry
large, purple; ripens mid-season.

=Kramer Seedling.= (Lab.) A seedling of Concord; from J. C. Kramer, of
La Crescent, Minnesota. Vine resembles Concord but not thrifty; fruit
resembles Concord but is sweet and with a spicy flavor.

=Krause.= (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) A second generation Herbemont-Niagara
cross; from Munson, in 1908. Munson says, "Vine vigorous, usually
healthy, very prolific; clusters large, handsome; berries medium size,
pearly white, fine quality; promising for Southwest."

=Kruger.= (Linc. Rup. Lab. Vin.) Parents, America by R. W. Munson; from
Munson, in 1899. Stamens erect; cluster very large; berry medium, black;
ripens late.

=Labe.= An accidental seedling from Lebanon, Pennsylvania, about 1850.
Vigorous, hardy; bunch small, short, loose; berry black; flesh tender,
sweet.

=Lacon.= (Lab.) A seedling of Concord from D. H. Wier, Lacon, Illinois,
about 1862. Medium in vigor, hardy; bunch small; berry medium, black;
Concord flavor.

=Laconia.= (Lab. Vin.) From Jos. N. Sanborn, Laconia, New Hampshire.
Received at this Station in 1903 for testing but has not fruited. Rather
weak grower; self-sterile.

=La Crissa.= (Bourq. Lab.) _Sacrissa; Saccharissa._ A Delaware seedling;
from J. Sacksteder, Louisville, Kentucky. Vigorous; berry small, white;
good.

=Ladies.= (Lab.) Mentioned by Downing in 1845 as a fox grape with a
strong scent, harsh flavor and of no value for dessert.

=Lady Charlotte.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware crossed with
Iona; from C. G. Pringle of Vermont, 1869. Vigorous; bunch large,
shouldered, compact; berry medium, round, light green to golden; juicy,
sweet; good.

=Lady Dunlap.= (Lab. Vin.) _Dunlap?_ From J. H. Ricketts, about 1875.
Bunch medium, compact; berry medium, amber; vinous; good.

=Lady Helene.= From Fred Roenbeck, Bergen, New Jersey. Vigorous; cluster
large, shouldered, compact; berry large, white; good.

=Lady Younglove.= (Lab. Rip.) A cross between Missouri Riesling and
Perkins; from John Sacksteder, Leavenworth, Indiana. Vigorous, hardy;
cluster medium, generally shouldered; berry large, oval, light red.

=Lake.= _Iden._ Exhibited by Nicholas Longworth in 1852. Bunch and berry
small, black; acid, harsh; early.

=La Marie.= (Lab.) A seedling of Willie; from L. C. Chisholm. Vigorous,
hardy; bunch large, shouldered; berry large, very foxy, color "ashes of
roses."

=La Reine.= (Linc. Rup. Lab.) A seedling of America by Beacon; from
Munson in 1899. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry large, black; ripens
mid-season.

=Large Berry.= (Long.) A wild vine of _Vitis longii_ secured by Munson
from Motley County, Texas. Stamens reflexed; cluster small; berry
medium, black; ripens early.

=Large Leaf.= (Long.) Like the preceding, this is one of Munson's
varieties, a wild form of _Vitis longii_ from Motley County, Texas.
Stamens depressed; cluster small; berry small, black; ripens early.

=La Salle.= (Rip. Linc. Rot.) A Scuppernong crossed with a Post-oak
hybrid; from Munson. Vigorous and comparatively hardy; stamens
depressed; cluster medium, ovate, short; berries large to very large,
black with white specks; juicy; "better than Scuppernong."

=Laughlin.= (Lab.? Bourq.? Vin.?) A chance seedling, probably of Concord
crossed with Delaware; from W. R. Laughlin, College Springs, Iowa.
Hardy; cluster large, compact, shouldered; berries medium, white; skin
tender; sweet, vinous, high quality; early.

=Laura.= (Lab.) From H. B. Lum, Sandusky, Ohio, 1867. Hardy, productive;
berry large, pale red; sweet, somewhat foxy.

=Laura.= (Bourq. Lab. Aest. Vin.) _Lama; Watertown._ A cross of Eumelan
with Delaware; from D. S. Marvin, Watertown, New York, about 1880.
Medium in vigor; bunch small, shouldered; berry small, dark purple; skin
thin, tough; pulp tender, juicy; hardly good.

=Laussel.= (Linc. Lab. Aest.) A seedling of a Post-oak crossed by Gold
Coin; from Munson. Vigorous, hardy; cluster medium, moderately compact;
berry medium, round, dark purple or black; skin thin; pulp firm; good.

=Lavega.= (Lab. Vin.) A hybrid seedling; from W. H. Mills, Hamilton,
Ontario. Hardy; bunch medium; berry large, reddish; vinous; very good.

=Lawrence.= (Lab.) Found growing wild by Dr. R. B. Black, Fay,
Pennsylvania, about 1880. Very vigorous; cluster large, conical,
compact; berry medium to large, round, dark purple to black; sub-acid;
quality poor.

=Lawson.= (Lab.) From E. W. Bull, Massachusetts; first exhibited before
the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1874. Bunch large; berry
large, white.

=Leader.= (Lab. Vin.?) A chance seedling of unknown parentage; from the
Storrs and Harrison Company, Painesville, Ohio, about 1893. Variable in
vigor and productiveness; flowers semi-fertile; tendrils continuous;
clusters not uniform, medium to short, shouldered; berries medium,
roundish, light green changing to yellowish; skin thin, tender; flesh
tender, vinous; good to very good.

=Leavenworth.= (Lab. Vin.) _Burr No. 47._ A seedling of Concord; from
Francis Godard of Leavenworth, Kansas, about 1888. Weak, hardy, medium
in productiveness; tendrils continuous; flowers fertile or nearly so;
cluster small, short, moderately compact; berries small, slightly oval,
dull green; flesh tender and soft; fair in quality.

=Lehman.= (Lab. Vin.) From William Lehman, New Lebanon, Pennsylvania;
parentage, Bland crossed with Isabella. Bunch and berry large, nearly
white; late.

=Lenori.= _Alvey's Lenori._ Noted in the _United States Patent Office
Report_ of 1861.

=Leon.= (Vin. Lab.?) From William H. Marine. Bunch medium; berry large,
oval, pale red.

=Letovey.= (Linc. Lab.? Vin.) From Munson. Very vigorous; shy bearer;
stamens reflexed; cluster large, compact; berry small, round, deep
purple to black; pleasant flavor; quality medium.

=Lewis.= Noted in the _Illinois Horticultural Society Report_ for 1881
as productive, healthy, early; berry black; fair quality.

=Lexington.= (Lab.) A Concord seedling; from T. B. Miner, New Jersey.
Hardy, not productive; bunch large; berry medium to large, black;
quality medium.

=Lida.= A chance seedling from Ludwig Hencke, Collinsville, Illinois.
Bunch and berry medium, red; sweet, not foxy; mid-season.

=Lightfoot's Seedlings.= W. H. Lightfoot, of Springfield, Illinois, has
raised a large number of seedlings from standard varieties, such as
Concord, Northern Muscadine, Goethe and others. Of his named seedlings
there are Alice Lee, Amy, Benjamin, Capital, Lightfoot, Miriam, Sangamon
and Springfield.

=Lightfoot.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Niagara; from W. H. Lightfoot,
Springfield, Illinois. Vigorous, healthy; stamens upright; leaves three-
to five-lobed; cluster medium, shouldered, loose; berry medium, round,
light green to yellowish; flesh melting, juicy, sweet; good; keeps well;
ripens after Concord.

_Lightfoot Seedling No. 34._ (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Lady Washington;
from W. H. Lightfoot, Springfield, Illinois. Vigorous and healthy; bunch
large, compact; berries large, round, black; juicy and sweet.

=Limington White.= (Lab.) Described by Cole in 1849. Hardy; bunch and
berry large; good.

=Linceola.= (Linc. Rip. Lab.) A cross between a Lincecumii and Elvira
credited to Munson but not cataloged by him. Vigorous, shy bearer.

=Lincoln.= _Hart; McLean._ A southern grape found growing in the Catawba
River in North Carolina, by Dr. Wm. McLean, about 1800. Vigorous, hardy,
early; berry small, round; skin thin, dark purple with light bloom;
flesh tender, juicy, sweet, rich, vinous. Resembles Devereaux, and by
some considered identical.

=Lincoln.= (Lab. Vin.) _Lincoln County; Read's Hybrid._ A seedling of
Concord crossed with Black Hamburg; from Wm. H. Read, Port Dalhousie,
Ontario. Vigorous, hardy, productive; cluster below medium, compact,
cylindrical, shouldered; berry below medium, round, black; skin thick,
tough; pulp firm but breaking, sweet, sprightly, slightly foxy; good;
ripens with Concord.

=Lincoln Downer.= (Lab.) Listed in the _United States Patent Office
Reports_ of 1859-61 as being under test. Vigorous.

=Lincrup.= (Linc. Rup.) From Texas. Vigorous; productive; stamens
reflexed; bunch large, medium in compactness; berry small, black; medium
in quality.

=Lincy.= (Linc.) From Texas. Vigorous; stamens upright; cluster large,
compact; berry medium, black; quality medium.

=Lindell.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Lindley crossed with
Delaware; from T. V. Munson.

=Linden.= (Lab.) A Concord seedling; from T. B. Miner, Linden, New
Jersey. Hardy; bunch and berry large, black, firm.

=Linherbe.= (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Lindley crossed with
Herbemont; from Munson. Vigorous; cluster medium, conical; berry small,
red, translucent; flavor sweet; quality medium.

=Lindmar.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Lindley crossed with Martha; from
Munson. Vigorous, not always hardy, variable in productiveness; tendrils
continuous; flowers partly fertile; stamens upright; cluster small,
compact; berries small, oval, dull, pale green, thin gray bloom; flesh
pale green, slightly vinous, foxy; good.

=Linelvi.= (Rip. Lab. Vin.) _Munson No. 45._ From Munson; parentage
given as Lindley by Humboldt, or Lindley by Elvira. So lacking in vigor
as to be unpromising.

=Linley.= (Lab. Rip. Vin. Bourq.) Parentage, Rommel crossed with
Delaware; from Munson in 1897. Stamens erect; cluster medium; berry
medium, yellow; ripens early.

=Linn.= (Lab.) From P. B. Crandall, Ithaca, New York, about 1890.
Vigorous; tendrils continuous; cluster medium, compact, shouldered;
berry medium, round, yellowish-green with reddish dots; pulp fibrous,
foxy and acid; good.

=Linn Queen.= (Lab.) Vigorous; cluster medium, compact; berry large,
black, poor; stamens upright.

=Little Blue.= (Lab. Vin. Aest.) From A. J. Caywood, Marlboro, New York,
about 1888. Vigorous, medium in productiveness; tendrils intermittent to
rarely continuous; diaphragm thick; flowers partly fertile; stamens
upright; cluster medium, shouldered; berry medium, oblong, black; pulp
juicy, sweet, good; ripens after Concord.

=Little Giant.= (Lab. Vin.) Noted as under test in the vineyards of the
United States Department of Agriculture from 1863 to 1866. Resembles
Isabella very closely.

=Little Ozark.= Hardy; bunch long, loose; berry medium, black; juicy;
good.

=Livingston.= (Lab. Vin.) From John C. Wheaton, Dansville, Livingston
County, New York; believed to be a seedling of Wilder or Aminia.
Vigorous, not always hardy, productive; tendrils continuous; leaves
large, dull green; flowers nearly self-fertile; stamens upright; cluster
large, long, frequently loosely single-shouldered, very compact; berries
medium, roundish, black with blue bloom, persistent; skin thin, tender;
flesh tender, faintly spicy; good; characters of vine and fruit indicate
Labrusca and Vinifera.

=Lizzie.= (Lab.) A seedling from E. W. Bull, exhibited by him before the
Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1874. Bunch and berry large,
white.

=Lobata.= (Linc. Lab.) A seedling of Munson crossed with Profusion; from
Munson in 1897. Stamens depressed; cluster large; berry medium, black;
ripens late.

=Logan.= (Lab. Vin.) _David Hall Grape; Purple Urbana; Urbana._ A
seedling of unknown parentage, brought to notice by Dr. Thompson;
supposed to have come from Logan County, Ohio. Medium in vigor, usually
hardy; cluster medium, compact, shouldered; berries large, oval, dark
purple to black; sweet, juicy; good.

=Logan.= _Alvey's Logan._ Mentioned by Dr. G. P. Morris, Wilmington,
Delaware, in _United States Patent Office Report_, 1861, as a hardy
grape.

=Long.= (Bourq.) _Madison County._ Found by Col. James Long on his
plantation near Danielsville, Madison County, Georgia, about 1827.
Vigorous; cluster medium to large, compact, shouldered; berries small,
dark purple with thin bloom; pulp tender, sweet, vinous; good; ripens
late. Considered by some synonymous with Cunningham.

=Long John.= (Linc. Lab. Vin.) Parents, Big Berry crossed with Triumph;
from Munson. Vigorous, not hardy here; cluster large, long, cylindrical
to tapering, compact; berry large, roundish, black; skin thin, tough;
texture tough and coarse; flavor tart, slightly acid at center; good;
ripens very late.

=Longworth.= (Bourq.) _Longworth No. 20._ Found in the garden of
Nicholas Longworth, Cincinnati, Ohio, about 1867. Healthy, vigorous,
productive; clusters large, shouldered; berry small, round, black,
juicy, refreshing; of the Herbemont type but ripens earlier.

=Longworth.= (Linc. Bourq.) _Jaeger No. 50._ A seedling of _Jaeger No.
43_ crossed with Herbemont; from Hermann Jaeger, Neosho, Missouri, about
1880. Susceptible to mildew; bunches large; berries medium, blue-black;
good; very late.

=Longworth Monster.= From Ohio. Vigorous, healthy, productive; bunch
medium; berry large, round, blue.

=Loomis' Honey.= (Lab.) Exhibited in 1863 by Peter Raabe of
Philadelphia, in New York at the New York Fruit Growers' meeting. Hardy;
clusters large; berries large, black; sweet.

=Looney Seedling.= (Lab.) From C. S. Looney, Cowan, Tennessee, about
1902. Cluster small, shouldered, blunt at end, loose; berry large,
round, thick blue bloom over black; skin thin, tender; sweet, slightly
foxy; good; ripens early. Resembles Concord.

=Lorain.= From Lorain, Ohio, about 1865. Cluster medium; berry large,
amber-yellow; sweet; good.

=Loretto.= (Lab.) _Queen Loretto._ From Tennessee. Berry medium, round,
white; good; mid-season.

=Loudon Seedling.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delaware and Diana;
from F. W. Loudon, Janesville, Wisconsin. Resembles Diana in bunch,
berry and flavor.

=Louisa.= (Lab. Vin.) Grown by Samuel Miller, Calmdale, Pennsylvania.
Vigorous, hardy; cluster compact, occasionally shouldered; berry round,
oval, black with blue bloom; flavor resembles Isabella; ripens early.

=Louise.= (Lab. Vin.) Given by Mitzky as a seedling from New Jersey.
Vigorous; bunch large, compact; berries large, white; juicy, sweet; very
good.

=Louisville.= Noted in a list of supposed hardy grapes in _United States
Department of Agriculture Report_ for 1863.

=Lowell Globe.= Noted in a list of worthless varieties in Gardener's
Monthly in 1863.

=Lucky.= (Linc.) An undescribed variety used by Munson as a parent in a
number of crosses.

=Lucy Winton.= Noted in the _Gardener's Monthly_ for 1861 as being equal
in quality to Isabella and four weeks earlier.

=Luders.= (Rip.) A wild male vine of _Vitis riparia_ secured from near
Madison, Wisconsin, by Munson.

=Luffborough.= (Lab. Vin.?) Found near Georgetown, District of Columbia,
before 1828. Berries large, deep purple; juice sweet, foxy. Recommended
by John Adlum for wine and cited in a list of worthless varieties in
_Gardener's Monthly_, 1863.

=Lugawana.= Noted in the _Ontario Fruit Growers' Association Report_ for
1887 in a list of varieties ripening late.

=Lukfata.= (Champ. Lab.) A seedling of Moore Early crossed with _Vitis
champini_; from Munson. Vigorous, hardy; cluster medium, ovate, compact;
berries globular, large, black, persistent; juicy, very sweet and
agreeable; good; early; stamens reflexed.

=Luckyne.= (Linc. Bourq.) Parents, Lucky crossed with Sweety; from
Munson in 1897. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry medium, black;
ripens late.

=Lulie.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Telegraph crossed with Black Hamburg;
from C. J. Copley, Stapleton, New York. Hardy, healthy and productive;
cluster large; berry very large, black with a fine bloom; good. Awarded
a medal at the World's Fair, Chicago, 1893.

=Luna.= (Lab.) From William M. Marine. A large, hardy, white grape.

=Lycoming.= (Lab. Vin.) From a Mr. Evenden, Williamsport, Lycoming
County, Pennsylvania, about 1860. Hardy; canes short-jointed; cluster
large; berry large, oval, light red.

=Lydia.= (Lab. Vin.) A chance seedling from Charles Carpenter, Kelleys
Island, Ohio. Cluster short, compact; berries large, oval,
greenish-white; skin thick; pulp tender, sweet, slightly vinous; good;
ripens with Delaware.

=Lyman.= (Rip.) A northern variety said to have been brought from Quebec
more than fifty years ago. Hardy; productive, vigorous; cluster large,
handsome, compact; berry medium, round, black with thick bloom; juicy;
good.

=Lyon.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) _Chidester No. 1; Pres. Lyon._ A seedling of
Concord crossed with Delaware; from C. P. Chidester, Battle Creek,
Michigan, named in honor of T. T. Lyon of Michigan about 1890. Vigorous,
productive; cluster medium to large, cylindrical, shouldered, medium
compact; berries large, round, white, whitish bloom; pulp tender, sweet,
rich, vinous; very good.

=Mabel.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) Originated by A. J. Caywood of Marlboro, New
York, from seed of Walter. Moderately vigorous, not always hardy,
inclined to mildew, productive; canes medium size with thin blue bloom;
tendrils intermittent; leaves medium size, thin, slightly pubescent;
flowers fertile; clusters large, usually shouldered; berries large,
round, black; skin thin, rather tough, inclined to crack, purplish
pigment; flesh tender, juicy, sweet, vinous; good; ripens before Concord
but not a good keeper.

=McDonald's Ann Arbor.= (Lab.) Noted in the _American Pomological
Society Report_ for 1881. Berry very large, black with blue bloom;
quality of Concord; ripens with Worden.

=Macedonia.= (Lab.) _Miller's No. 3._ An early white seedling of
Concord; raised by Samuel Miller of Calmdale, Pennsylvania, over fifty
years ago. Said to resemble Martha but not so vigorous.

=McKinley.= (Lab. Vin.) Originated by Frank L. Young, Lockport, New
York, from seed of Niagara pollinated by Moore Early, planted in 1891.
Not vigorous, usually hardy, moderately productive; tendrils continuous;
leaves of medium size; clusters medium to large, usually
single-shouldered, compact; berries large, oval, light green; skin
tender; flesh tender, juicy, sweet; good; resembles Niagara but about
ten days earlier.

=McNeil.= (Lab.? Rip.?) A variety resembling Clinton, cultivated in the
Champlain region from fifty to seventy-five years ago.

=Madeira.= The name Madeira is common in the early grape literature of
the country. Its use was begun at the time when many of the cultivated
sorts were supposed to be of foreign origin. The significance of the
word when found unqualified depends somewhat on the time and place.
Thus, in the South, Madeira usually means Herbemont's Madeira; in Ohio,
Ives Madeira and in Pennsylvania, York Madeira.

=Madeline.= (Lab.) Given by Mitzky, in 1893, as a chance seedling grown
by G. Henderson, Eddyville, New York. Bunch medium to large, compact,
often shouldered; berry large, round, greenish-white with a white
bloom; skin medium thin but tough, translucent; sweet, juicy, with a
pleasant flavor; ripens early.

=Magee.= Given by Mitzky as the name of the variety described in this
work as Glenfeld.

=Magnificent.= (Lab.? Vin.?) From A. F. Rice, Griswoldville, Georgia,
about twenty-five years ago. Cluster large, broad, shouldered, loose;
berries large; skin thin, tender; flesh tender, juicy, sweet; very good.

=Maguire.= (Lab.) This variety was known about fifty years ago as a very
early black sweet grape of fair quality which originated at Lansingburg,
New York. Similar to Hartford but more foxy.

=Mahogany Colored.= (Lab.) _Mahogany._ A wild Labrusca introduced over
fifty years ago by G. W. Clark, of Malden, Massachusetts. Fruit of the
Labrusca type; mahogany-red.

=Main.= (Lab.) Mentioned in the horticultural periodicals of fifty years
ago as a variety very similar to Concord and thought by many to be the
same; from a Mr. Main, of Concord, New Hampshire, about 1854. Said to be
about ten days earlier than Concord.

=Malinda.= An early white variety mentioned in _Gardener's Monthly_ in
1869.

=Malvin.= One of Marine's seedlings, described as black, of good quality
and with cluster and berry of medium size.

=Manhattan.= An amber-green seedling of Isabella which originated on
Long Island about 1850. Unproductive; cluster small, compact; berry
medium; flesh tough, foxy; good; ripens late; shatters.

=Manockanock.= Listed by Prince in _Gardener's Monthly_ in 1863 as
worthless.

=Mansfield.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Concord fertilized by Iona;
raised in 1869 by C. G. Pringle of Charlotte, Vermont. Very vigorous;
leaves large, thick, very pubescent below; cluster large, shouldered,
compact; berry large, slightly oval, black; flesh tender; very good;
ripens before Concord.

=Manson.= A cross between R. W. Munson and Gold Coin; produced by Munson
in 1899 and introduced in 1906. Munson says: "Vigorous and productive;
clusters large; berry above medium, of yellow color; skin thin and
tough; pulp tender; quality excellent; ripens late, with Triumph."

=Marguerite.= (Lab. Vin.) A Labrusca-Vinifera variety; from Theophile
Huber, Illinois City, Illinois. Vigorous, not productive; stamens
upright; cluster small, loose; berries medium, light amber; tender,
sweet, vinous; good; ripens a week after Concord.

=Marguerite.= (Linc. Bourq.) Originated by Munson; from Post-oak No. 2
fertilized by Herbemont. Very vigorous, very productive; shoots spiny,
not downy; leaves medium to large, three- to five-lobed; stamens
upright; clusters medium, cylindrical, shouldered, compact; berries
large, round, dark purple; skin thin, tough; flesh tender; good; ripens
ten days later than Catawba.

=Marine's Seedlings.= A number of varieties were produced by Wm. M.
Marine about 1870. They were all crosses of native sorts produced by
putting the pollen in water and then applying the water to the stigma of
the sort to be fertilized. Of the varieties thus produced are Nerluton,
Greencastle, Leon, Lucas, Mianna, Malvin, Olympia, King William, Minnie,
Harriet Beecher, U. B., Uncle Tom, Red Jacket, and many others.

=Mariole.= _Joe's Mariole._ Mentioned by R. O. Thompson, of Nursery
Hill, Nebraska, in the _United States Department of Agriculture Report_
for 1866.

=Marique.= Warder, in 1867, says, "Ohio. Healthy, vigorous, very
productive; bunch full medium, compact; berry oval, large, blue; spicy;
very good."

=Marker.= Listed by the Superintendent of the Experimental Garden of the
United States Department of Agriculture in the report for 1863.

=Marsala.= (Lab.) A dark red grape introduced about thirty years ago by
Dr. Stayman. Cluster large; berry large; foxy, somewhat solid, tough;
good; very resistant to rot.

=Marvin's Seedlings.= D. S. Marvin, Watertown, New York, grew many
crosses of American varieties, few if any having been made by him with
Vinifera. His best known grapes are Cayuga, Centennial, Hopican, Rutland
and Shelby. Besides these he produced others, many of which were never
named nor disseminated. One of these which was received at this Station
in 1892 was described in the _Thirteenth Annual Report_ under the name
Marvin's Seedling. Clusters medium, compact; berry small, pale green or
yellow; flesh firm, sweet, vinous; good; season last of September.

=Marvina.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq. Aest.) A seedling of Laura by Brilliant;
from Munson in 1897. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry medium, white;
ripens early.

=Mary.= (Lab. Vin.) A chance seedling of Catawba found in 1849 in the
garden of Datus Kelley, Kelleys Island, Ohio. Vigorous, hardy; leaf
medium, light-colored, downy beneath; cluster large, loose; berry
medium, round, greenish-white, gray bloom, translucent; flesh tender,
juicy, sweet, sprightly; very good; ripens with Catawba; mildews badly.

=Mary.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Catawba introduced by a Mr. Hasselkus,
of Griffin, Georgia, about 1885. Resembles Lindley very closely but is
said to be more vigorous with larger and rounder berries of a lighter
red and shorter, more compact clusters; ripens with Concord.

=Mary Ann.= (Lab. Vin.) _North Carolina Muscadine._ Originated by J. B.
Garber, Columbia, Pennsylvania, about 1850. Vigorous and productive;
cluster medium, compact, shouldered; berry medium, oval, black, foxy,
poor; resembles Isabella; ripens with Hartford.

=Mary Favorite.= From J. T. Coffin, of Westland, Hancock County,
Indiana, in 1889; a chance seedling found growing near a trellis on
which Delaware and one of Rogers' hybrids were growing. Vigorous,
usually hardy, variable in productiveness; canes long; tendrils
continuous; leaves large, lower surface grayish-white, pubescent;
flowers fertile, open early; clusters medium to small, usually
shouldered, very compact; berries small, roundish, purplish-black,
persistent; skin thin, tough; flesh tough, slightly vinous, sweet, tart
at center; good to best.

=Mary Mark.= (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware; from Dr.
Stayman. Lacks vigor, hardy, apparently healthy, productive; berry
medium, red; flesh tender, juicy, vinous, sweet; very good; ripens with
its parent which it closely resembles.

=Mary Wylie.= (Vin. Rip. Lab.) A hybrid of Clinton and Red Frontignan;
from Dr. A. P. Wylie, Chester, South Carolina. Cluster large, loose;
berry above medium, yellowish-green; flesh tender, juicy, vinous,
delicate; very good; ripens late.

=Maryland Purple.= Mentioned by Prince in 1830 as a seedling from the
woods of Maryland. Berries medium, purple, sweet and juicy; ripens very
late.

=Mason.= A chance seedling of 1881; from Mrs. E. Mason, Lamont, Ottawa
County, Michigan. Vigorous; clusters medium, sometimes shouldered,
compact; berries large, round, reddish-amber; flesh tender, sweet,
vinous, sprightly, slightly foxy; good; ripens just before Worden.

=Mason.= (Lab.) _Mason's Seedling._ A white Concord seedling raised by
B. Mason, of Mascoutah, Illinois, about thirty years ago. Moderately
vigorous, unproductive; cluster small, compact; berry large, round,
light yellowish-green; skin thin; flesh tender, juicy, sweet, sprightly,
slightly foxy; ripens a few days before Concord; very persistent;
self-fertile.

=Mason Renting.= (Lab.) Described in _Bulletin 10_, 1890, Alabama
Experiment Station. Vigorous, productive; clusters small, compact;
berries small, greenish-yellow; good; ripens with Catawba.

=Massachusetts White.= (Lab.) A red foxy Labrusca, apparently a wild
grape sent out by B. M. Watson, of Plymouth, Massachusetts, about 1860.
Utterly worthless and name a misnomer.

=Matchless.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.?) Originated by John Burr, of
Leavenworth, Kansas, about 1887, Vigorous, hardy; black with heavy
bloom; skin thin, tough; flesh tender, sprightly, vinous; very good;
ripens with Brighton and hangs well for some time.

=Mathilde.= (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) Originated by G. A. Ensenberger,
Bloomington, Illinois, from seed of Delaware. Vigorous, productive, not
quite hardy; cluster large, very compact; berry small to large, round,
dark red with lilac bloom; small ones seedless; flesh tender, juicy,
vinous; good; very late.

=Mauston.= (Rip.) A wild vine of _Vitis riparia_ secured by Munson from
near Mauston, Wisconsin. Stamens reflexed; cluster small; berry small,
black; ripens early.

=May Red.= Mentioned in the _Report of the Ontario Fruit Growers'
Association_ for 1887 as ripening with Janesville.

=Mead Seedling.= (Lab. Vin.) Found in 1847 in the garden of John Mead,
Lowell, Massachusetts. A supposed seedling of Catawba which it strongly
resembles but darker and with round berries.

=Meanko.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) Parentage, Delago crossed with Brilliant,
from Munson, in 1899. Stamens erect; cluster medium; berry large, red;
ripens mid-season.

=Medora.= (Bourq. Vin.? Lab.?) A seedling of Lenoir, probably pollinated
by Croton; raised by Dr. Thos. R. Cooke, Victoria, Texas. Moderately
vigorous; leaf resembles Lenoir; clusters large; berries pale green,
medium, round, very translucent; sprightly, vinous; good.

=Melasko.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delago by Governor Ireland;
from Munson in 1899. Stamens erect; cluster large; berry large, black;
ripens mid-season.

=Memory.= (Rot.) Vigorous, very productive, tender; cluster small,
containing four to twelve large, round, brownish-black berries; skin
thick; flesh tender, juicy, sweet; good to best; ripens early for a
Rotundifolia.

=Mendota.= (Lab. Vin.) Originated about 1883 by John Burr, of
Leavenworth, Kansas, from mixed seed. Not vigorous nor productive;
leaves round, pale green; stamens upright; cluster small, very compact;
berry above medium, round, black; skin tender; flesh tender, melting,
sprightly, sweet; good; ripens just before Brighton.

=Meno.= (Lab. Vin.) Mentioned in _Bulletin 10_, 1890, Alabama Experiment
Station. Clusters small and compact; berries medium size, amber; good;
ripens with Catawba; rots and mildews.

=Merceron.= (Lab. Vin.) A somewhat recent seedling of Catawba and so
similar as to be difficult to distinguish from it.

=Merceron.= (Lab. Vin.) From F. E. Merceron, Catawissa, Pennsylvania,
about 1893; said to be a cross of Wilder and Concord. Cluster large,
heavily shouldered; berries large, black; sweet, sprightly; very late.

=Mericadel.= (Linc. Rup. Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A seedling of America crossed
with Delaware; from Munson, in 1898. Very vigorous, very productive;
cluster large; berry medium, purple, very persistent; skin thin and
tough; flesh tender, sweet; very good; ripens just after Concord.

=Meta.= According to Mitzky, a seedling of Jewel produced by Mr. L.
Hencke, of Illinois. Bunch large, compact, shouldered; berry large, red;
sweet and juicy; good; ripens before Concord.

=Metis.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Salem; from C. Engle, of Paw Paw,
Michigan. Cluster small, not compact, sometimes shouldered; berry large,
dark red, gray bloom; skin thick; flesh rather tough, juicy, vinous;
good.

=Metternich.= (Rip. Lab. Vin. Bourq.) _Metterny._ A seedling of Clinton
fertilized by Poughkeepsie; from A. J. Caywood, Marlboro, New York.
Moderately vigorous; cluster medium, long, cylindrical, sometimes
shouldered, compact; berry small, roundish or slightly oval; skin thin,
tough, light green to medium dark red; flesh tender, not very sweet,
fine flavor; good; ripens late.

=Mianna= or =Mienna.= One of Marine's seedlings which some call a white
grape and others black.

=Michigan.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Salem from C. Engle, Paw Paw,
Michigan. Vigorous, hardy and productive; cluster large, compact,
usually shouldered; berry above medium, light green; good; ripens with
Concord. There was another sort named Michigan or Michigan Seedling
about fifty years ago which was said to resemble Catawba but about two
weeks earlier.

=Middlesex.= (Lab.) One of E. W. Bull's seedlings. Apparently never
disseminated.

=Miland.= Described in _Alabama Station Bulletin No. 29_, 1891, as a
vigorous, not very healthy vine with medium-sized amber berries.

=Miles.= (Rip. Lab.) _Matlock._ From West Goshen Township, Chester
County, Pennsylvania, over sixty years ago. Vigorous, productive, very
early but does not keep; better than Hartford.

=Millardet.= (Berland.) From Llano County, Texas. Moderately vigorous,
productive; stamens reflexed; cluster large; berry small, black; good;
ripens late.

=Miller.= (Cord. Vin.) Mentioned by John Craig in the _Canadian
Horticulturist_ as a new grape, "a very happy combination of the
European _V. vinifera_ and the American _V. cordifolia_. It also keeps
excellently."

=Miller.= (Bourq. Lab.) A seedling of Herbemont by Martha; from Munson.
Stamens erect; cluster large; berry medium, white; ripens late.

=Miller's Seedlings.= Samuel Miller, during his early life a resident of
Calmdale, Pennsylvania, later of Bluffton, Missouri, was one of the well
known grape-breeders of the last century. He started this work about the
time of the introduction of Concord and continued it until his death in
1901. Miller was an advocate of close breeding rather than
cross-breeding as a means of improving fruit. His best known grape
productions are: Black Hawk, Eva, Macedonia, Martha and Young America.
Martha is the best known of these and this has been superseded. At the
time of Miller's death he was engaged in improving the native persimmon.

=Millington.= (Lab.) Tested by the Michigan Experiment Station and
reported in 1899 as being fairly vigorous, variable in productiveness;
clusters large, roundish, moderately compact; berries large, round,
black with blue bloom; flesh tender, very light green, sprightly, sweet,
vinous, with a perceptible aroma; fair to good; ripens mid-season.

=Millington White.= (Rip.) Mentioned by Prince in 1830 as having been
found growing north of the Missouri River, in Missouri, by Dr.
Millington of that state. "Fruit of good size, very juicy, rather tart,
the skin is thin and each berry generally contains three seeds."

=Mineola.= (Lab. Vin.) A cross between a seedling of Telegraph and
Chasselas Musque; from C. J. Copley, Stapleton, New York. Of medium
vigor, healthy, hardy and productive; bunches medium, cylindrical,
compact, seldom shouldered; berries large, roundish, white or pale
yellow, transparent, no pulp; very rich, pure, Muscat flavor; ripens
very early.

=Miner's Seedlings.= About forty years ago, T. B. Miner, of Linden,
Union County, New Jersey, raised 1500 seedlings of Concord in central
New York. In 1879 after Miner's death, twelve of these seedlings were
named and sent out for testing. They are Adeline, Antoinette, Augusta,
Belinda, Boadicea, Carlotta, Eugenia, Ida, Lexington, Linden, Rockingham
and Victoria. None of these is of great value and they are chiefly of
interest as indicating what may be expected from Concord seedlings.

=Mingo.= Mentioned by Samuel Miller in 1895 as being among the newer
varieties; bunch and berry small, black; ripens before any other; makes
a heavy dark wine.

=Minnehaha.= (Vin. Lab.) Said to be a cross between Muscat of Alexandria
and Massasoit; from Marshall P. Wilder. Vigorous, productive, not hardy;
bunch large, very long, variable in compactness, shouldered; berry
medium, very sweet, vinous, "of the most delicious quality." Said by
some to be Croton.

=Minnesota.= (Rip.) A wild vine of _Vitis riparia_, secured by Munson
from near Carver, Minnesota. Stamens reflexed; cluster small; berry very
small, white; ripens very early.

=Minnesota Mammoth.= (Lab.) Introduced by L. W. Stratton, Excelsior,
Minnesota, about 1879. Vigorous, hardy and productive; bunch and berry
large, dark red; skin thick; characteristic spicy flavor, sweet; poor.

=Minnie.= From William M. Marine. Bunch small; berry medium, dark red;
sweet; nearly equal to Delaware.

=Miriam.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Lady Washington; from W. H.
Lightfoot, Springfield, Illinois. Very vigorous, hardy, healthy; bunch
large, compact, shouldered; berries large, black, juicy and sweet; of
superior quality; ripens two weeks later than Concord.

=Mish.= (Rot.) _Meisch._ Origin in North Carolina. Vine vigorous, very
productive; bunches contain from six to fifteen medium-sized,
reddish-black oval berries with thin skin; tender and sweet; very good;
self-sterile.

=Mission.= (Vin. Gird.?) _El Paso._ The exact origin of Mission is
unknown but it is believed to have originated in the remote Missions of
northern Mexico at a time when grape-growing was forbidden by Spain. The
variety was introduced into California at a very early day and was
raised by the Mission fathers, hence the name. Mission is believed by
some to be a hybrid between Vinifera and Girdiana. Vigorous; canes
short-jointed, dull dark brown to grayish; leaf above medium size,
slightly oblong, five-lobed; stamens erect; clusters slightly
shouldered, loose, distinctly compound; berries medium, round; skin
thin, purplish-black with heavy bloom; flesh tender, vinous, sweet; very
good; ripens with Concord in Texas; said to be imperfectly self-fertile.

=Missouri.= _Missouri Seedling._ Mentioned by Prince in 1830 as a native
grape. Vine weak, not very productive; bunches medium size, loose;
berries small, round, bluish-black with little bloom; tender with little
pulp, sweet and pleasant.

=Missouri Bird Eye.= Mentioned in the _United States Patent Office
Report_ for 1859 as being free from rot in the vicinity of Hermann,
Missouri.

=Missouri Muscadine.= Mentioned in the _Illinois Horticultural Society
Report_ for 1877 as being very hardy and very productive.

=Modena.= (Lab.) A Concord seedling; from Caywood, about 1867. Vigorous
and hardy; bunch and berry medium, roundish, black; similar to Concord
in flavor and ripens about with that variety.

=Moffats.= Mentioned in the _Minnesota Horticultural Society Report_,
1877, as being a large, hardy grape.

=Moltke.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Salem; from F. E. L. Rautenberg, of
Lincoln, Illinois. Very productive and vigorous, resembles Agawam;
cluster medium, sometimes shouldered; berries very large, oblong, dark
red; skin thick; sweet and aromatic; ripens ten days earlier than
Agawam.

=Monarch.= (Lab.?) Tested by the Alabama Experiment Station and reported
as "vigorous and a strong grower. Clusters large, compact; berries
large, round, black with blue bloom; skin thick; pulp half tender,
pleasant, quality good; season last of August; productive. A promising
market grape."

=Monard.= Vine weak; stamens reflexed; bunch small to medium; berry
medium, light red; very good; a few days later than Concord.

=Monlintawba.= (Mon. Linc. Vin. Lab.) A seedling of _Vitis monticola_ by
Fern Munson; from Munson. Stamens depressed; cluster large; berry small,
purple; ripens very late.

=Montclair.= (Lab. Vin.) From C. C. Corby, of Montclair, New Jersey.
Moderately vigorous, not fully hardy, productive; stamens upright;
clusters above medium, long and broad, tapering, shouldered; variable in
compactness; berries large to medium, slightly oval, dark red with lilac
bloom, unusually persistent; skin thin, tough; pulp greenish, somewhat
tough and solid, slightly vinous, sweet; good to very good; late in
ripening.

=Montisella.= (Mon. Linc. Lab. Aest.) A seedling of _Vitis monticola_
crossed with Laussel; from Munson. Stamens reflexed; cluster medium;
berry medium, purple; ripens very late.

=Montour.= (Lab.) Mentioned by the United States Department of
Agriculture in their report for 1869 in a list of varieties of Labrusca.

=Montreal.= Noted in the _Rural New Yorker_ for 1886 as being a new
black grape, superior to Concord; from Wm. E. Green of Vermont.

=Morin.= Noted by Prince in _Gardener's Monthly_, 1863, in a list of
worthless varieties.

=Morrell Seedling.= Raised by a Mr. Morrell of Germantown, New York;
noted in _Gardener's Monthly_ for 1871. A medium-sized blue grape with a
sharp and pleasant flavor. Said to be a "better grape than Hartford
Prolific or Concord, but not equal to them in earliness."

=Morse.= Noted by Prince in 1863 in a list of worthless varieties.

=Mottled.= (Lab. Vin.) _Carpenter's Seedling._ An offspring of Catawba
grown by Chas. Carpenter, Kelleys Island, Ohio, about 1860. Vigorous,
hardy and prolific; bunch medium, shouldered, compact; berries medium,
round, like Catawba in color and mottled with darker shades; skin thick;
pulp tender, sweet, juicy, brisk and sprightly, rather pulpy and acid at
center.

=Mountain.= One of a list of worthless varieties mentioned by Prince in
_Gardener's Monthly_, 1863.

=Mount Lebanon.= (Lab. Vin.) From George Curtis of the United Society of
Shakers, Mount Lebanon, Columbia County, New York; supposed to be a
cross of Spanish Amber and Isabella. Bunch medium; berry round, reddish;
flesh pulpy, tough, sweet.

=Mrs. McLure.= (Rip. Lab. Vin. Bourq.) _McLure._ One of Dr. Wylie's
hybrids from a cross between Clinton and Peter Wylie; noted by the
American Pomological Society in 1875. Vigorous, productive; foliage
resembles Clinton; stamens upright; bunch medium, shouldered, not very
compact; berries medium, round, white; good; ripens before Catawba.

=Mrs. Munson.= (Linc. Bourq.) From Munson; a cross between Neosho and
Herbemont. Vigorous, hardy, very productive; clusters large, conical,
shouldered, compact; berry small, purple with a thin, tough skin; pulp
melting, juicy, sprightly; very good; ripens late.

=Mrs. Stayman.= (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) A Delaware seedling; from Dr. J.
Stayman. Very vigorous, hardy, healthy and productive; free from rot and
mildew; bunch large, compact; berry above medium, red with light bloom;
skin thick, tough; pulp tender, juicy, sprightly, rich, sweet; very
good; ripens about with Concord.

=Muench.= (Linc. Bourq.) Parentage, Neosho crossed with Herbemont; from
Munson, in 1887. Very vigorous, hardy; cluster large, usually
shouldered; berry below medium, round; skin thin, tough, dark purple;
flesh tender, juicy.

=Multiple.= (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) _Munson's No. 107._ A seedling of
Herbemont pollinated by Triumph; produced by Munson. Vigorous,
self-fertile; cluster large; berries medium, purple; ripens very late.

=Muncie.= (Rip. Lab.) Said to be a seedling of Elvira; from Leavenworth,
Kansas. Described by Stayman in _Missouri Horticultural Society Report_,
1892, as follows: "Bunch medium, compact, handsome; berry medium, white;
skin thin, rather tough; pulp tender, juicy, sprightly, rich, sweet,
very good; vigorous, hardy, healthy and productive; free from rot and
mildew; ripe about with Concord."

=Muncy Black.= (Lab.) Mentioned by Prince in 1830 as having been found
on the same farm as the Pale Red Muncy. Very productive, with harsh and
unpleasant fruit.

=Munier.= Noted in _Gardener's Monthly_, 1863, as coming from a German
near Massillon, Ohio. Early, of excellent quality as a table grape,
productive and as hardy as the Isabella or Concord.

=Munson.= (Linc. Rup.) _Jaeger No. 70._ A seedling of _Jaeger No. 43_
crossed with a male Rupestris. Very vigorous, productive; clusters
medium, shouldered, moderately compact; berries large, black; slight
Post-oak flavor; ripens before Norton.

=Murdock.= A grape grown by Judge Murdock at Elkader, Clayton County,
Iowa. Hardy and free from mildew; very sweet.

=Muscadine Superior.= A seedling exhibited by John Hopkins, of
Wilmington, North Carolina, before the American Pomological Society in
1871.

=Muscat.= The name of a group of Vinifera grapes the best known variety
of which is Muscat of Alexandria.

=Muscat Catawba.= Listed by Prince in 1863 as a worthless sort.

=Mylitta.= (Lin. Rup. Lab.) From Munson; a cross between America and
Beacon. Cluster large; berry large, black; ripens late; self-fertile.

=Nahab.= (Lab.) Described in _Alabama Station Bulletin No. 87_ for 1900
as follows: "Vines lacking in vigor; clusters medium in size, compact;
berries medium, round, white; skin thin; pulp tender, juicy, slightly
acid; season middle of August; not productive."

=Nashua.= Mentioned by Prince in 1830 as originating in Maine.

=Nashua.= A variety under this name was exhibited at the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society meeting in 1869 by Allen Putnam. Described as
"between the Hartford and Concord, but sweeter than either and does not
drop."

=Naumkeag.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Isabella raised by a Mr. Bowker of
Salem, Massachusetts, which fruited in 1848. Bunches resemble the
parent; berries above medium, round, red with slight bloom; pulpy, with
Isabella flavor; a little earlier than its parent.

=Nazro.= (Lab. Vin.) Prince, in 1830, states that this variety was
originated from seed of the Troy grape planted in 1825 by Henry Nazro of
this state; fruited in 1828. Berries medium in size, oval; sweet, of
pleasant flavor, slightly foxy; ripens early.

=Nebraska.= Noted by Fuller in 1867 as "a beautiful ornamental vine, but
the fruit of no value."

=Neff.= (Lab.) _Keuka._ From a Mr. Neff, near Keuka, New York. Bunch and
berry medium, dark red; foxy; good; early.

=Nell.= (Bourq. Aest. Lab.) A seedling of Herbemont crossed with Norton;
from Munson. A very late, large-clustered, small-berried, white grape;
self-fertile.

=Nelson.= A chance seedling from Roger Nelson, Ilion, New York, about
1896; undescribed.

=Neosho.= (Linc.) Found growing wild on the farm of E. Schoenborn,
Neosho, Missouri, by H. Jaeger. Very vigorous, hardy, not productive;
large, glossy, beautiful dark green foliage; stamens reflexed; bunches
medium to large, long, shouldered; berries small, black with blue bloom;
skin thin; pulp firm, sweet, spicy; produces a light wine with a
peculiar aroma.

=Neponset.= Noted as a worthless sort by Prince in 1863.

=Nerluton.= One of Marine's seedlings. Vigorous; leaf large, leathery;
cluster large; berries medium, black.

=Neva Munson.= (Linc. Bourq.) _Neva._ One of Munson's crosses between
Neosho and Herbemont; originated about 1885. Very vigorous, hardy and
productive; stamens upright; clusters large, cylindrical, shouldered,
compact; berries small, purple with thin, tough skin; pulp tender,
juicy, sprightly, sweet flavor; too late for the North.

=Neverfail.= Mitzky in 1893 says: "This variety was found in Roanoke
County, Virginia. Feeble at first but grows rapidly when older; free
from rot; bunch and berry medium, black, juicy and vinous; too late for
the North."

=Newark.= (Vin. Rip. Lab.) A hybrid between Clinton and a Vinifera; from
Newark, New Jersey. Vigorous, hardy and very productive; bunches long,
loose, shouldered; berries medium, dark, almost black; sweet, juicy and
vinous, of pleasant taste.

=New Buda.= (Lab.) Tested by the United States Department of Agriculture
in 1863 and thought to be Concord.

=Newburgh.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Concord crossed with Trentham
Black; from Ricketts. Mitzky in 1893 says: "Bunch and berry of the
largest size, bunch heavily shouldered; berries large, black, with
bluish-gray bloom; flesh tender, juicy with peculiar flavor; very
vigorous, a fine amateur grape."

=Newburgh Muscat.= (Lab. Vin.) _Culberts No. 3; White Moline; White
Muscat of Newburgh._ From Dr. W. A. M. Culbert of Newburgh, New York, in
1877; a seedling of Hartford crossed with Iona; exhibited before the
American Pomological Society in 1877. Vigorous and hardy, unproductive;
flowers sterile; stamens reflexed; clusters medium, short, often
single-shouldered, loose; berries medium, roundish, pale
yellowish-green, gray bloom, shatter badly; skin thick, tender; flesh
soft and tender, musky, sweet, mild; good.

=New Haven.= (Lab.) _New Haven Red._ A seedling of Concord; from J.
Valle of New Haven, Missouri. Vigorous, thrifty, hardy, productive;
stamens upright; bunches medium, variable in compactness, sometimes
shouldered; berries large, black with blue bloom; skin thin and tender;
pulp tender, juicy, good; ripens about a week before Concord.

=Newman.= (Linc. Vin. Lab.) A cross between Big Berry and Triumph; from
Munson, introduced in 1894. Vigorous, hardy, productive; stamens erect;
bunches large, loose; berry large, black, with thin tough skin; pulp
tender, juicy, nearly sweet; good; late.

=New Mary.= (Lab. Vin.) Mitzky, 1893, says this is "Lindley under a new
name."

=Newport.= (Bourq.) A seedling of Herbemont; resembles its parent.

=Newton.= A large, showy grape bought from an agent by Stephen H.
Shallcross, Louisville, Kentucky, and exhibited at the Mississippi
Valley Horticultural Society meeting at St. Louis in 1881.

=Newtonia.= (Linc. Rup. Lab. Vin.) A seedling of America pollinated by
R. W. Munson; from Munson, in 1897. Cluster large; berry medium, black;
self-fertile; ripens early.

=Nimalba.= (Linc. Bourq.) From Texas. Tested by Georgia Experiment
Station and described as follows: Very weak, light yielder; stamens
upright; bunch small, compact; berry small, white; good; ripens with
Catawba.

=Nina.= (Lab. Vin.) Mitzky, 1893, says this is "a seedling of Diana,
raised by C. H. Woodruff, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Vine very hardy and
productive; bunch medium to large; berries medium, dark red, very sweet
and good quality; ripens early with Champion and Moore Early, in quality
better than either."

=Ninekah.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delago crossed with
Brilliant; from Munson, in 1899. Cluster medium; berry large, red;
self-fertile; ripens mid-season.

=Nizola.= Noted by Cole in 1849. From Col. L. Chase, Cornish, New
Hampshire; medium bunch and berry; vinous and excellent.

=Nonantum.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling raised by Francis Dana near Boston,
Massachusetts; exhibited before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society
in 1864. Vigorous; bunch small, shouldered; berries medium, oval,
entirely free from pulp; good; in appearance very much like Isabella and
probably a seedling of that variety.

=Nonpareil.= (Linc. Vin. Lab. Bourq.) A seedling of Early Purple crossed
with Brilliant; from Munson, in 1896. Cluster medium; berry large, red;
self-fertile; ripens early.

=Nora.= (Bicolor, Vin.?) Received for testing at this Station in 1902
from Dr. G. L. Tinker, New Philadelphia, Ohio. Lacks vigor; tendrils
intermittent; buds apparently tender. Has not fruited.

=North America.= (Lab. Rip.?) Noted frequently since 1860; said to be a
seedling of Franklin. Vigorous, hardy, healthy, unproductive; bunch
small, shouldered; berries round, black; juicy, sweet, foxy; early.

=North Carolina.= (Lab. Vin.) _North Carolina Seedling._ From J. B.
Garber, Columbia, Pennsylvania. Very vigorous, hardy, healthy, very
productive; stamens erect; bunches medium to large, generally
shouldered, compact; berries large, oblong, black with slight blue
bloom; skin very thick; pulpy, sweet; good; ripens a few days after
Hartford.

=North Carolina White.= Noted by Prince in 1830. From North Carolina and
different from Scuppernong; white berries of good flavor.

=Northern Light.= (Lab.) A chance seedling from John D. Cameron,
L'Original, Ontario, about 1880. Vigorous, hardy, productive; leaf
thick, leathery; bunch long, cylindrical, compact, sometimes shouldered;
berries large, round, greenish-white with thin whitish bloom; pulp
juicy, melting, sweet, vinous; good; ripens a little later than
Champion.

=Northern Muscat.= Mentioned in _Rhode Island Station Bulletin No. 6_,
1890, as being a new variety received from Ohio for testing; bunch
medium or above; berry medium, amber color; good.

=North Star.= Noted in the _Wisconsin Horticultural Society Report_,
1886, as a seedling from Waupaca County, Wisconsin. A black grape with
long clusters; poor quality.

=Obed.= Noted by Mitzky, 1893, as "a chance seedling grown by Obed
Harrell, Chrisman, Illinois. Cluster medium to large, moderately
compact; berry medium, round, whitish-green with delicate bloom;
vigorous and productive."

=Oberon.= (Vin. Lab.) From G. W. Campbell about 1880; a cross between
Concord and Muscat Hamburg. Moderately vigorous, productive, not hardy;
bunch large; berry large, black, resembles Muscat Hamburg; good.

=Occidental.= (Lab. Vin.) Produced by N. B. White from a cross between a
wild Labrusca and Black Hamburg. Clusters compact with dark red berries.

=Octavia.= (Linc. Vin. Lab. Bourq.) A seedling of Early Purple crossed
with Brilliant; from Munson, in 1896. Cluster large; berry large, red;
self-sterile; ripens mid-season.

=Offer.= (Lab.) Warder in 1867, says of this variety: "Bunch large;
berry large, dark red, sweet, musky; not approved."

=Ohio Claret.= A native variety under test by the United States
Department of Agriculture in 1863.

=Oktaha.= (Champ. Vin. Lab. Bourq.?) A seedling of _Vitis champini_
pollinated with Brilliant or Delaware; from Munson and introduced in
1898. Moderately vigorous, healthy, productive; cluster medium,
cylindrical, shouldered, compact; berries medium, round, black with
little bloom; skin thin, tough; pulp melting, juicy, sprightly, good;
early.

=Old Ford.= (Lab.) Noted by Mitzky in 1893 as a wild grape from the
mountains of North Carolina. Remarkably healthy and vigorous,
productive; bunches medium; berries large, round, dark wine color;
pulpy, juicy, sweet; very early.

=Old Gold.= (Rip. Lab. Vin.) _Munson's No. 29._ Elvira crossed with
Brighton; from Munson. Tested by Virginia Experiment Station and
discarded; not introduced by the originator.

=Old Hundred.= (Cin. Aest.?) Mitzky, in 1893, says of this variety:
"Introduced by J. A. Francis, Salem, Virginia. Bunch medium, not very
compact; about the size of Clinton; black; very prolific; good table and
wine grape; contains Cinerea blood in large quantity with probably
Aestivalis."

=Olita.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delaware fertilized by Irving;
from Munson in 1898. Moderately vigorous, not hardy, moderately
productive, somewhat subject to attacks of mildew; flowers semi-fertile;
stamens upright; clusters variable in size, long, nearly cylindrical,
single-shouldered, variable in compactness; berries medium, round,
yellowish-green, often with slight amber tinge, gray bloom; skin thin;
somewhat tough; flesh tender and melting; mild, slightly vinous, nearly
sweet; fair; ripens about with Concord; of the Delaware type but
inferior to that variety in both fruit and vine characters.

=Olitatoo.= (Vin. Lab. Linc.) A seedling of Armlong crossed with
Excelsior; from Munson in 1896. Cluster very large; berry medium, white;
self-fertile; ripens very late.

=Olmstead.= (Lab.) A fox grape mentioned by Nicholas Longworth in
Buchanan's _Culture of the Grape_, 1852.

=Olympia.= From William M. Marine about 1870. Bunch and berry medium,
round, black.

=Omega.= (Lab. Vin.?) From John Burr, Leavenworth, Kansas. Moderately
vigorous, hardy, healthy, not productive; clusters medium to small,
short, usually shouldered, compact; berries medium, oblate to roundish,
dull red with thin gray bloom, persistent, soft; flesh green, tender,
juicy, sweet, sprightly; good; ripens about with Concord; self-sterile.

=Omega.= Noted in the _Record of Horticulture_, 1868, as "a new variety
from the West, resembling Catawba but said to be better." Possibly the
same as the preceding.

=Onderdonk.= (Bourq. Lab.? Vin.?) Said to be a pure seedling of
Herbemont but also given as Herbemont crossed with Irving; from Munson,
about 1890. Very vigorous, hardy, very productive; affected some with
soft rot; stamens upright; clusters large, conical, compact; berries
small, white, translucent, with scattering dots; skin thin, tough; pulp
juicy, sweet, sprightly; very good; makes excellent white wine.

=Oneovem.= (Rip. Bourq. Lab.) A seedling from Munson in 1897; from One
Seed fertilized by Rommel. Cluster medium; berry large, white; stamens
reflexed; ripens late.

=One Seed.= (Rip. Bourq. Lab.) A variety produced by Munson from Elvira
crossed with Humboldt; used by him as a parent in some of his breeding
work.

=Onondaga.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of a cross between Diana and
Delaware; from Lewis Hueber, Fayetteville, Onondaga County, New York;
exhibited at the American Institute Fair in 1865. Hardy, vigorous and
prolific; bunches large, compact; berries medium, amber color with thick
skin; pulp sweet, rich, fine flavored; ripens with Delaware.

=Ontario.= (Lab.) A very large black grape, probably identical with
Union Village.

=Onyx.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) Parentage, Delago crossed with Golden Gem;
from Munson in 1899. Cluster medium; berry medium, dark red; stamens
erect; ripens early.

=Opal.= (Lab. Vin.) A white seedling of Lindley crossed with Martha;
from Munson, introduced about 1892. Lacks vigor; hardy, not productive
at this Station; self-fertile; bunch medium to large, shouldered,
compact; berries medium, nearly round, yellowish-white with thin white
bloom; skin thin, tough; pulp tough, not readily releasing seed, juicy,
sweet, sprightly, vinous with little or no foxy flavor; good; ripens
with Niagara.

=Oriole.= (Linc. Bourq.) A seedling of Post-oak crossed with Devereaux;
from Munson. Vigorous and productive; stamens erect; bunch medium to
large, cylindrical, shouldered, moderately compact; berries small,
black, with thin, tough skin; pulp tender, sweet; best quality; very
late.

=Orphan Boy.= (Vin. Lab. Bourq.) Noted by Mitzky, 1893, as from J. H.
Dawson, Weatherford, Texas, and as a cross between Delaware and Wilder.
Bunch medium, shouldered; berry large, black with fine bloom; quality
much like Delaware; ripens a little after Delaware.

=Orwigsburg.= (Lab. Vin.) _Black Palestine; Schuylkill._ Found growing
near Orwigsburg, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, by Dr. W. E. Hulings
of Philadelphia. Generally supposed to be a hybrid between a Vinifera
and some native species, probably Labrusca; said to be productive,
hardy, subject to mildew; berries round, small, white; juicy, sweet;
good.

=Osage.= (Lab. Vin.) A black seedling of Concord; from John Burr, of
Kansas. Vigorous, usually hardy and healthy, medium to very productive;
flowers sterile; stamens reflexed; tendrils continuous; clusters
variable in size, usually short, shouldered, compact; berries large,
distinctly flattened to sometimes roundish; dull black with blue bloom,
shatter badly, not firm; flesh tough, foxy, sweet, good; of Concord type
but less foxy; a week earlier than its parent.

=Osceola.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Standard; from Dr. J.
Stayman. Vigorous, very hardy, healthy and productive; stamens upright;
bunch medium to large, compact; berry large, white; skin thin, tough;
pulp tender, sweet, rich, sprightly, vinous; very good; ripens with
Jewel.

=Osee.= (Rip. Lab.) A white Riparia from John Burr, Leavenworth, Kansas;
said to be a seedling of Grein Golden. Variable in vigor, very
productive, hardy; bunch medium, short and thick, compact; berry white,
very large; tender, very juicy, sprightly, sweet with a peculiar flavor;
good only for wine; ripens before Concord.

=Oskaloosa.= (Bourq. Lab.) A Delaware seedling; from Dr. J. Stayman.
Vigorous, hardy, healthy and productive; bunch medium, compact; berry
large, black with bloom; skin thick, tough; pulp tender, rich, sweet,
sprightly, juicy, vinous; very good; very late.

=Osmond.= (Rip.) Noted by Downing, 1869, as a seedling of Franklin from
O. T. Hobbs, Randolph, Pennsylvania. Bunch small; berry small, round,
black, blue bloom; flesh vinous, harsh.

=Oswego.= (Lab.) Noted in _Bushberg Catalogue_, 1894; origin unknown,
from Dr. J. Stayman of Leavenworth, Kansas. Vigorous, hardy and
productive; bunch and berry very large, handsome, resembling Concord in
color; little pulp and with native aroma; ripens with Concord.

=Otoe.= Mentioned in the _United States Department of Agriculture
Report_, 1863, as one of the varieties under trial in the government
experimental garden.

=Ouachita.= (Aest.) A wild grape found on the plantation of Dr. G. W.
Lawrence near Midland on the Ouachita River, Hot Springs County,
Arkansas. Hardy and productive with long, compact bunches; one time
popular in France for wine-making.

=Owego.= From John Burr. Vigorous, hardy, healthy and productive;
bunches medium, compact; berry very large, red; tender, juicy, sprightly
and vinous; best quality.

=Owens White.= (Lab.) Noted by Prince in 1830 as from Wm. Owens of
Virginia. A large-fruited, white Labrusca.

=Owosso.= (Lab. Vin.) A chance seedling from C. H. Goodhue, Owosso,
Michigan; supposed to be from Catawba. Very vigorous, hardy, productive;
self-sterile; bunches medium to large, round, shouldered, compact;
berries large, round, dark amber with slight lilac bloom; pulp tough,
sweet, vinous; quality not high; ripens with Delaware.

=Ozark Seedling.= Among the worthless sorts listed by Prince in
_Gardener's Monthly, 1863_.

=Pagan.= Noted by Mitzky, in 1893, as on trial.

=Palermo.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delago crossed with
Brilliant; from Munson, fruited in 1899. Intermediate in vigor, hardy,
not a heavy bearer; tendrils usually intermittent; foliage medium to
large, light green, pubescent; flowers semi-fertile; stamens upright;
clusters medium to below in size and length, often single-shouldered,
compact; berries average size, roundish, yellowish-green with tinge of
amber, covered with thin gray bloom, adherent, firm; skin thick, tough;
flesh green with tinge of yellow, tender and nearly melting, vinous,
sweet from skin to center, agreeable flavor; very good.

=Palmer.= (Lab.) From a Mrs. Millington, of New York, about 1890.
Vigorous, hardy; cluster large; berry large, round, black; pulp soft,
sweet; very good.

=Palmetto.= (Bourq.) From David Johnson, Union, South Carolina.
Resembles Herbemont very closely in form, size of cluster and berry but
is distinct. Berry dark red, heavy light blue bloom; flesh soft, juicy,
sweet, aromatic, vinous.

=Pamlico.= (Rot.) Noted in the _United States Department of Agriculture
Report_ in 1871 as a Rotundifolia with must having a saccharine strength
of 80 deg..

=Paradox.= (Lab. Vin.) _Seedling No. 502._ A seedling of Hartford
crossed with Iona; from Ricketts. Vine variable in vigor, not always
hardy, an uncertain bearer; tendrils continuous; foliage healthy, large
to medium; flowers semi-fertile, bloom medium late; stamens upright;
fruit ripens about with Concord or earlier, does not keep well; clusters
large, of medium length, broad, compact; berries medium, roundish,
purplish-black, glossy, covered with heavy blue bloom, drop considerably
from pedicel, firm; skin thin to medium, often rather tender,
astringent; flesh nearly tough, stringy, somewhat vinous; good in
quality.

=Paragon.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Telegraph crossed with Black
Hamburg; from Chas. J. Copley, Stapleton, New York, years ago. Moderate
vigor; leaves dark green, three- to five-lobed; cluster large, compact;
berries large, black; quality very good; good keeper; rots some.

=Paragon.= (Lab.) _Burr's No. 15._ From John Burr, Leavenworth, Kansas.
Lacks vigor; tendrils intermittent; flowers nearly fertile; stamens
upright; season between Worden and Concord; keeps well; clusters not
uniform, short, compact; berries medium, roundish, black, glossy,
covered with abundant blue bloom, persistent; skin varies in toughness,
tender, not astringent; flesh moderately tender, stringy and foxy,
nearly sweet at skin to acid at center; good, equal to Concord.

=Parker Rocky Mountain Seedling.= Noted in a list of native grapes under
test in the experimental vineyards of the Department of Agriculture in
1860.

=Pattison.= (Lab.?) Given in a list of earliest ripening varieties in
the report of the Canada Central Experimental Farms for 1905.

=Pauline.= (Bourq.) _Burgundy of Georgia; Red Lenoir._ A Southern grape
valuable only for wine; grown rather extensively fifty years ago. Not
vigorous; leaves more downy than Devereaux; cluster large, long,
tapering, shouldered, compact; berries below medium, copper color or
violet, lilac bloom; brisk, sweet, vinous.

=Paultne.= Described by Wm. Falconer, Glen Cove, New York, in _Country
Gentleman_ in 1884. Cluster medium, loose; berries greenish, unequal,
not over medium; foliage healthy.

=Pawnee.= (Aest. Lab.) From Dr. J. Stayman, Leavenworth, Kansas. Medium
in vigor, productive; stamens upright; cluster large, double-shouldered,
compact; berry above medium; skin thin, tough, black; pulp tender,
meaty, not juicy, sprightly, rich, vinous, sweet, peculiar flavor
resembling Ozark; quality medium.

=Paxton.= (Lab.) A Concord seedling; from F. F. Merceron, Catawissa,
Pennsylvania; fruited in 1863. Said to be as hardy and productive as the
Concord, which it much resembles; large bunch and berry; quality given
by originator as better than Concord.

=Pearl.= (Rip. Lab.) _Rommel's Taylor Seedling No. 10._ From Jacob
Rommel, of Morrison, Missouri. Very vigorous, hardy, variable in
productiveness; tendrils continuous, bifid to trifid; leaves large,
light green; lower surface pale green, pubescent; flowers semi-fertile,
open early; stamens upright; fruit ripens with Concord or later;
clusters intermediate in size, short, slender, usually with a small
single shoulder, compact; berries small, roundish, very light green,
often with amber or yellow tinge, covered with thin gray bloom, shatter
badly; skin variable in thickness and toughness; flesh moderately juicy,
tender and vinous, sweet from skin to center; fair in quality. The vine
is peculiar in having very hairy petioles and nearly glabrous shoots.

=Pedee.= (Rot.) Discovered on Pedee River, South Carolina, over thirty
years ago. Vigorous; stamens reflexed; cluster very small, loose,
irregular; berry very large, black; medium in quality; ripens a month
after Scuppernong.

=Peerless.= (Lab. Vin.) A hybrid between Hartford and Muscat Hamburg;
from Geo. W. Campbell, Delaware, Ohio. Productive; cluster long,
slightly shouldered, rather loose; berry green, large, adherent; skin
thin, tough; seeds two to four; pulp quite large, firm, separating
easily from seeds, juicy; excellent quality.

=Peggy.= (Lab.) In 1869, R. W. Gandy, Troy, Iowa, described Peggy as
hardy and healthy; berry size of Isabella and equal to Delaware in
flavor; ripens five days before Hartford. In 1876, John Balsiger, of
Highland, Madison County, Illinois, said of it: "A very foxy, small and
valueless grape."

=Pell's Illinois.= (Rip.?) Found wild in prairies of Illinois and sent
to Prince by G. T. Pell, of Illinois, about 1830.

=Peola.= (Lab. Vin.) From John Burr, Leavenworth, Kansas, about 1890.
Vigorous, hardy, healthy and productive; free from rot and mildew; berry
medium, black, with some bloom; skin thin, tough; pulp tender, juicy,
sweet, sprightly, vinous; very good; ripens about with Concord.

=Perfume.= Named by a General Jones previous to 1830. The original vine
grew on a small island in the Roanoke River a few miles above the Great
Falls, in North Carolina. A. J. Davie, describing it in the _American
Farmer_ gives the color as purple; berry one-third larger than common
grape of woods, slightly elongated; fine flavor.

=Perry.= (Linc. Bourq.) Parentage, Post-oak No. 2 fertilized with
Herbemont; from Munson. Very vigorous, healthy, very productive; cluster
large, slender, compact; berry small to medium, purple; skin thin,
tough; pulp melting, juicy, good; season two weeks later than Concord.

=Peter Wylie.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) _Peter Wylie No. 1._ Parents, Halifax
crossed with a Vinifera, fertilized with Delaware crossed with a
Vinifera; from Dr. A. P. Wylie, of Chester, South Carolina. Vigor and
hardiness medium, inclined to rot in some places, not productive; shoots
smooth; leaves medium to small, shallow three-lobed, glabrous
underneath; stamens upright; cluster medium to large, compact, often
shouldered; berry medium, greenish to greenish-yellow; skin thin,
tender; flesh tender, sweet, vinous, Muscat flavor; quality good; ripens
soon after Concord.

=Pierce.= (Lab. Vin.) _Isabella Regia; Royal Isabella._ A bud-sport from
Isabella, originating about 1882 with Mr. J. P. Pierce, of Santa Clara,
California. Very vigorous, large leaves, prolific; cluster large;
berries very large, black, light bloom, not firm; pulp tender, sweet,
strongly aromatic; good; a valuable grape west of Rocky Mountains.

=Pioneer.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Isabella and very similar to it.

=Piqua.= Mentioned by Buchanan as raised and exhibited by Longworth in
1846.

=Pittsburg Seedling.= (Lab. Vin.) Found growing wild in 1851, by J. S.
Arthur, of Pittsburg, Pennsylvania. Does not yield as well as Delaware,
but earlier, more sprightly and vinous and with less pulp; ripens in
August.

=Pizarro.= (Vin. Rip. Lab.) Parents, a Clinton seedling crossed with a
Vinifera; from J. H. Ricketts, Newburgh, New York. Medium in vigor,
productive; stamens upright; cluster large, loose; berry medium, black,
oblong; juicy, sweet, aromatic; good quality; ripens mid-season.

=Planchette.= (Bourq. Lab. Vin.) Herbemont fertilized by Triumph; from
Munson. Self-fertile; cluster medium; berry white; season late.

=Planet.= (Lab. Vin.) From Ricketts; parents, Concord crossed by Black
Muscat of Alexandria. Healthy and productive; cluster large, loose,
shouldered; berries large, intermixed with smaller ones which have no
seeds, oblong; pulp tender, juicy, sweet; good flavor with slight taste
of Muscat.

=Plymouth.= (Lab.) _Plymouth White._ Noted in the _United States Patent
Office Report_ of 1860 as a native white grape, suitable for culture in
the Northern and Middle States.

=Pocohontas Red.= (Lab.) A worthless variety noted in _Gardener's
Monthly_ for 1863.

=Poeschel Mammoth.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Mammoth Catawba; from
Michael Poeschel, Hermann, Missouri. Healthy; cluster medium, compact,
sometimes shouldered; berry very large, round, red; pulpy, deficient in
flavor; season a week later than Catawba.

=Pollock.= (Lab. Vin.) From a Mr. Pollock, of Tremont, New York,
previous to 1862. A free grower; foliage thick and leathery; free from
mildew; cluster compact, long, large; berry dark purple or black; flesh
tender, vinous, not too sweet.

=Pond's Seedling.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling grown by Samuel Pond of
Massachusetts, previous to 1830. Very vigorous, short-jointed; shy
bearer; cluster long, large; berry round, purple; juicy; good quality.

=Ponroy.= (Doan.) A named wild variety found by Munson in Wilbarger
County, Texas. Stamens reflexed; cluster medium; berry medium, black;
season early.

=Pontotoc.= (Vin. Bourq. Lab.) A cross of Delago fertilized with
Brilliant; from Munson. Stamens reflexed; cluster and berry large, red;
quality as good or better than Brighton; season early.

=Porup.= (Linc. Rup.) A seedling of Post-oak by Rupestris; from Munson.
_Mississippi Station Bulletin No. 56_ says: A late ripening variety;
shatters badly; yield and quality poor.

=Post-oak No. 1.= (Linc.) From Munson, found in 1881. Stamens reflexed;
cluster large; berry medium to small; black; season late.

=Post-oak No. 2.= (Linc.) From Munson, found in 1883. Stamens reflexed;
cluster and berry medium; black; season very late.

=Post-oak No. 3.= (Linc.) Found by Munson in 1883. Stamens reflexed;
cluster and berry black; season very late.

=Potter.= (Lab.) _Potter's Early; Potter's Seedling; Potter's Sweet._
Originated in Providence, Rhode Island about 1881. Vigorous; cluster
compact, medium size, not shouldered; berry large; skin thick, black;
pulp rather tough; season earlier than Concord.

=Prairie State.= (Lab.) From Jacob Christian, Mount Carroll, Illinois,
before 1892. Hardy, productive; cluster large, compact; berries large,
white, fine bloom; skin thin; no pulp, sweet, pleasant flavor; good;
ripens ten days before Concord.

=President.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Herbert; from Munson. Strong,
healthy, prolific; flower perfect; cluster medium, compact; berry large,
black, persistent, does not crack; quality better than Concord; ripens
with Moore Early.

=Presly.= (Lab. Rip.) _Lyon; President Lyon._ A seedling of Elvira
crossed with Champion; from Munson, the name changed by him from
President Lyon to Presly. Vigorous, hardy, produces good crops; tendrils
continuous; flowers nearly fertile; stamens upright; fruit ripens the
last of August; clusters medium, slender, cylindrical, frequently
single-shouldered, loose; berries small, roundish, purplish-red, heavy
blue bloom, persistent; skin medium, tender, adheres strongly to pulp;
flesh dull green, juicy, tender, foxy, mild, sweet from skin to center;
good quality.

=Primate.= (Lab. Bourq.?) Originated by John Burr, Leavenworth, Kansas,
from mixed seed. Vigorous, hardy, healthy, productive; cluster long,
compact, handsome; berry medium or above, red, firm; pulp tender, juicy,
rich, vinous; quality very good; season a little after Concord.

=Professor Brunk.= Vigorous, healthy; cluster medium size, ragged;
ripens unevenly; very late. Reported upon at Mississippi Experiment
Station in 1899.

=Professor Gulley.= According to _Mississippi Station Bulletin No. 56_,
1899, vine and fruit resemble those of Concord and fruit ripens
irregularly about the same time. Yield not so large, more subject to
rot.

=Professor Hilgard.= (Linc. Bourq.) Parents, Post-oak crossed with
Herbemont; from Munson. Cluster large, shouldered, compact; berry
medium, purple; juicy, sweet and sprightly; medium to late.

=Profitable.= (Lab. Rip.) A seedling of Elvira fertilized by Perkins;
from Munson. Vigorous and productive, hardy; stamens upright, perfectly
self-fertile; cluster medium to large, long, medium compact, shouldered;
berry medium size, round, inclined to oblong, pale greenish-red; skin
rather thin, tender; pulp tender, sweet, juicy; flavor pleasant and
agreeable; season about with Concord.

=Profusion.= (Linc. Lab.) Ten-Dollar-Prize fertilized by Worden; from
Munson, 1889. Very vigorous; stamens upright; cluster large, compact;
berry small, black, adheres well; quality good; later than Concord in
Texas.

=Progress.= (Lab. Vin.) Thought to be a hardy native Labrusca by Black
Hamburg cross; from A. F. Rice, of South Weymouth, Massachusetts,
previous to 1883. Good grower; cluster medium size, shouldered; berries
large, dark red; skin thick, rather tender; quite pulpy, juicy, not high
flavored; quality fair.

=Progress.= (Lab. Vin.) From John Burr, Leavenworth, Kansas, previous to
1885. Very vigorous, healthy, hardy; cluster large, compact, shouldered;
berry large, medium, black, fine bloom; pulp tender, juicy, rich,
vinous; quality best; season a little later than Concord.

=Prolific.= (Lab.) From Dr. Stayman about 1880. Vigorous, productive;
clusters large, double-shouldered, compact, hang well on vine; berry
large, black; season soon after Jewel.

=Prolific Chicken Grape.= (Rip.?) A wild grape from Goochland County,
Virginia; mentioned by Prince in 1830. Very productive; flavor pleasant;
ripens in August in Virginia.

=Provost White.= (Lab.) Noted by Strong in 1866 as a common wild variety
of little value.

=Prunella.= (Vin. Lab.) A seedling from M. Vibert, of France, produced
by crossing a Vinifera with Isabella, about 1842. Resembles Wilder very
closely.

=Pukwana.= (Mont. Rup.) A seedling of _Vitis monticola_ crossed with
Rupestris; from Munson. Stamens reflexed; blooms mid-season; cluster
small; berry small, black.

=Pulaski.= (Lab. Vin. Aest.?) From John Burr, Leavenworth, Kansas. Vine
vigorous, hardy, medium to productive; canes long; tendrils continuous
to sometimes intermittent; foliage large to medium; flowers nearly
fertile; stamens reflexed; keeps well; clusters small, inclined to
short, often with a small single shoulder, compact; berries intermediate
in size, roundish, dark purplish-black covered with blue bloom; skin
thin, tender, adheres to pulp; flesh greenish, tender, sweet; good to
very good in quality.

=Pulliat.= (Bourq. Vin.) A seedling of Herbemont; from M. Pulliat, of
France; received at this Station in 1896. Vigorous, not hardy, very
productive; foliage shows Vinifera, mildews; tendrils intermittent;
stamens upright; clusters large, compact, shouldered; berries small,
round, black; pulp tender, moderately juicy, of good flavor; ripens
about ten days later than Herbemont.

=Pulpless.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Salem; from C. Engle, Paw Paw,
Michigan. Vigorous, productive; stamens upright; cluster large,
shouldered, medium in compactness; berry large, black, oval; vinous,
rich; quality very good; ripens with Concord.

=Purity.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A cross between Delaware and some native
variety; from G. W. Campbell, about 1870. A white grape of the Delaware
type but a stronger, healthier grower; foliage larger and thicker;
bunches smaller than Delaware; berries larger; sweet, of very fine
quality; ripens very early; difficult to propagate.

=Purple Bloom.= (Lab. Vin.) _Culbert's Seedling No. 6._ A seedling of
Hartford and General Marmora; from Dr. W. A. M. Culbert, Newburgh, New
York, exhibited before the American Pomological Society in 1877.
Vigorous, hardy, productive; bunches large, showy; berries above medium,
purple, of good quality.

=Purple Favorite.= (Aest.) Discarded as a worthless variety by United
States Department of Agriculture in 1864.

=Purple Marion.= _Mottier._ Noted by W. R. Prince in _Gardener's
Monthly_ for 1863.

=Putnam.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) _Ricketts' Delaware Seedling No. 2._ A
cross between Delaware and Concord; from J. H. Ricketts, Newburgh, New
York, previous to 1871. Vine resembles Concord more than Delaware;
tendrils intermittent; clusters medium, moderately compact, usually
single-shouldered; berries medium, oval, black, persistent; pulp tender,
sweet, good; ripens early.

=Quassaic.= (Vin. Rip. Lab.) A cross between Clinton and Muscat Hamburg;
from Ricketts of Newburgh, about 1870. Usually vigorous, productive;
stamens upright; bunch large, shouldered, sometimes double-shouldered,
moderately compact; berries large, roundish-oval, black with heavy blue
bloom; skin thin, tough; pulp tender, juicy, sweet, slightly vinous,
rich, aromatic; good; ripens soon after Concord.

=Queen of Sheba.= Sent out from Connecticut about 1869 as a promising
variety but proved to be Diana.

=Quinnebang.= Pronounced worthless by Prince in 1863.

=Quintina.= (Linc. Bourq.) A seedling of Early Purple crossed with
Jaeger; from Munson in 1897. Cluster large; berry medium, black; stamens
erect; ripens late.

=Raabe.= (Lab. Vin.) _Honey; Raabe's Honey; Raabe's No. 3._ Raised by
Peter Raabe of Philadelphia about 1850; supposed to be a Catawba
seedling but some say it is a cross between Elsinburgh and Bland.
Vigorous, hardy, healthy, prolific; foliage much like Catawba; bunches
small, compact, rarely shouldered; berries small, round, dark
purplish-red, heavy bloom; pulp sugary, very juicy, vinous with Catawba
aroma; very good; early.

=Raabe's Seedlings.= Peter Raabe, of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, years
ago originated several varieties of pure Vinifera seedlings. The best
known of these were Brinckle and Emily. They were unfit for outdoor
culture and are now long obsolete. Raabe originated native varieties as
well as the above mentioned Vinifera sorts.

=Rachel.= Exhibited at the grape show in New York in 1867 from the
vineyard of Rev. J. Knox, Pittsburg, Pennsylvania. Healthy and vigorous;
bunch and berry medium, white; early.

=Racine.= (Linc.) According to _Bushberg Catalogue_, 1883, "of similar
origin as Neosho and at first supposed to be the same grape but
afterwards recognized as distinct." Hardy, healthy, not very productive;
small pulpy berries of poor quality.

=Ragan.= (Linc. Lab. Vin.) _Reagan._ A seedling of Post-oak crossed with
Triumph; from Munson about 1892. Vigorous and fairly productive; stamens
upright; clusters large, conical, sometimes shouldered, compact; berries
medium, roundish, a little flattened; skin moderately thick, tough,
shiny black with blue bloom; pulp rather tender, juicy, some trace of
Post-oak flavor; fair to good.

=Raisin.= Noted in the _Illinois Horticultural Society Report_ for 1897.
Very productive; a medium-sized bunch with small, black berries of fair
quality.

=Raisin de Cote.= According to Prince 1830, this is a native of
Louisiana of which there are two varieties, the more common one being
dark blue, round with thick skin, somewhat pulpy, extremely sweet and
not musky.

=Ramsey.= (Champ.) One of Munson's, a variety of _Vitis champini_ found
in San Saba County, Texas. Cluster small; berry medium, black; ripens
early; self-sterile.

=Randall.= Received at this Station in 1893 from Peter Henderson and
Company, New York, as a cutting of a seed sport originating in the
garden of a Mr. Randall, Bayonne, New Jersey. It proved to be very
similar if not identical with Agawam.

=Raritan.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) _Ricketts' Delaware Seedling No. 1._ A
seedling of Delaware crossed with Concord, from J. H. Ricketts.
Moderately vigorous, doubtfully hardy; foliage much like Delaware; quite
productive; bunch medium, shouldered, resembles Delaware; berry medium,
round, black; flesh juicy, sweet, vinous; ripens about with Delaware.

=Rautenberg's Seedlings.= F. E. L. Rautenberg, of Lincoln, Illinois, has
originated many varieties of grapes. His varieties were raised from seed
of various standard varieties and are most of them second generation
hybrids. His best known sorts are: Amalia, Black Rose, Bismarck,
Chicago, Clarissa, Cleopatra, Hatton and Moltke.

=Read Seedling.= From M. A. Read, Port Dalhousie, Ontario; awarded the
first premium at the Industrial Fair, Toronto, 1895, as the best
seedling grape. Described by the originator as vigorous with heavy
foliage similar to Concord, very productive; bunch large, well
shouldered, very compact; berry of fair size, firm, black; good; early.

=Red Bird.= (Lab. Vin.) _Munson's No. 33._ A cross between Lindley and
Champion; from Munson, about 1888. Vigorous, hardy except in severe
winters, variable in productiveness; tendrils continuous; flowers
sterile; stamens reflexed; clusters medium, usually shouldered, variable
in compactness; berries medium, roundish, dull dark red with heavy blue
bloom; skin thick, tough; pulp tough, sweet, juicy, decidedly foxy;
good.

=Red Giant.= (Lab.) From Pennsylvania, about 1898. Vigorous, healthy,
prolific; sterile; bunch medium, compact; berry very large; skin thick
and tough, dark red; pulp tender, sweet, foxy; similar to Columbian
Imperial.

=Red Jacket.= From William M. Marine. A medium-sized bunch with large
oval berries of the Isabella type.

=Red Juice.= Mentioned by Adlum in 1823. Said to make a claret wine.

=Red Leaf.= (Rup.) A wild Rupestris found in Missouri and used by
Munson. Cluster very small; berry small, black; stamens reflexed; ripens
early.

=Red Riesling.= Introduced by the Hermann Grape Nurseries, Hermann,
Missouri. Described as being hardy and free from rot; bunches medium;
berries dark red, large.

=Red Rover.= (Lab. Vin.) Found growing in the vineyard of C. W. Seelye
at Vine Valley, on Canandaigua Lake, New York. Vigorous, healthy, fairly
productive; clusters large, shouldered, moderately compact; berries
medium, round, resemble Brighton in size and color; skin moderately
thick and tough; pulp tender, sweet, vinous, juicy, agreeable flavor;
good; ripens two weeks later than Brighton and is a better keeper but
not so high in quality.

=Red Sheperd.= (Rip. Lab.) Disseminated by a Mr. Estell of Rush County,
Indiana. Very vigorous, resembles Taylor; bunches small and compact;
berries small, round, red; sweet, very foxy.

=Red Sweet Water.= (Vin. Lab.) A seedling exhibited at the Ohio State
Fair, 1876, from Dr. Clark of Lebanon; said to be of southern origin and
of the Catawba type.

=Regina.= Listed among the grapes on trial in the government
experimental garden in 1863.

=Reinecke.= (Lab.) From F. E. L. Rautenberg of Lincoln, Illinois. A
seedling of Woodruff and, according to _Bushberg Catalogue_, 1894, not
sufficiently distinct to be disseminated as a different variety.

=Reinike.= (Rip. Lab.) Noted in the _Wisconsin Horticultural Society
Report_, 1871, as a vigorous, hardy grape resembling Clinton but with a
less compact bunch.

=Reliance.= (Vin. Bourq. Lab.) Exhibited by J. G. Burrows, Fishkill, New
York, before the American Pomological Society in 1881; a probable cross
between Delaware and Iona. Vigorous, hardy and very productive; bunch
resembles Delaware in size but not so compact; berry medium, light red;
tender, juicy, sweet; ripens with Delaware.

=Rentz.= (Lab. Vin.) _Rentz Seedling; Riatz._ A Catawba seedling; from
Sebastion Rentz, of Cincinnati. Vigorous, healthy, hardy, very
productive; stamens upright; bunch medium, compact, usually shouldered;
berries large, round, black, shatter badly; pulp firm, sweet, juicy,
foxy; early.

=Rhenish.= Noted in the _United States Patent Office Report_, 1849-50,
as being "an excellent variety", grown in Illinois; supposed to be of
European origin, though doubtful.

=Richmond.= Mentioned in the _United States Department of Agriculture
Report_, 1875, as being a very early southern grape.

=Riehl's Seedlings.= Seedlings originated by E. H. Riehl, of Alton,
Illinois. Those tested at this Station all show unmistakable traces of
Concord blood and are presumably seedlings of that variety. The most
promising of these is Eclipse, for a description of which see page 254.
With the exception of Eclipse, none of his seedlings has been named or
introduced.

=Riesenblatt.= (Aest.) _Giant Leaf._ A chance seedling found growing in
the vineyard of M. Poeschel at Hermann, Missouri. Hardy, healthy,
productive; with a very large leaf; bunch and berries small.

=Roanoke Red.= (Cord. Lab. Vin.) From Texas, previous to 1900. Very
vigorous; stamens upright; bunch medium, moderately compact; berry
medium, reddish-purple; fair to good; ripens with Pocklington.

=Robert Wylie.= Produced by Dr. A. P. Wylie, Chester, South Carolina.
Described in _Bushberg Catalogue_, 1883, as a great bearer but not quite
hardy; bunch large and long; berry large, blue; skin thin; rich and
juicy; ripens as late as Catawba.

=Robeson.= From a Mr. Robeson, of South Texas. Resembles Devereaux;
probably a seedling of that variety but inferior to it in every respect.

=Robeson Seedling.= According to the _Bushberg Catalogue_, 1894,
identical with Louisiana. Probably the same as Robeson.

=Robinson Unnamed Seedling.= (Lab.) Given in _Bushberg Catalogue_, 1894,
as an accidental seedling found by Mrs. E. Mason, Lamont, Michigan, in
1881. Moderate grower with Labrusca foliage; bunch medium, round,
reddish-amber with thin whitish bloom; pulp tender, juicy, vinous,
sprightly, a little foxy, "very good"; ripens with Delaware.

=Robusta.= (Long.) A variety of _Vitis longii_ found in Motley County,
Texas, and used by Munson. Cluster small; berry small; self-sterile;
ripens early.

=Rockingham.= (Lab.) A seedling of Concord; from T. B. Miner, of New
Jersey. Described by Mitzky, 1893, as "hardy, vigorous, productive;
bunch and berry medium, black; quality like Concord."

=Rockland Favorite.= (Lab.) A Concord seedling from Rockland,
Massachusetts, introduced by Ellwanger & Barry as earlier, hardier and
better than its parent. Bunch and berry large, black; sweet, juicy.

=Roenbeck.= (Vin.?) A chance seedling originated on the grounds of Jas.
W. Trask, Bergen Point, New Jersey; first fruited in 1870. Fairly
vigorous, hardy, very productive, with tendency to overbear; clusters
medium, compact, shouldered; berries medium, roundish, slightly
flattened; skin thin, tough, greenish with yellowish tinge, white bloom;
pulp nearly transparent, melting, juicy, sweet, vinous; fair to good.

_Rogers' No. 5._ (Lab. Vin.) One of Rogers' unnamed hybrids; a seedling
of Mammoth Globe crossed with Black Hamburg. Vigorous, not always hardy,
moderately productive; tendrils continuous to intermittent; leaves
large; stamens reflexed; self-sterile; cluster medium size, rather
loose, frequently shouldered; berries large, roundish to oval; skin
thin, tough, dark red to purplish-black; slightly foxy and vinous; good;
ripens with Concord.

_Rogers' No. 13._ (Lab. Vin.) Parentage, Mammoth Globe crossed with
White Chasselas. Vigorous, not always hardy, uncertainly productive;
tendrils continuous to intermittent; stamens upright; self-fertile or
nearly so; clusters medium, rather loose; berries large, roundish to
oblate; skin medium thick, rather tender, dark red to almost black;
flesh tender, foxy, rather sweet, vinous; good; ripens with Concord; not
a good keeper.

_Rogers' No. 24._ (Lab. Vin.) Parents, Mammoth Globe crossed with Black
Hamburg. Vigorous, productive, not always hardy; tendrils continuous to
intermittent; stamens upright; flowers nearly self-fertile; clusters
large, attractive, short, rather broad, variably compact; berries rather
large, roundish to slightly oval, persistent; skin rather thin, rather
tough, medium to light red; flesh somewhat tough, stringy, sweet,
vinous; good; resembles Goethe and of about the same season.

_Rogers' No. 32._ (Lab. Vin.) A cross of Mammoth Globe and Black
Hamburg. Moderately vigorous, usually hardy; tendrils continuous,
sometimes intermittent; stamens upright; flowers partly self-fertile;
cluster medium size, usually shouldered; berries large to medium,
roundish to slightly oblate; skin rather thick and tough, dark red;
flesh slightly tough, sweet, vinous, musky; very good; ripens after
Concord and sometimes unevenly.

=Rombrill.= (Lab. Rip. Vin. Bourq.) A cross of Rommel and Brilliant;
from Munson in 1897. Cluster large; berry large, yellow; medium early;
self-fertile.

=Rosalie.= (Lab.) One of E. W. Bull's seedlings, exhibited by him before
the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1874. Bunch large; berry red;
very foxy; shatters.

=Roscoe.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware crossed with Martha;
from Munson, about 1888. Vigorous, healthy, moderately productive;
clusters resemble Delaware in size and shape; berries medium, nearly
round, white or pale green with white bloom; skin thin, tough; pulp
tough, nearly sweet, sprightly; good; ripens with Delaware;
self-sterile.

=Rose.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delaware fertilized with Iona;
from J. H. Ricketts, about 1873. "Bunch four inches long, compact;
berries three-fourths of an inch in diameter, reddish purple; skin
thick; pulp very tender, sprightly; very good; one of the earliest."

=Roslyn.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Diana crossed with Hartford; from C.
J. Copley, Stapleton, New York, about 1880. Bunch large, shouldered,
very compact; berry large, round, sometimes compressed, purplish with
thin bloom; skin thick; pulp firm, sweet with a strong musky flavor.

=Roswither.= (Lab. Bourq.) A seedling of Jewel; from L. Hencke,
Collinsville, Illinois. Described by Mitzky, in 1893, as very productive
and hardy; bunch and berry medium to large; dark purplish, nearly black;
quality fine; ripens about ten days before Concord.

=Ruby.= (Lab.) A seedling from Geo. Haskell, Ipswich, Massachusetts.
Hardy, variable in vigor; somewhat subject to rot; bunch medium, loose;
berry above medium, round, dark ruby red; very good quality; ripens
about with Hartford; stamens reflexed.

=Ruby.= (Lab. Vin. Rip.) A seedling of Elvira crossed with Brighton;
from Munson, about 1890. Vigorous, healthy, not very hardy; bunches
imperfectly filled, small, shouldered; berry medium, round, dull red
with stripes, resembling Elvira in flavor and texture; ripens about with
Concord.

=Ruckland.= (Lab. Vin.) Grown in Louisiana and said to have been brought
from England. Munson pronounced it a Labrusca-Vinifera hybrid. Very
late; red.

=Rulander.= (Bourq.) _Amoreux; Red Elben; St. Genevieve._ A southern
grape, by some claimed to be a foreign seedling brought to this country
by the early French settlers; probably native. Vigorous, short-jointed,
healthy, not productive nor hardy; stamens upright; bunch medium,
shouldered, very compact; berry small, roundish-oval, purplish-black;
without pulp, juicy, sweet and rich; makes an excellent pale red wine
closely resembling sherry; ripens last of July in the South.

=Rupel.= (Rup. Rip. Lab.) A seedling of Rupestris pollinated by July
Twenty-fifth; from Munson. Cluster small; berry small, black; ripens
early; stamens upright.

=Rupert.= (Linc. Rup. Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A cross between America and
Brilliant; from Munson. Vigorous, not very hardy, variable in
productiveness; stamens upright; clusters medium, slender, usually
shouldered, moderately compact; berries medium, nearly round, dark dull
reddish-black with blue bloom; skin thin, tough; flesh pale green,
tender, melting, somewhat musky, with Post-oak flavor; fair; ripens with
Worden.

=Rustler.= (Lab. Vin.) From Munson, about 1888; a seedling of Lindley
crossed with Martha. Vine vigorous, not always hardy, variable in
productiveness; stamens reflexed; clusters medium, cylindrical, compact,
sometimes shouldered; berries medium, roundish; skin medium thick,
tough, dull light green with gray bloom, covered with scattering russet
dots; pulp pale green, tough, stringy, foxy, sweet, somewhat musky; fair
to good; ripens about with Concord.

=Rusty Coat.= Described by _Mississippi Station Bulletin No. 56_ as
healthy, fair yielder; bunches long, loose and irregular; berries
medium, black; good.

=Rutland.= (Lab. Vin. Aest.) From D. S. Marvin, Watertown, New York,
about thirty years ago; a seedling of Eumelan pollinated by Concord. Of
medium vigor, not very hardy or productive; stamens upright; clusters
medium, shouldered, usually compact; berries small, roundish, inclined
to shatter; skin thin, somewhat tough, dark reddish-black with blue
bloom; flesh tender and nearly melting, vinous, sweet; very good; ripens
about with Worden.

=Saginaw.= Noted in _Michigan Pomological Society Report, 1880_, as a
seedling from G. Wingworth, Saginaw City, Michigan. Vigorous, hardy,
early.

=St. Albans.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Ives crossed with Niagara; from
Jacob P. Bossung, Jefferson County, Kentucky, about 1889. Fair grower,
hardy, healthy; described as a "Black Niagara".

=St. Augustine.= (Aest.?) Noted in _American Pomological Society Report_
for 1877, as a native variety from Florida.

=St. Catherine.= (Lab.) From James W. Clark, Framingham, Massachusetts,
about 1860. Vigorous, hardy, productive; bunches large, rather compact;
berries large, round, red; pulpy, sweet, foxy.

=St. Hilaire.= (Rip.?) From Alexis Dery, St. Hilaire, Quebec, before
1892. Hardy, vigorous; cluster small, rather loose; berry small, black;
pulp tough with a marked acidity.

=St. John.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Brighton pollinated by
Delaware; from Henry B. Spencer, Rocky River, Ohio, about 1890.
Vigorous, healthy, productive; foliage like Delaware; short-jointed;
fruit resembles Brighton; pulp sweet, meaty, tender, vinous; ripens
about with Delaware.

=Salabra.= Described by Georgia Experiment Station in 1901 as weak in
vigor, unproductive; stamens reflexed; bunches irregular, very loose;
berries small, black, of fair quality; ripens with Delaware; perhaps
same as Salado.

=Salado.= (Champ. Lab. Vin.) Seedling of De Grasset crossed with
Brilliant; from Munson. Resistant to drought, vigorous, prolific;
pistillate; adapted to limy and black soils of the South.

=Sally.= (Bourq. Vin. Rip.) A cross between Delaware and Sherman; from
D. S. Marvin, Watertown, New York. Vigorous, healthy; bunch smaller than
Delaware; berry same size, sweeter, white; very early.

=Salt Creek.= (Doan.) A variety of _Vitis doaniana_ found by Munson in
Greer County, Oklahoma; stamens reflexed; small bunch with medium-sized
black berry; early; an excellent graft stock.

=Saluda.= Noted in _United States Patent Office Report_ for 1860 as very
vigorous; blue, large; juicy, somewhat pulpy.

=Salzer Earliest.= (Lab.) From John A. Salzer, La Crosse, Wisconsin, in
1892. Very hardy, prolific; resembles Concord in type but of better
quality; early.

=Samuels.= (Vin.?) A cross between a Vinifera and a native Texas
species; exhibited by Bruni & Brother, Laredo, Texas, at the Columbian
Exposition in 1893. Bunch large, compact, much compounded; berries
medium, white; skin adherent; flavor not high.

=Sanalba.= (Rot. Linc. Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A cross of San Jacinto and
Brilliant; from Munson, about 1906. Said to be very vigorous, prolific;
cluster larger than Scuppernong; berry large, white, rich in sugar,
tender, of good quality; skin thin.

=Sanbornton.= (Lab. Vin.) _Sanborton._ Purchased for an Isabella by Dr.
Carr, of Sanbornton, New Hampshire, in 1826. Said to resemble Isabella
except that it has rounder berries and ripens earlier.

=San Jacinto.= (Rot. Linc.) A seedling of Scuppernong crossed with a
Lincecumii hybrid; from Munson, about 1898. Medium in vigor, prolific,
healthy; stamens reflexed; bunch small, irregular, very loose; berry
large, black, of fair quality; ripens two to three weeks after
Scuppernong.

=Sanmelaska.= (Rot. Linc. Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A hybrid of San Jacinto and
Brilliant; from Munson, about 1906. Said to be very vigorous, prolific;
bunch three times as large as Scuppernong; berry about same size,
sweeter, black.

=Sanmonta.= (Bourq. Rip. Linc.) A seedling of San Jacinto crossed with
Herbemont; from Munson, about 1906. Vigorous, very prolific; bunch above
medium; berry black; very juicy, melting, sprightly; skin thin; seeds
small.

=Sanrubra.= (Rot. Linc. Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A cross between San Jacinto
and Brilliant; from Munson, about 1906. Very vigorous, productive;
cluster medium; berry not quite as large as Scuppernong but more
persistent; melting, sweet, of good quality; skin thin, tough.

=Santa Clara.= (Vin. Lab. Bourq.) A seedling of unknown parentage,
probably Delaware; from J. B. Tuckerman, Cassville, New York, first
fruited in 1900. Lacks vigor; strongly Vinifera in vine characters;
tendrils intermittent; stamens upright; flowers sterile; clusters
usually single-shouldered; berries small, roundish, light green with
thin gray bloom, persistent, rather soft; fair in flavor and quality;
skin nearly thin, tender.

=Saxe White Seedling.= Found in Catskill Mountains by W. H. Saxe,
Palenville, New York, about 1900. Vigorous, hardy, productive; ripens a
little before Early Ohio.

=Schenck White.= Noted in _Grape Culturist, 1871_, as "supposed to have
come from Germany about 1790."

=Schiller.= (Bourq.) A seedling of Louisiana; from Frederick Muench,
Marthasville, Missouri. Vigorous, hardy, healthy, productive; bunch
below medium; berries medium, purplish-blue.

=Schmitz Seedling.= (Lab. Vin.) Noted in _Magazine of Horticulture_ for
1853 as a seedling grape from Gerhard Schmitz, Pennsylvania. Resembles
Isabella closely but may be a little earlier.

=Schoonemunk.= (Lab.) _Skunnymunk._ A native seedling found by W. A.
Woodward, Mortonville, Orange County, New York, about 1860, named after
a neighboring mountain. Said to be hardy, productive; fruit equal in
size and flavor to the Concord; earlier in ripening.

=Scott.= Noted by Prince in 1830 as a native North Carolina grape found
by Gen. John Scott of the same state. Berries medium, round, white,
amber when ripe; juicy, of good flavor; ripen late.

=Secunda.= (Linc. Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Early Purple crossed
with Brilliant; from Munson, about 1896. Stamens reflexed; bunch medium;
berry large, red; early.

=Seedlin.= (Rot.) Noted in _South Carolina Station Bulletin No. 132_,
1907, as medium in vigor, very productive; flowers perfect; bunches
contain three to six reddish-black berries; pulp tender, juicy, slightly
acid, of good quality; skin thick.

=Selma.= (Rip. Lab.) A seedling of Elvira probably crossed with Concord;
from G. Segessman, Amazonia, Missouri; first mentioned about 1890.
Hardy, productive, healthy; bunches large, perfect, shouldered; berry
medium, round, black, adherent; juicy, sprightly, pleasant flavored;
skin thick; ripens a few days after Moore Early.

=Seneca.= (Lab.) A seedling of Hartford; first exhibited at
Hammondsport, New York, in 1867 by R. Simpson, Geneva, New York. Similar
to its parent.

=Seneca.= (Lab. Vin.) From John Burr, Leavenworth, Kansas; mentioned in
_Missouri Horticultural Society Report_ in 1892. Very vigorous, not
quite hardy, healthy, productive; bunch large, compact; berry large,
red, with slight bloom; tender, juicy, sprightly, sweet, of Catawba
flavor; skin thin, tough; ripens after Concord.

=Septimia.= (Linc. Vin. Lab. Bourq.?) From Munson, in 1897; a cross
between Early Purple and Carman. Stamens erect; bunch large with
medium-sized, black berries; late.

=Seward.= A seedling from S. V. Smith, Syracuse, New York; exhibited as
a new variety before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1880.
Bunch medium, compact, frequently shouldered; berry large, round, color
of Catawba; sweet, juicy, rich, not adherent; skin medium thick.

=Shala.= (Linc. Rup. Lab.) A seedling of America crossed with Beacon;
from Munson, in 1899. Vigorous, prolific; stamens upright; clusters
large; berry large, black, tender, juicy, delicious; skin thin, tough;
ripens about with Concord.

=Sharon.= (Lab. Vin.?) A seedling of Adirondac; introduced by D. S.
Marvin, Watertown, New York. Resembles its parent but is sweeter,
hardier, more reliable; ripens at the same time.

=Sharp Beak.= (Rup. Rip. Lab.) From Munson; parents, _Vitis rupestris_
crossed with Elvira. Stamens reflexed; cluster and berry small, black;
early.

=Shelley Seedling.= A seedling from Daniel Shelley, Cumberland County,
Pennsylvania, exhibited in 1879. Fruit medium in size, of Catawba color
and of very good flavor.

=Sheppard Delaware.= (Lab. Vin.) Noted by Downing in 1869 as a seedling
of Catawba from J. N. Sheppard, in 1853. The vine and fruit are similar
in all respects to Delaware.

=Shepperd.= (Lab.) A seedling from E. W. Bull, Concord, Massachusetts;
exhibited in 1874 before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society. Bunch
and berry medium, black, not adherent.

=Sherman.= (Rip.) Resembles Lyman in most characters and by some
considered synonymous. Poor bearer; stamens imperfect; ripens earlier
than Hartford.

=Sheruah.= (Linc. Rup. Lab. Vin.) A seedling of America fertilized by R.
W. Munson; from Munson, in 1899. Described by originator as "vigorous
and prolific; cluster very large; berry large, black and handsome; skin
thin and tough; pulp tender, juicy, delicious; medium late season."
Resembles Concord in type of cluster and general appearance but is
superior in the texture and flavor of the pulp.

_Shull No. 2._ (Lab. Vin.) A chance seedling of unknown parentage; from
J. Shull, Ilion, New York, about 1892. Very vigorous, healthy,
productive; stamens long; clusters medium to large, compact,
cylindrical; berry medium, roundish-oblong; skin thin, tender, pale
green covered with thin bloom; pulp tender, releases seeds readily,
sweet; good but not equal to Winchell; early.

=Shurtleff Seedling.= _Lilac._ A chance seedling, probably from a
foreign grape, found in the garden of Dr. S. A. Shurtleff, of Pemberton
Hill, near Boston, in 1822. Bunches large, shouldered; berries nearly
large, oval; skin thick, light purple or lilac, with a spotted
appearance, grayish bloom; pulp firm, sweet, rich; very good; ripens
early in September.

=Siglar.= Mentioned in the _Gardener's Monthly_, 1869, as a new variety
resembling Delaware but with fruit twice as large. Comparatively hardy,
productive; rich and sweet.

=Silkyfine.= (Lab. Rip. Vin.) A cross of One Seed with Rommel; from
Munson, in 1898. Stamens erect; bunch medium; berry large, white; late.

=Silvain.= (Doan.) A wild staminate variety of _Vitis doaniana_ found in
Greer County, Oklahoma, by Munson. It furnishes an excellent graft
stock.

=Silver Dawn.= (Vin. Lab.) A seedling of Israella fertilized with Muscat
Hamburg, of the same lot of seed as Early Dawn; from Dr. Wm. A. M.
Culbert, Newburgh, New York, about 1877. Vigorous, hardy; white; best.

=Sinawissa.= Noted in the _Wisconsin Horticultural Society Report_,
1876, as a grape of delicious flavor but not to be recommended for
general cultivation.

=Sloe.= (Rot.) A variety of _Vitis rotundifolia_ which, according to
Prince, 1830, "is probably the original vine whence the improved
varieties of its race have emanated, but inferior to all the others. The
fruit is sour and scarcely eatable, and of a dark purple or black
color."

=Small Leaf.= (Rup.) A wild variety of _Vitis rupestris_ found by Munson
in Texas. Stamens reflexed; cluster very small; berry small, black; very
early.

=Smallwood.= A native of North Carolina; from E. Smallwood. According to
Prince, 1830, the fruit is about half the size of the Muscatel, and is
much esteemed for making wine.

=Snelter.= Mentioned by Mitzky, 1893, as a seedling of Riparia crossed
with Concord; from L. Snelter, Carver, Minnesota.

=Snowflake.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) According to _Bushberg Catalogue, 1894_,
a seedling of Jewel, from Dr. J. K. Stayman. Vigorous, hardy and
productive; bunch medium, compact; berry large, white; tender but firm,
juicy, sprightly, vinous, sweet; of very good quality; ripens about with
Concord.

=Solander Large Purple.= According to Prince, 1830, a variety highly
esteemed in Missouri, from which place it was received by him.

=Solrupo.= (Long. Linc. Rup.) A cross between _Vitis longii_ and a
seedling of Lincecumii crossed with Rupestris; from Munson. Stamens
reflexed; bunch and berry small, black; early.

=Somerville.= A large-berried variety, growing in the vineyard of Sidney
Weller, Brinkleyville, North Carolina, in 1845.

=Sophia.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Concord fertilized with Iona; from
D. J. Piper, Forreston, Ogle County, Illinois, about 1880. Equal to
Concord in hardiness, very productive; clusters compact; berries having
the rich vinous nature of the Iona and the sweetness of the Concord;
ripens with Concord and is a good keeper.

=Souland.= (Rip.) Mentioned in the _Illinois Horticultural Society
Report_, 1868, as a good winter grape, resembling Clinton; exhibited by
John H. Tice before the Mississippi Valley Grape Growers' Association in
that year.

=South Carolina.= According to Warder, 1867, from Ohio. Vigorous; bunch
large; berry small, black; juicy, spicy; very promising.

=Southern Champion.= Exhibited by Stephen H. Shallcross of Louisville,
Kentucky, at the fruit show of the Southern Exposition in Louisville.

=Spencer.= (Vin. Lab.) _Wells; Wells White._ Noted in the _United States
Patent Office Report_, 1861, as an accidental cross between Sweetwater
and Isabella.

=Spinosa.= (Lab.) A wild variety of _Vitis labrusca_ from North
Carolina; collected by Munson. Stamens reflexed; bunch very small;
berries large, black; mid-season.

=Spotted Globe.= According to Fuller, 1867, a hybrid from Jacob Moore,
Rochester, New York. Very feeble; flesh sweet, very tender; good.

=Springfield.= (Lab.) According to _Bushberg Catalogue_, 1894, a
seedling of Northern Muscadine; from W. H. Lightfoot, Springfield,
Illinois. Strong, healthy and hardy; bunch medium to large, very
compact; berries large, reddish-brown becoming dark brown when fully
ripe; pulpy yet juicy and very sweet; ripens about a week before
Concord.

=Stace White.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) An unnamed seedling from S. Stace,
Barnard Crossing, Monroe County, New York. A cross between Delaware and
Isabella; the vine closely resembles Rebecca in foliage, habit and
fruit.

=Stelton.= (Lab. Vin.) From W. Thompson, of New Brunswick, about 1882.
Bunch large, shouldered, rather loose; berries medium, greenish-white
with white bloom; pulp juicy, sweet; ripens with Concord.

=Sterling.= (Lab. Vin.) From E. P. Fisher, Sterling, Kansas, about 1904.
Moderate grower, healthy and hardy; bunch small to medium, irregular in
shape; berry large, round; ripens with Concord; good keeper.

=Stetson's Seedlings.= From Amos Stetson, of East Braintree,
Massachusetts, about sixty years ago.

_No. 1._ See Cabot.

_No. 2._ (Lab. Vin.) A red native Labrusca crossed with Grizzly
Frontignan. Berries nearly white, with a little tinge of blush.

_No. 3._ (Lab. Vin.) A native red Labrusca fertilized by Grizzly
Frontignan. Resembles _No. 2_ but has larger berries.

_No. 4._ (Lab. Vin.) A red native Labrusca crossed with Black Hamburg.
Ripens early in September, fourteen days sooner than Isabella.

_No. 5._ (Lab. Vin.) A cross between a native red Labrusca and
Sweetwater. Resembles Sweetwater very closely; color dark blue.

=Storm King.= (Lab.) A sport of Concord; from E. P. Roe,
Cornwall-on-Hudson, New York. Resembles its parent in all respects
except that the berries are about twice as large and are less foxy.

=Strawberry.= According to Cole, 1849, from Col. L. Chase, Cornish, New
Hampshire. Bunch and berry small; pleasant, sub-acid flavor.

=Striped Ruby.= _Munson's No. 13._ One of Munson's seedlings on trial at
the Virginia Experiment Station in 1893.

=Success.= (Linc. Rup. Bourq.) Parentage, Post-oak, Rupestris and
Bourquiniana; from Munson. Noted in the _Rural New Yorker_ for 1901.
Very vigorous and highly prolific; cluster size of Concord, compact;
berries variable in size from small to above medium; skin thin, tough;
very sweet and rich, of the best quality.

=Sugar Grape.= (Lab.) A wild variety of _Vitis labrusca_; grows in great
abundance near Plymouth, Massachusetts. Growth moderate, short-jointed;
healthy; bunches and berries of medium size, round and flat; very sweet.

=Sugar Grape.= (Rot.) A variety of the Scuppernong family, cultivated by
L. Froelich, of Enfield, Halifax County, North Carolina. Mentioned in
the _United States Department of Agriculture Report_, 1871, as having a
saccharine strength of 80 deg..

=Summer White.= (Lab.) Mentioned in the _Magazine of Horticulture_,
1854, as having been found wild; ripens the last of July and in August
and September; decidedly superior to Isabella.

=Sumner.= Noted in the _American Horticultural Annual_ for 1871 as a
seedling raised by P. Stewart, of Mt. Lebanon, New York.

=Sunrise.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) From Jos. Bachman, Altus, Arkansas, about
1897; seedling of Brilliant. Described by the originator as a strong
grower; bunches rather open; berries red; skin tender; best; ten days to
two weeks earlier than Delaware.

=Superior.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Jewel; from John Burr of
Leavenworth, Kansas, about 1890. Vigorous, hardy, healthy and
productive; stamens upright; bunch medium, moderately compact; berry
medium, black with heavy bloom; skin thin, tough; pulp tender, rich,
sweet, vinous, sprightly; very good; ripens a few days later than Jewel.

=Supreme.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A Delaware seedling; from John Burr, of
Leavenworth, Kansas, about 1890. Variable in vigor and productiveness,
hardy, healthy; stamens upright; cluster medium, usually compact; berry
medium, black; tender, sweet, sprightly, vinous; quality better than
Jewel and about a week earlier.

=Swatara.= From Pennsylvania; according to _Horticulturist_, 1858, this
variety was discovered many years ago in a ravine through which the
Swatara River flowed. Bunch and berry below medium size, compact; sweet;
early.

=Sweetey.= (Linc. Bourq.) _Munson's No. 111._ A seedling of Lincecumii
fertilized with Herbemont; from Munson. Very vigorous, tender, a shy
bearer; stamens upright; bunch medium, compact, shouldered; berry small,
round, dark purple or black with heavy bloom; skin thin, tender; pulp
large and tough; rather poor quality; a few days earlier than Concord.

=Taft.= Given by Prince in a list of worthless varieties in _Gardener's
Monthly_, 1863.

=Talala.= (Lab. Rip. Cand. Vin. Bourq.) A cross between Elvicand and
Brilliant; from Munson. An attractive compact bunch with large red
berries of rather tough pulp; not high quality.

=Talequah.= (Bourq. Rup. Linc.) A seedling of America crossed with
Herbemont; from Munson, about 1895. Clusters large, conical; berries
medium, dark red; skin thin, tough; without pulp, melting, juicy; nearly
as good as Delaware; late.

=Tamala.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delago crossed with Governor
Ross; from Munson; first fruited in 1899. Moderately vigorous; stamens
erect; bunch and berry medium, yellowish-white; good; ripens mid-season
in Texas.

=Tekoma.= (Lab. Vin.) Noted in the _American Horticultural Annual_,
1870, as a Missouri seedling of Catawba, more healthy than that variety.

=Tenderpulp.= (Rot.) A Rotundifolia, originated about 1870. Vigorous,
very productive; stamens reflexed; berries medium, black, in clusters of
four to twelve; skin tough; pulp tender, juicy, sweet; poor; ripens
about a month after Scuppernong.

=Ten-Dollar-Prize.= (Linc.) A wild Post-oak grape found by a Mr.
Hopkins, of Texas, about 1883. Used by Munson as one of the parents in a
number of his crosses.

=Tennessee.= Noted as on trial in the government experimental garden in
1860.

=Tennessee Island.= A wild grape growing in great abundance on the
islands in the Tennessee River. Very similar to Scuppernong and Prince
says "it is quite probable it may be the genuine Scuppernong."

=Texas.= (Linc.) _Diverse Leaved._ A variety of grape received by Prince
about 1830 from the border of Texas with leaves very variable in form;
produces a great abundance of very good grapes.

=Texas.= (Linc.) According to Prince, 1830, "a large, slightly reddish
fruit, very juicy, sweet, with little or no pulpy coherence."

=Texas.= (Bourq.) _Munson's No. 181._ A Herbemont seedling; from Munson
of Texas. Variable in vigor; stamens upright; bunches small, compact;
berries small, black; good; ripens with Herbemont.

=Texas Highland.= (Linc. Vin. Lab.) _Munson's No. 130._ A seedling of
Post-oak crossed with Agawam; from Munson, about 1885. Vigorous, not
very productive; stamens erect; bunch medium, loose; berries medium to
large, black; juicy, rich and pleasant; late.

=Themis.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Salem; from C. Engle, Paw Paw,
Michigan. According to _Bushberg Catalogue_, 1894, a strong grower,
hardy, productive; bunch medium, short, compact, sometimes shouldered;
berries large, Catawba-colored; meaty, firm; good; ripens with Worden.
Considered by some same as Metis.

=Theodosia.= (Lab.? Rip.?) A chance seedling originating on the grounds
of E. S. Salisbury, Adams, New York, in 1862. Hardy and productive;
bunch medium, very compact, usually shouldered; berries medium, black;
juicy, quite tart; very early.

=Theophile.= (Lab.) From Theophile Huber, Illinois City, Illinois. Bunch
medium, compact, sometimes shouldered; berry large, yellowish-white;
pulp tender, juicy, sweet, vinous; very good; ripens before Concord.

=Thomas.= (Rot.) A variety of Rotundifolia discovered in the woods near
Marion, South Carolina, by Drury Thomas, about 1845. Vigorous, very
productive; stamens erect; berries growing in clusters of from four to
ten; very large; skin thin, varies in color from a reddish-purple to a
deep black; pulp tender, sweet, vinous; good to very good; ripens about
with Scuppernong or a little earlier. One of the best of this species
for wine.

=Thompson's Seedlings.= The following seedlings were originated about
twenty years ago by Jos. T. Thompson of Oneida, New York:

_No. 2._ (Lab.) A seedling of Brighton, resembling it very closely,
fully equal in quality and, so far as tested, earlier and a better
keeper.

_No. 3._ A white grape of unknown parentage.

_No. 4._ A chance seedling; early, black and large.

_No. 5._ (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Worden and fruit somewhat of the same
type. Clusters medium, loose; berries nearly large, roundish,
reddish-purple with thin bloom; skin thin, tough; pulp rather tough,
juicy, sweet, not foxy; good; stamens reflexed; shows Vinifera; late.

_No. 7._ (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Agawam. Vigorous, healthy; clusters
nearly large, compact; berries medium to large, round; skin thick,
tough, dull dark red with blue bloom; pulp sweet, rather tough, vinous;
good; late.

=Thompson's Seedlings.= A large number of seedlings were raised by David
Thompson, of Green Island, in the Hudson River, near Troy, about forty
years ago. Nearly all are of Vinifera parentage and consequently of
little value for open vineyard culture. Among his named seedlings are:
David Thompson, General Grant, L. H. Tupper, Nathan C. Ely, A. B.
Crandall, Bonticue, Early August, William Tell, Lavina, Elenor, Jas. M.
Ketchum.

=Thompson Red Seedling.= According to _Grape Culturist_, 1869, from a
Mr. Thompson, originator of the Missouri Mammoth blackberry, said to be
a Concord seedling but bears a strong resemblance to some of Rogers'
hybrids.

=Thompson Wine.= (Lab. Vin.?) Received by the _Magazine of Horticulture_
in 1865 from Mr. R. O. Thompson, of Nebraska. Bunch and berry resembling
Isabella in shape; black.

=Tishomingo.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delago crossed with
Governor Ireland; from Munson, about 1899. Stamens erect; bunch medium
with large black berry; ripens mid-season.

=Togni.= (Aest.) A seedling of St. Augustine cultivated in Florida about
thirty years ago.

=Tonkawa.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delago crossed with
Brilliant; from Munson, of Texas, about 1899. Vigorous, nearly hardy,
productive; stamens upright; clusters medium, rather slender,
shouldered, variable in compactness; berries not uniform in size, oval,
dull dark red with lilac bloom; skin moderately thick and tough; pulp
slightly tough, vinous, sweet; good; ripens with Concord.

=Transparent.= (Rip. Lab.) A Taylor seedling; from Jacob Rommel, of
Missouri, about 1880. Vine vigorous, healthy, moderately productive;
stamens upright; bunch small, compact, shouldered; berry very juicy,
sweet; good; ripens a few days before Concord.

=Trask.= (Lab. Vin.) The _Bushberg Catalogue_ says, "a chance seedling
that first fruited in 1875. Introduced by Peter Henderson and Company.
Healthy; leaves smooth; bunches large, long, often shouldered; berries
medium to large, brown or bluish-black; tender, melting, very sweet,
vinous; ripens before Concord."

=Triumphant.= A failure at the Ontario Experimental Farm where it was
tested in 1886.

=Trollinger.= Mentioned in _United States Patent Office Report_ for 1859
as being on trial in the government experimental garden.

=Trowbridge.= (Lab. Vin.) According to _American Horticultural Annual_,
1870, a sport from the Isabella with much larger bunches and berries
than those of its parent.

=Troy.= (Lab. Vin.) _Purple Hamburgh_ of Troy; _Troy Hamburg_. Described
by Prince in 1830 as hardy, vigorous, productive; berries large, oval, a
little foxy, pleasant; very good; similar to Isabella.

=Tryone.= (Lab. Rip. Vin. Bourq.) From a cross by Munson between One
Seed and Rommel, about 1897. Stamens erect; bunch and berry large,
white; very late.

=Tuckerman.= From J. B. Tuckerman, Cassville, Oneida County, New York,
about 1870. A white grape.

=Tuskahoma.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A member of Munson's Delago family, the
male parent being Brilliant; first fruited in 1899. Stamens erect; bunch
and berry large, translucent red; equal to Brighton in quality; early.

=U. B.= One of Marine's seedlings; a black grape, of Labrusca type.

=Uhland.= (Rip. Lab.) A seedling of Taylor; from Wm. Weidmeyer, Hermann,
Missouri. Vigorous, hardy, healthy, usually a shy bearer; stamens erect;
bunch medium, nearly cylindrical, compact, sometimes shouldered; berry
medium, slightly oblong, greenish-yellow with thin bloom; skin thin,
tender, cracks; pulp tender, juicy, sweet, pleasant; good; ripens a few
days later than Concord; subject to rot in some sections; makes a very
good wine.

=Uller Mammoth.= Reported by the Tennessee Experiment Station in 1894 as
an exceedingly large grape of inferior quality; a vigorous vine.

=Ulrey.= Mentioned by Warder in 1867. From Indiana; medium bunch with
large white berry; sweet, rich.

=Una.= (Lab.) A White Concord seedling; from E. W. Bull, about 1867.
Healthy and vigorous; bunch and berries medium; resembles Martha but not
so sweet and more foxy; ripens a week before Concord.

=Underhill.= (Lab.) _Underhill's Celestial_; _Underhill's Seedling_. A
variety of the wild Fox grape; from Dr. A. K. Underhill, Charlton,
Saratoga County, New York, about 1863. Of medium vigor, hardy, healthy
and productive; stamens reflexed; bunches medium to large, cylindrical,
frequently shouldered, moderately compact; berries large, usually
roundish, dark dull red with lilac bloom, inclined to drop when ripe;
skin thick, tough, very astringent; pulp tough, sweet, foxy, moderately
juicy, fair; ripens about with Concord; of the Wyoming type but inferior
to that variety.

=Undine.= (Lab. Rip.) From J. H. Ricketts; a seedling of Concord and
Clinton; vigorous and healthy; bunch large, shouldered; berries large,
yellowish-white when fully ripe; sprightly, very good.

=Universal.= (Linc. Lab. Rup.) A seedling of America crossed with
Profusion; from Munson, about 1897. Stamens erect; bunch large with
medium-sized black berry; equal to Concord in quality; very late.

=Urbana.= (Lab.) A seedling of Concord; from Indiana. Bunch medium,
shouldered; berry large, white; juicy, vinous, not very sweet; ripens
about with Isabella.

=Ursula.= (Lab.) According to Mitzky, 1893, "produced by T. Huber, Sr.,
Illinois. Bunch small, compact; berries small, white; flesh melting,
juicy and sweet; fine quality; vigorous grower; ripens with Concord."

=Valencia.= Grown by Munson from seed secured in South Spain, near
Valencia. Described by the originator as vigorous, short-jointed;
healthy, a light cropper; cluster small, shouldered, very compact; berry
small, brownish-red; pulp melting, juicy, very sweet and fine. Munson
gives the species as Bourquiniana.

=Valentine.= _August Isabella._ Mentioned by Prince in _Gardener's
Monthly_ for 1863.

=Valhallah.= (Lab. Cand. Rip. Vin. Bourq.) From Munson, about 1902; a
hybrid of Elvicand and Brilliant. Described by the originator as a very
vigorous, drouth-enduring, prolific vine; cluster medium; berry large,
bright clear red; skin thin, tough; pulp juicy, tender, nearly equaling
Brilliant in quality; ripens about with Concord.

=Valverde.= (Champ. Lab. Vin. Bourq.) From Munson; a seedling of De
Grasset fertilized with Brilliant. Stamens erect; bunch and berry large;
ripens mid-season in Texas.

=Van Deman.= (Linc. Lab. Vin.) From Texas; a cross of Lincecumii and
Triumph. Vigorous; stamens erect; bunch medium, compact; berry medium,
black; poor to good; ripens about two weeks after Catawba.

=Vanderburgh.= Noted in _Record of Horticulture_ for 1868 as a new and
promising variety from Lansingburg, New York; not yet sent out.

=Venango.= (Lab.) _Minor's Seedling._ According to Buchanan (Mss.), an
old variety, said to have been cultivated by the French at Fort Venango,
on Allegheny River, over a century ago. Very vigorous, hardy, healthy
and usually productive; stamens erect; bunch medium, compact; sometimes
shouldered; berries medium, round or sometimes flattened by compactness;
skin thick and tough, pale red with white bloom; flesh sweet, aromatic;
pulpy and foxy; ripens about with Concord.

=Vermont.= Listed by Prince in _Gardener's Monthly_, 1863, as a
worthless sort.

=Vermont Giant.= (Lab.) From C. G. Pringle of Charlotte, Vermont. Noted
in the _Western New York Horticultural Society Report_, 1882, as a
black, very pulpy grape with poor flavor.

=Vermorel.= (Champ.) A wild variety of _Vitis champini_ from Williamson
County, Texas; collected by Munson. Stamens reflexed; bunch small with
medium-sized black berry; early.

=Vesta.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Salem; from C. Engle, Paw Paw,
Michigan. Vigorous, hardy, productive; stamens upright; bunches medium
to large, long, shouldered, moderately compact; berries large, round,
greenish-white; skin thin, tough; pulp tender, juicy, vinous, rich; very
good; about a week later than Concord.

=Viala.= (Champ.) A wild variety of _Vitis champini_, from Coryell
County, Texas; collected by Munson. Stamens reflexed; bunch small; berry
medium, black; early.

=Vialla.= (Rip.) According to _Bushberg Catalogue_, 1883, "a
Franco-American variety, recommended as a grafting stock; resembles the
Franklin and is by some supposed to be the same variety; others contend
that it is distinct from and superior to Franklin."

=Victoria.= Origin unknown. Moderately vigorous, open, healthy; bunch
very small, short and thick; berry large, round, dark purple, scarcely
black, with thin bloom; skin tender; pulp tender but stringy, juicy,
mild acid, without decided character; poor; about a week later than
Concord.

=Victoria.= (Lab.) _Ray's Victoria._ Introduced in 1872 by M. M.
Samuels, of Clinton, Kentucky. Vigorous, healthy, and productive; bunch
medium; berry medium, round, amber color; skin thin; pulp tender, sweet
and of high flavor; very good; resembles Venango.

=Vine Arbor.= Mentioned in the _United States Patent Office Report_,
1845, as being grown at Brinkleyville, Halifax County, North Carolina,
at that time. So called on account of its very large leaf and extended
growth, consequently adapted for arbors.

=Vinita.= (Linc. Bourq.) A seedling of Post-oak crossed with Herbemont;
from Munson, about 1885. Very vigorous, productive; stamens erect; bunch
large, conical, shouldered, compact; berries small to medium, purple;
skin thin, tough; pulp juicy, melting; "best"; very late.

=Vinrouge.= (Lab. Aest. Vin. Bourq. Rup. Linc.) From a cross between
America and Laura; by Munson about 1894. Vigorous, healthy; stamens
erect; bunch large; berry medium; black; early.

=Virginia.= Noted by Buchanan, 1852, as a grape raised and exhibited by
N. Longworth in 1846.

=Vivie Hybrid.= _Vivie's Hartford._ According to _Bushberg Catalogue_,
1883, "produced by M. Vivie in France, and by some called Vivie's
Hartford. Of very vigorous growth, very productive and its grape of good
quality making a very good wine."

=Waddel.= (Lab.) Noted in the _United States Department of Agriculture
Report_ for 1893. Found in the woods of Highland County, Ohio, about
1863, by John F. Waddel. Productive and hardy; cluster medium, heavily
shouldered, moderately compact; berry oval, medium to large, persistent;
skin thick, tender, dark purple or black with heavy blue bloom; pulp
translucent, tender, melting, very juicy, mildly sweet, rich, pleasant
with slightly musky aroma; good to very good; season September 20-30th
in Ohio.

=Waldo Seedling.= (Lab.) A chance seedling found on the farm of J. B.
Waldo, Johnsville, Dutchess County, New York, about 1881. Of medium
vigor, healthy, hardy, productive; clusters as large or larger than
Concord, often nearly double, somewhat loose; berries large, black with
abundant blue bloom; skin variable in thickness, tender; pulp moderately
sweet, juicy, slightly foxy with Concord flavor; good; ripens a little
before Moore Early. Resembles Concord closely.

=Wales.= (Lab.) A seedling having a medium-sized bunch, exhibited by E.
W. Bull at the meeting of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in
1874.

=Waneta.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delago crossed with
Brilliant; from Munson, about 1896. Stamens erect; bunch medium with
large red berry; equal to Brighton in flavor; late.

=Warmita.= (Linc. Rup. Lab.) From a cross between America and Beacon; by
Munson, about 1896. Healthy and vigorous; stamens erect; bunch and berry
large, black; ripens mid-season.

=Warren.= Supposed by some to be identical with Herbemont but claimed to
be distinct by others. The original vine grew near Warrenton in Warren
County, Georgia.

=Washington.= Noted by Warder in 1867. From New York. Early, black.

=Washita.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Delago crossed with Governor
Ireland; from Munson, about 1896. Stamens erect; bunch medium with
large, black berry, equal to Concord in flavor; early.

=Washita.= A white grape from Arkansas; on trial in the government
experimental gardens in 1859.

=Waterloo.= _Rock House Indian._ A native grape from Illinois, grown by
F. Muench. Vigorous and a good bearer; cluster and berry small.

=Watertown.= From D. S. Marvin, Watertown, New York. According to
Mitzky, 1893, a good grower; bunch medium, sometimes shouldered; berry
medium, slightly oblong, white; sweet; fine quality.

=Watova.= (Lab. Rip. Vin. Aest.) A cross between Gold Coin and Rommel;
from Munson, in 1899. Stamens erect; bunch and berry large, yellow;
late.

=Waubeck.= (Linc. Lab. Aest.) A seedling of _Jaeger No. 43_ fertilized
with Laussel; from Munson, about 1893. Stamens erect; bunch large; berry
medium, black, equal to Concord in flavor; very late.

=Waverly.= (Vin. Rip. Lab.) A seedling of Clinton and one of the
Muscats; from Jas. H. Ricketts, about 1870. Usually vigorous and
productive, hardy, healthy; bunch medium, shouldered, compact; berry
medium, round to oval, black with blue bloom; pulp tender, juicy, sweet,
vinous; good; ripens with Brighton.

=W. B. Munson.= (Linc. Vin. Lab.) A seedling of Post-oak No. 3, crossed
with Triumph; from Munson, about 1887. Vigorous, very productive,
subject to mildew in the South; stamens erect; bunch medium or sometimes
large, cylindrical, compact, sometimes shouldered; berry medium, round,
black, persistent; pulp juicy, melting, sprightly; very good; late.

=Webb Grape.= Mentioned by Prince in 1830. Discovered by Samuel Webb, of
Philadelphia, near Woodbury, Pennsylvania. Berries large, black.

=Weeks Seedling.= Mentioned in the _American Horticultural Annual_,
1871. Raised by Dr. Cyrus Weeks, of Bellville, New Jersey. Medium bunch
and berry; very sweet; pleasant flavor.

=Wells.= (Lab.) _Wells' Seedling._ Originated in Ohio where it was
discovered by a Mr. Wells about 1882. Vigorous, healthy, very
productive; clusters large, cylindrical, shouldered, moderately compact;
berries large, bronze or wine-colored, oval; pulp tender, mild, very
juicy with a peculiar musky flavor and foxy aroma; fair quality; ripens
about two weeks after Concord.

=Western Beauty.= Grown from mixed seed by E. P. Fisher, Sterling,
Kansas, about 1904. Described by the originator as a black or purple
grape of superior quality, better than Concord, a stronger grower than
that variety and perfectly hardy; ripens about with Catawba.

=Wetumka.= (Lab. Aest. Rip. Bourq.) From a cross by Munson between One
Seed and Gold Coin, about 1893. Of medium vigor, healthy, productive;
stamens erect; clusters medium, ovate, moderately compact, sometimes
shouldered; berries large, globular, yellowish-green; pulp juicy,
tender; good; ripens after Concord.

=Wewoka.= (Linc. Rup. Lab.) Produced by Munson, about 1893, by crossing
America with Beacon. Stamens reflexed; bunch very large; berry large,
black; late.

=Wheaton.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware; from John C.
Wheaton, of Dansville, New York, in 1873. Rather weak grower, hardy,
variable in productiveness; tendrils irregularly continuous; foliage not
very healthy; stamens upright; flowers nearly fertile; clusters medium
to small, much like Delaware, cylindrical, nearly compact, sometimes
shouldered; berries small, roundish, light green with yellow tinge, with
thin gray bloom; pulp tender, nearly sweet; good; ripens about with
Delaware.

=White Ann Arbor.= (Lab.) _Ann Arbor._ A seedling of Concord; raised by
Chas. H. Woodruff, of Ann Arbor, Michigan, in 1870. Of medium vigor,
very hardy, moderately productive; bunch and berry large, white with
white bloom; pulp tough, sweet; good; ripens about two weeks before
Concord.

=White Beauty.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Dutchess; from Stayman
of Kansas. Very vigorous, hardy, healthy and very productive; bunch
large, long, shouldered, compact; berries medium size, white; pulp
tender, sprightly, rich, vinous, sweet; best; ripens with Concord and
will hang until frost.

=White Cape.= (Lab. Vin.) According to Mitzky, 1893, similar to
Alexander except that it is greenish-white in color.

=White Catawba.= (Lab. Vin.) A seedling of Catawba; raised by John E.
Mottier, of Ohio, about 1849. Bunch medium, shouldered; berry large,
round, greenish; pulpy, foxy.

=White Clinton.= _White Delaware._ Mentioned in the _United States
Department of Agriculture Report_ for 1864, as being a hardy and
vigorous vine with a small white grape, insipid and worthless.

=White Cloud.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A seedling of Dutchess; from Stayman,
of Kansas. Vigorous, hardy, healthy and productive; clusters large,
long, compact; berries large, white; skin thin, tough; pulp tender,
juicy, rich, sprightly, vinous, sweet; best; ripens with Concord.

=White Delaware.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) From Geo. W. Campbell, of Delaware,
Ohio. Lacking in size and productiveness as compared with its parent;
resembles Delaware in form of bunch and berry, compact and shouldered;
greenish-white with thin white bloom; early.

=White Delaware.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) According to _Bushberg Catalogue_,
1894, from Hermann Jaeger, of Neosho, Missouri; bunch and berries
closely resemble the Delaware in shape and size but it has some Labrusca
characteristics.

=White Delaware.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) Produced by Jacob Rommel of
Morrison, Missouri. Described by Mitzky, 1893, as healthy, moderate
grower, very productive; bunch medium, compact, shouldered; berry
medium, white with white bloom; skin tough; without pulp, very sweet,
pure flavor, delicious; ripens with Concord.

=White Delaware.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) From C. J. Copley, Stapleton, New
York. Described in _Massachusetts Horticultural Society Report_, 1880,
as having a small bunch, exceedingly compact; berries very small, round,
green with an amber tint in the sun, thin bloom; skin very thick; sweet
with not much pulp but pretty hard.

White Delaware seedlings have also been produced by John Burr, J.
Sacksteder, Dr. J. Stayman, D. B. Woodbury and others.

=White Elizabeth.= _Hart's White_; _White Isabella_. Listed by Prince in
_Gardener's Monthly_ for 1863.

=White English.= Mentioned in the _United States Patent Office Report_
for 1845 as being grown by Sidney Weller, Brinkleyville, North Carolina.

=Whitehall.= (Lab.) Supposed to be a chance seedling from Geo. Goodale,
of Whitehall, Washington County, New York; first fruited in 1870. Of
medium vigor, not very productive, comparatively healthy; stamens
reflexed; clusters large, moderately compact, shouldered; berry medium,
dark purple or nearly black with thin bloom; pulp tender, melting and
sweet; ripens about with Hartford.

=White Jewel.= (Rip. Lab.) _Burr's No. 19._ A seedling of Elvira;
supposed to be from John Burr, of Leavenworth, Kansas. Vigorous, hardy
and very productive; stamens upright; bunch medium, long, compact; berry
medium, round, white with abundant bloom; skin thin, rather tender; pulp
very juicy, tender, sweet, sprightly, very good; ripens about with Moore
Early.

=White Mountain.= From Connecticut; very early.

=White Muscadine.= Mentioned in the _United States Patent Office
Report_, 1862, in a list of grapes that do well as far north as
Burlington, Vermont.

=White Musk.= (Lab. Vin.) According to Fuller, 1867, a hybrid from Jacob
Moore, of Rochester, New York. Vine resembles Sweetwater but does not
require protection; of medium size with insipid flavor.

=White Northern Muscat.= (Vin. Lab.) _Culinary Grape_; _White's Northern
Muscadine_. A seedling of Brighton fertilized with Muscat; from W. T.
White, Troy, Ohio, about 1889. Vigorous, tender, moderately productive;
stamens upright; bunch medium size, compact; berries large, nearly
round, brownish-green or amber color; skin thick, tough; pulp large,
tender, juicy, sweet; high flavor; about ten days earlier than Concord.

=White Norton.= (Aest. Lab.) A seedling of Norton; from F.
Langendoerfer, Hermann, Missouri. Noted in _Missouri Horticultural
Society Report_, 1883, as a slow grower, moderately productive, very
hardy; smaller than its parent, of a golden yellow color and a few days
earlier.

=White Norton.= (Aest. Lab.) _White Virginia Seedling._ Another Norton
seedling, probably crossed with some Labrusca; produced by J. Balziger,
Highland, Illinois. Strong, hardy; healthy and vigorous; fruit similar
to Elvira but better in quality; very late; shows some Labrusca blood.

=White Rose.= Received at this Station for testing in 1906 from Miss R.
R. Short, Clifton Springs, New York.

=White Sugar.= W. R. Prince in _Gardener's Monthly_ for 1863, mentions
this variety as a worthless Labrusca.

=White Tennessee.= According to _Grape Culturist_, 1871, grown by W.
Valiant, of Clarksville, Tennessee, and known by him for about fifty
years. Hardy, productive and free from disease.

=White Ulster.= (Lab. Vin.) According to _Bushberg Catalogue_, 1894, an
amateur variety, raised by A. J. Caywood from a seedling of Ulster
crossed with White Concord.

=Wilcox.= Mentioned in the _United States Patent Office Report_, 1845,
as being grown by Sidney Weller, Brinkleyville, North Carolina.

=Wilding.= (Rip. Lab.) A seedling found by Jacob Rommel, Morrison,
Missouri. Vigorous, hardy and healthy, moderately productive; stamens
reflexed; bunch medium, loose, shouldered; berry medium, round, pale
green, almost transparent; skin very thin, and tender; no pulp, juicy,
very sweet; very good; ripens with Concord.

=Wilkins Seedling.= (Lab.) From O. Fitzalwyn Wilkins, Bridgeburgh,
Ontario, about 1895. Described in the _Canadian Horticulturist_, 1898,
as follows: Bunch of good size and form; berries white, round, of medium
size; skin thin and tender; pulp tender and separates readily from the
seeds; flavor agreeable, somewhat foxy, but much sweeter and pleasanter
than Concord; early.

=Willard.= (Lab.) From E. P. Fisher, Sterling, Kansas; received at this
Station for testing in 1905. Described by originator as a vigorous,
short-jointed grower, perfectly hardy, sometimes mildews; bunch a little
smaller than Concord, compact; berry nearly large, round, red; sweet,
without any foxiness; lacks vigor here; tendrils continuous or sometimes
intermittent.

=Williamson.= (Cand.) A wild variety of Candicans from Williamson
County, Texas; collected by T. V. Munson. Stamens reflexed; small bunch
with very large, black berry; early.

=Williamsport.= Noted in the _Magazine of Horticulture_, 1860, as a new
variety originated on the mountain near Williamsport, Pennsylvania.
Perfectly hardy, and very prolific.

=William Wine.= (Lab. Aest.) Mentioned by S. J. Parker in the _United
States Department of Agriculture Report_ for 1864. Cluster small with
long peduncle; berry large, round, having "the fox grape perfume mingled
with that of a rose."

=Willie.= (Lab.) Said to be a seedling of Northern Muscadine crossed
with Concord; from L. C. Chisholm, Spring Hill, Tennessee. Vigorous,
rampant grower, healthy and very productive; fruit larger than Concord,
shouldered, very showy; black with white bloom; pulp vinous and
sprightly, no foxiness; excellent wine grape; ripens with or a few days
later than Concord.

=Willis.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware; from Willis W.
Jones, Camargo, Illinois, about 1865. Usually vigorous, as hardy as
Concord, healthy, generally quite productive; bunch medium, compact,
shouldered, in shape like the Delaware; berry medium, round, pale green
or amber-yellow with a slight bloom; pulp tender, very juicy, slightly
vinous, sweet, foxy; good; early.

=Willis Fredonia.= _Guernsey Grape_; _Jersey Grape_. Origin unknown;
grown by John Willis, of Maryland. According to Prince, 1830, a vigorous
rampant grower, healthy, very productive; fruit black and pleasant for
the table.

=Willis Large Black.= _Great Black Muscadine._ An old variety mentioned
by Prince in 1830, who says, "according to a traditional account of the
Southern Indians, this vine and the White Scuppernong have been in
bearing among them for more than five hundred years." Very vigorous;
berries very large; foxy.

=Wilmington.= (Lab. Vin.) _Wilmington White._ Originated with a Mr.
Jeffries, near Wilmington, Delaware, about 1856. Very vigorous, hardy,
productive; bunches large, loose, shouldered; berries large, roundish or
inclining to oval, greenish-white; tender and not pulpy, sweet and
pleasant when properly ripened but requires a long southern season;
late.

=Winchester.= (Lab. Vin.) _Brackett's Seedling_; _Brackett's
Winchester_. A seedling of Union Village; from E. A. Brackett,
Winchester, Massachusetts, first fruited in 1858. Vigorous, hardy; bunch
large; berry large, round, black, heavy bloom; juicy, sweet, vinous;
resembles parent but ripens a week earlier.

=Windsor.= Noted by Prince in 1830. Found growing wild twelve miles
north of Baltimore, at Windsor, on the plantation of George Fitzhugh.
Very luxuriant and productive; clusters large and long; berries round,
blue, juicy.

=Winedrop.= (Linc. Bourq.) A cross between Post-oak No. 1 and Herbemont
by Munson, in 1884. Stamens reflexed; bunch large with small, dark red
berry; late.

=Wine House.= Noted in _United States Patent Office Report_, 1854. Found
growing spontaneously in the vineyard of Frederick Muench. Sweet and
aromatic; not very juicy.

=Wine King.= (Aest. Linc. Rup. Lab.) A seedling of Winona crossed with
America; from Munson, in 1898. Very vigorous, prolific, healthy; stamens
erect; cluster large, compact; berry medium, black with blue bloom; very
little pulp, tender, very juicy, vinous, rich and sprightly; good.

=Winona.= (Aest. Lab.) A seedling of Norton; from Munson, about 1895.
Vigorous, productive; stamens upright; cluster large, loose, conical;
berries small to medium, black; skin thin, tough; pulp juicy, tender,
good; about a week earlier than Norton.

=Winslow.= (Rip.?) A seedling raised by Charles Winslow, of Cleveland,
Ohio, about 1857. Hardy and productive; bunch medium, long, compact;
berries small, round, black; pulp vinous and juicy; resembles Clinton
but is less acid; very early.

=Winter Wine.= (Simp. Linc. Bourq.) A cross between _Vitis simpsoni_ and
Marguerite by Munson in 1898. Stamens reflexed; bunch large with
medium-sized black berry; "extra late."

=Witt.= (Lab.) A white seedling of Concord; from Michael Witt, of
Columbus, Ohio, about 1880. Not very vigorous, hardy, moderately
healthy, very productive; clusters medium to large, conical, moderately
compact, sometimes shouldered; berries variable in size, usually large,
roundish, greenish-white or pale yellow with thin whitish bloom; pulp
tender, juicy, vinous, sweet; good; ripens with Concord or a little
before.

=Woodbury.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) _Woodbury White._ A seedling of Delaware
from D. B. Woodbury, Paris, Maine, about 1891. Described in _Bushberg
Catalogue_, 1894, as resembling Delaware in growth and foliage; bunch
medium, compact; berry larger than Delaware, slightly oblong,
greenish-white with fine bloom; skin thin, yet tough, almost
transparent; juicy, sweet, good; ripens two weeks before Concord; a very
good keeper.

=Woodbury.= Mentioned in the _United States Department of Agriculture
Report_ for 1863, as being on trial in the government experimental
garden.

=Woodcock Seedling.= Exhibited by H. Woodcock at the Western New York
Horticultural Society meeting in 1887. A large red grape, of very good
quality; ripens with Delaware.

=Woodford.= On trial in the United States Department of Agriculture
experimental vineyard in 1860. Vigorous; purple; pulpy, juicy, sweet.

=Woodriver.= According to _Bushberg Catalogue_, 1883, originated near
Woodriver, Washington County, Rhode Island, by a Mr. Brown. White, very
early, fine quality.

=Woodson.= From Prince Edward County, Virginia, previous to 1830. Bunch
medium, very compact; berry medium red; no pulp, rich; good for table
and wine; later than Cunningham.

=Wyman.= (Lab. Vin.) _Wyman's Seedling._ Exhibited by Joseph Breck in
1854 at a session of the fruit committee of the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society. Said to be a seedling of Catawba; berries large,
sweet and free of pulp; ripens with or before Isabella.

=Wynant.= (Lab. Vin.) According to Mitzky, 1893, a chance seedling grown
by D. W. Babcock, Dansville, New York; almost identical with Dutchess.

=Wyoming.= Noted in the _United States Patent Office Report_, 1860.
Vigorous; black; juicy, somewhat pulpy.

=Wylie's Seedlings.= Unnamed seedlings of Dr. A. P. Wylie, of Chester,
South Carolina:

_No. 4._ A cross between two hybrids. Described by originator in
_Bushberg Catalogue_, 1883, as bunch somewhat larger than Lenoir; berry
medium, of a clear transparent golden color; finest texture and flavor,
resembles White Frontignan; ripens as early as Concord.

_Concord and Foreign No. 8._ (Vin. Lab.) Seedling of Concord and Bowood
Muscat. Strong grower; foliage Labrusca; cluster very large, loose;
berry very large, black, of foreign texture; skin thick; ripens with
Catawba.

_Delaware and Concord No. 1._ (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) Very hardy with
Labrusca foliage; a great bearer; bunch and berry medium; skin thick,
dark red; juicy, rich and sweet, slightly musky.

_Halifax and Delaware No. 30._ (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) The same color as
Delaware with bunch of same size and berries one half larger; texture
and flavor also much like Delaware; generally more healthy than that
variety; a great bearer.

_Halifax and Delaware No. 38._ (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) Hardy and healthy with
Labrusca foliage, not so strong a grower as _No. 30_; dark red in color
with purple bloom and superior to _No. 30_ in flavor.

_Halifax and Delaware No. 49._ (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A black grape of high
vinous flavor.

_Halifax and Delaware No. 55._ (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) Bunch medium, long,
shouldered; berries large, dark blue or purple with a purple bloom;
flesh tender, juicy, very sweet, sprightly, high flavored; best.

_Halifax and Hamburg No. 11._ (Vin. Lab.) Very productive and healthy;
bunch medium; berry medium, black, with thick skin.

_Hybrid Scuppernong No. 4._ (Rot.) Exhibited at the American Pomological
Society in 1877. Healthy, very productive; bunches medium, compact;
berry round, greenish-white; pulp nearly melting, very juicy, sprightly,
vinous, with a musky aroma; good.

_Hybrid Scuppernong No. 5._ (Rot. Vin.) Parentage, Bland Madeira and
Foreign No. 1, crossed with a staminate hybrid Scuppernong produced by
impregnating Black Hamburg with Scuppernong. Healthy and hardy; bunch
medium; berries large, white, transparent with thin tough skin; almost
pulpless, rich, sweet, with a peculiar flavor; as early as Concord.

=Xenia.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) Parentage, Delaware, Goethe and Triumph;
from Munson. Vigorous; cluster medium, compact; berry very large, white;
skin thin and tough; pulp meaty, tender, sprightly, high flavor; best;
very late, with Fern Munson or just before.

=Xlnta.= (Linc. Rup. Vin. Lab.). One of Munson's seedlings; America
fertilized with R. W. Munson. Vigorous, hardy in Southern States;
stamens reflexed; cluster large, cylindrical, shouldered, fairly
compact; berries medium to large, globular, black, with little bloom;
skin thin; pulp meaty, tender, sprightly; season with or later than
Concord.

=Yoakum.= (Bourq.) According to _Bushberg Catalogue_, 1894, "resembling
the Herbemont, its juice is of deeper color, its foliage is more deeply
lobed, but otherwise much inferior; ripening unevenly and being less
productive."

=Yomago.= (Lab. Vin. Bourq.) A cross between Delago and Brilliant, by
Munson, about 1894. As grown at this Station, a weak grower, not hardy,
variable in productiveness; flowers fertile, bloom late; stamens
upright; clusters large, usually single-shouldered, compact; berries
large, roundish, black, glossy, covered with heavy blue bloom; skin thin
and tender; flesh pale green, tender, spicy, sweet with Post-oak flavor;
fair to good; it is doubtful if it will ripen in this locality.

=Yonkers.= (Lab.) A Concord seedling; from J. W. Gray, Atwood, Illinois.
Hardy, not a strong grower; bunch medium, shouldered, compact; berries
large, round, light green; sweet; good; ripens a little before Concord.

=York Claret.= (Lab.) According to Prince, 1830, a native cultivated
near York, Pennsylvania, where it is much esteemed for wine. Bunches and
berries smaller than those of Alexander; without pulp, very juicy,
sweet.

=York Lisbon.= (Lab. Vin.) Noted by Prince in 1830. Grown around York,
Pennsylvania. Resembles Alexander but larger and a little elongated and
the pulp is more acid; coarse, pulpy and foxy; some consider it
identical with Alexander.

=York Madeira.= (Lab. Vin.?) _Baldwin's Early; Black German; Canby's
August; German Wine; Large German; Marion Port; Monteith; Shepherd's
Port Wine; Small German; Tryon; Wolfe._ An old variety of Isabella type,
originated at York, Pennsylvania. Vigorous, generally hardy, productive;
cluster medium, compact, shouldered; berries medium, roundish, inclining
to oval, black; pulp juicy, sweet, somewhat vinous, pleasant; ripens
with Isabella or before. Some consider Marion (II) identical with this
variety.

=Young America.= (Lab.) Raised by Samuel Miller, of Calmdale,
Pennsylvania, about 1860. A seedling of Concord and resembling its
parent in color and shape but three weeks later.

=Zane.= From a Mr. Zane, Wheeling, West Virginia; found by him growing
wild on Wheeling Island. Berry medium, red.

=Zelia.= (Lab. Vin.) Parentage, Telegraph crossed with Black Hamburg;
from C. J. Copley, Stapleton, New York. Medium in vigor, productive,
quite hardy; leaves five-lobed, some indistinctly so, dull green;
cluster large, compact; berry very large, black; skin thin, fine bloom;
pulp tender, rich, sweet, aromatic; season earlier than Concord.

=Zinnia.= (Lab.) Origin unknown. Cluster large, loose, shouldered; berry
medium, round, black with a rich bloom.

=Zita.= (Lab. Bourq. Vin.) A seedling of Delaware; from John Sacksteder,
Leavenworth, Crawford County, Indiana. Vigorous, productive, healthy;
cluster above medium; berry medium, round, yellow.

=Zoe.= Mentioned by Campbell in _Garden and Forest_, 1890, as a northern
grape attaining its best quality in long seasons.




BIBLIOGRAPHY AND REFERENCES WITH ABBREVIATIONS USED


In the standard works listed below, the date of copyright has been
preferred to that of the title page although where there are several
editions from the same copyright they are given, so far as our knowledge
permits. This is thought to be more just to the writers as the copyright
date is usually a better indication of the time when the book was
written than the date of publication. An effort has been made to present
a complete bibliography of grape literature in the United States
including many books which, owing to their nature, have been of no use
in the preparation of this work. In addition there are given all
agricultural works and periodicals to which references will be found in
the preceding pages. Reports and bulletins of experiment stations and
reports of horticultural societies are not included as in each case the
abbreviation used is standard and sufficiently full for ready
recognition. Only such European works have been included as were found
useful in preparing the volume.

     Adlum A Memoir on the Cultivation of the Vine in America and the
     Best Mode of Making Wine. By John Adlum. Washington: 1823. Second
     edition, 1828.

     Allen A Practical Treatise on the Culture and Treatment of the
     Grape Vine, etc. By J. Fisk Allen. Second edition, Boston: 1848.
     Third edition, 1853.

     Amer. Farmer The American Farmer. Baltimore: 1819-1832.

     Amer. Gard. The American Garden. 1888-1891. American Gardening, New
     York: 1892-1904. (The American Garden and Popular Gardening were
     combined in 1892 to form American Gardening.)

     Am. Hort. An. American Horticultural Annual. A Year Book of
     Horticultural Progress, etc. New York: 1867-1871.

     Am. Jour. Hort. The American Journal of Horticulture and Florist's
     Companion. Name changed in 1869 to Tilton's Journal of Horticulture
     and Florist's Companion. Boston: 1867-1871.

     Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt. American Pomological Society Report. Issued
     usually biennially from 1852 to date.

     Andrae A Guide to the Cultivation of the Grape Vine in Texas, and
     Instructions for Wine-Making. By E. H. Andrae. Dallas, Texas:
     1890.

     An. Hort. Annals of Horticulture in North America. A Witness of
     Passing Events and a Record of Progress. By L. H. Bailey. New York:
     1889-1893. (Appearing annually.)

     Antill An Essay on the Cultivation of the Vine, etc. By Edward
     Antill. (Appearing in Transactions American Philosophical Society.)
     Philadelphia: 1771.

     Bailey American Grape Training; An Account of the Leading Forms Now
     in Use of Training the American Grapes. By L. H. Bailey. New York:
     1893.

     Barry The Fruit Garden; A Treatise, etc. By P. Barry. New York:
     1851. Revised edition (Barry's Fruit Garden), New York: 1872.
     Revised edition (Barry's Fruit Garden), New York: 1883.

     Bolling Sketch of Vine Culture. By Robert Bolling. (Never printed
     but several manuscript copies were circulated during the latter
     half of the 18th century. Extracts were published in several
     periodicals.)

     Bright Bright's Single Stem Dwarf and Renewal System of Grape
     Culture, etc. By William Bright. New York: 1860. Second edition,
     New York: 1861. (Same copyright date as first edition.)

     Buchanan The Culture of the Grape and Wine-Making. By Robert
     Buchanan. Cincinnati: 1852-1860 or later. (Eight editions or more.)

     Budd-Hansen American Horticultural Manual, etc. By J. L. Budd and
     N. E. Hansen. New York and London: 1903.

     Busby Journal of a Recent Visit to the Principal Vineyards of Spain
     and France, etc. By James Busby, Esq. New York and Boston: 1835.

     Bush. Cat. Illustrated Descriptive Catalogue of American Grape
     Vines, etc. By Bush and Son and Meissner. Third edition, St. Louis:
     1883. Fourth edition same, St. Louis: 1894.

     Can. Hort. Canadian Horticulturist. Toronto: 1878 to date.

     Chorlton The Cold Grapery, from Direct American Practice, etc. By
     Wm. Chorlton. New York: 1853.

     Chorlton The American Grape Growers' Guide, etc. By Wm. Chorlton.
     Many editions. With the exception of a final chapter added to the
     later editions there are no revisions. New York: 1852-1883.

     Cole The American Fruit Book, etc. By S. W. Cole. Boston and New
     York: 1849.

     Cope Physiography in its Application to Grape Culture. An essay in
     Saunders' "Both Sides of the Grape Question".

     De Berneaud The Vine-Dresser's Theoretical and Practical Manual,
     etc. By Thiebaut de Berneaud. (Translated from the French.) New
     York: 1829.

     Denniston Grape Culture in Steuben County, New York. By G.
     Denniston. Albany: 1865. (In New York Agricultural Society Report,
     and also as a separate.)

     Dom. Enc. The Domestic Encyclopedia; or a Dictionary of Facts, etc.
     By A. F. M. Willich. First American edition with additions by James
     Mease. In five volumes. (The fifth volume contains an article on
     grapes by William Bartram and James Mease.) Philadelphia: 1804.

     Downing The Fruits and Fruit Trees of America. By A. J. Downing,
     1845. Second edition, same text, with colored plates, 1847. First
     revision, by Charles Downing, 1857. Second revision, 1869. First
     appendix, 1872. Second appendix, 1876. Third appendix, 1881.

     Du Breuil The Thomery System of Grape Culture. (A translation from
     the French.) New York: No date.

     Du Breuil Vineyard Culture, etc. By A. Du Breuil. Translated (from
     the French) by E. & C. Parker, with notes and adaptations by John
     A. Warder. Cincinnati: 1867.

     Dufour The American Vine-Dresser's Guide, etc. By John James
     Dufour. Cincinnati: 1826.

     Eisen The Raisin Industry, etc. By Gustav Eisen. San Francisco:
     1890.

     Elliott Elliott's Fruit Book, or the American Fruit Growers' Guide,
     etc. By F. R. Elliott. New York: 1854. Revised edition (same),
     1859.

     Ev. of Nat. Fruits Sketch of the Evolution of our Native Fruits. By
     L. H. Bailey. New York: 1898.

     Fisher Observations on the Character and Culture of the European
     Vine, etc. By S. I. Fisher. Philadelphia: 1834.

     Flagg Three Seasons in European Vineyards, etc. By Wm. J. Flagg.
     New York: 1869.

     Floy-Lind. Guide to the Orchard and Fruit Garden, etc. By George
     Lindley; edited by John Lindley. American edition with notes and
     additions by Michael Floy. New York: 1833.

     Fuller The Grape Culturist; a Treatise, etc. By Andrew S. Fuller.
     New York: 1864. Same, new and enlarged edition, New York: 1867.
     Same, new revised and enlarged edition, New York: 1894.

     Gard. Chron. Gardener's Chronicle, etc. London: 1841 to date.

     Gar. Mon. Gardener's Monthly, etc. Thomas Meehan, editor.
     Philadelphia: 1859-1887.

     Goessman Contribution to the Chemistry of the American Grape Vine.
     By C. A. Goessman. In Proceedings American Chemical Society, volume
     2, and also as separate.

     Grape Cult. The Grape Culturist, a Monthly Journal, etc. George
     Husmann, editor. St. Louis: 1869-1871.

     Grant Manual of the Vine. By C. W. Grant, Iona, N. Y.: 1864.

     Haraszthy Grape Culture, Wines and Wine-Making, etc. By A.
     Haraszthy. New York: 1862.

     Haskell An Account of Various Experiments for the Production of New
     and Desirable Grapes. Ipswich, Mass.: 1877.

     Hoare A Practical Treatise on the Cultivation of the Grape Vine on
     Open Walls. By Clement Hoare. Boston: 1837. Same, Boston: 1840.
     Same, Boston: 1845. Same, New York: 1847.

     Hofer Grape Growing. A Simple Treatise on the Single Pole System,
     etc. By A. F. Hofer. New York: 1878.

     Hooper Hooper's Western Fruit Book, etc. By E. J. Hooper.
     Cincinnati: 1857.

     Horticola The pseudonym of Dr. Charles Siedhof who translated and
     added notes to Mohr's "The Grape Vine," etc.

     Horticulturist The Horticulturist and Journal of Rural Art and
     Rural Taste. Albany, Philadelphia and New York: 1846-1875.

     Husmann The Cultivation of the Native Grape and Manufacture of
     American Wines. By George Husmann. New York: 1866.

     Husmann American Grape Growing and Wine Making. By George Husmann.
     Fourth edition, New York: 1895.

     Hyatt Hyatt's Handbook of Grape Culture, etc. By T. Hart Hyatt. San
     Francisco: 1867.

     Johnson Rural Economy, etc. By S. W. Johnson. New York: 1806.

     Keech The Grape Growers' Guide. By J. Keech. Waterloo, N. Y.: 1869.

     Lond. Hort. Soc. Cat. A Catalog of the Fruits Cultivated in the
     Garden of the Horticultural Society of London. First edition,
     London: 1826. Same, second edition, 1831.

     Longworth The Cultivation of the Grape and Manufacture of Wine. By
     N. Longworth. Cincinnati: 1846.

     Loubat The American Vine Dresser's Guide. By Alphonse Loubat. New
     York: 1827. Same, 1872.

     McMahon The American Gardener's Calendar, etc. By Bernard McMahon.
     Philadelphia: 1806.

     McMinn A Contribution to the Classification of the Species and
     Varieties of the Grape Vine. By J. M. McMinn. (An essay appearing
     in Saunders' "Both Sides of the Grape Question.")

     McMurtrie Report upon Statistics of Grape Culture and Wine
     Production in the United States for 1880. By Wm. McMurtrie, United
     States Department of Agriculture. Washington: 1881.

     Mag. Hort. Magazine of Horticulture. Published first two years
     under name American Gardener's Magazine. C. M. Hovey, editor.
     Boston: 1835-1868.

     Mead An Elementary Treatise on American Grape Culture and Wine
     Making. By Peter B. Mead. New York: 1867.

     Mitzky Our Native Grape, etc. Published by C. Mitzky & Co.
     Rochester: 1893.

     Mohr The Grape Vine. A Practically Scientific Treatise on its
     Management, etc. By Frederick Mohr. Translated from the German by
     Horticola (Charles Siedhof). New York: 1867.

     Muench School for American Grape Culture, etc. By Frederick Muench.
     Translated from the German by Elizabeth H. Cutter. St. Louis: 1865.

     Munson Classification and Generic Synopsis of the Wild Grapes of
     North America. By T. V. Munson. United States Department of
     Agriculture, Division of Pomology, Bulletin 3. Washington: 1890.

     My Vineyard My Vineyard at Lakeview. By a western grape-grower (A.
     N. Prentiss). New York: 1866.

     Persoz New Process for the Culture of the Vine. By Persoz.
     Translated by J. O. C. Barclay. New York: 1856.

     Phelps The Vine: Its Culture in the United States, etc. By R. H.
     Phelps. Hartford: 1855.

     Phin Open Air Grape Culture, etc. By John Phin. New York: 1862.
     Same, 1876.

     Prince A Treatise on the Vine, etc. By William Robert Prince, aided
     by William Prince. New York: 1830.

     Rafinesque American Manual of the Grape Vines, etc. By C. S.
     Rafinesque. Philadelphia: 1830.

     Rec. of Hort. Woodward's Record of Horticulture. Edited by A. S.
     Fuller. (An annual). New York: 1866-1868.

     Reemelin The Vine-Dresser's Manual; An Illustrated Treatise, etc.
     By Charles Reemelin. New York: 1856.

     Rural N. Y. Rural New Yorker. Rochester and New York: 1850 to date.

     Saunders Both Sides of the Grape Question, etc.: Three essays on
     grape culture by Wm. Saunders, F. J. Cope and J. M. McMinn.
     Philadelphia: 1860.

     Siedhof, Charles (See Mohr.)

     Sou. Agr. Southern Agriculturist, Horticulturist, etc. Charleston:
     1828-1846.

     Speechly A Treatise on the Culture of the Vine, etc. By William
     Speechly. Dublin: 1791.

     Spooner The Cultivation of American Grape Vines, etc. By Alden
     Spooner. Brooklyn: 1846.

     Story of the Vine The Story of the Vine. By Edward R. Emerson. New
     York and London: 1901.

     Strong Culture of the Grape. By W. C. Strong. Boston: 1866.

     Thomas The American Fruit Culturist. By J. J. Thomas. Published at
     various places. First edition, 1846; twenty-first edition, 1903.

     Tomes The Champagne Country. By Robert Tomes. New York: 1867.

     Traite gen. de vit. Traite general de viticulture, etc. Published
     under the direction of P. Viala and V. Vermorel assisted by many
     others. In six volumes. Paris: 1903.

     Tryon A Practical Treatise on Grape Culture, etc. By J. H. Tryon.
     Willoughby, Ohio: 1887. Same, second edition, Willoughby, Ohio:
     1893.

     U. S. D. A. Rpt. Reports of the United States Department of
     Agriculture: 1862 to date.

     U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt. Reports of the Agricultural Section of the
     United States Patent Office: 1837 to 1861.

     Vineyardist The Vineyardist. Penn Yan, N. Y.

     Wait Wines and Vines of California, etc. By Frona Eunice Wait. San
     Francisco: 1889.

     Warder See Du Breuil.

     West. Hort. Rev. Western Horticultural Review. J. A. Warder,
     editor. Cincinnati: 1850-1853.

     Woodward Woodward's Graperies and Horticultural Buildings. By Geo.
     E. & F. W. Woodward. New York: 1865.




INDEX.


(Names of varieties in this index, if accepted names, appear in roman
type; if synonyms, in italics.)

Abby Clingotten, 433

Ada, 433

Adaptation, 68;
  influence of air current, 71;
  of altitude and latitude, 69;
  of fertility, 70;
  of insects and fungi, 72;
  of moisture, 69, 70;
  of soil, 71;
  of temperature, 69

Adelaide, 433

Adelia, 433

Adeline, 433

Adirondac, 157

Adlum, John, attempt to establish an experimental farm, 45, 46;
  book by, 45;
  life of, 45;
  quoted, 45, 46, 161;
  var. found by, 449

Admirable, 433

_Admirable_ (syn. of Fern Munson), 271

_Admiral_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Adobe, 433

_Adobe Land grape_ (syn. of _V. champini_), 124

Advance, 158

Agawam, 158

Aiken, 433

Air currents, 71

Alabama, grapes in, 20

_Alabama_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Alabama_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 369

Albaiis, 433

Albania, 433

Albert, 433

Albino, 433

Alderton, D., var. found by, 466

Aledo, 433

Aletha, 433

Alexander, 17, 45, 50, 160

_Alexander_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Alexander, John, var. found by, 161

Alexander, S. R., var. orig. by, 163

Alexander Winter, 163

_Alexander's_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

_Alexandria_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

Alfarata, 434

Alice (I), 164

Alice (II), 164

Alice Lee, 434

Allair, 434

Allen, John Fisk, var. orig. by, 166, 461

Allen's Hybrid 56, 57, 165

Alma, 434

Alphonse, 434

Aluwe, 434

Alvey, 434

_Alvey's Lenori_ (syn. of Lenori), 479

_Alvey's Logan_ (syn. of Logan), 481

Amadas and Barlowe, quoted, 30, 31, 51

Amalia, 434

Amanda, 434

Ambecon, 434

Amber, 434

_Amber_ (syn. of Early Amber), 455

Amber Queen, 166

Ambrosia, 167

_Amelia_ (syn. of Amalia), 434

Amerbonte, 434

America, 168

American grapes, characters of, 3, 4, 98, 103, 105;
  distribution of, 26;
  early history of, 26 et seq.;
  resistance to disease, 6;
  species of, 107

_American grape vine_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138

American Hamburg, 434

_American Muscadine_ (syn. of Scuppernong), 399

Amersion, 434

Amethyst, 169

Aminia, 170

Amonta, 435

_Amoreaux_ (syn. of Louisiana), 331

_Amoreux_ (syn. of Rulander), 508

Amos, 435

Amy, 435

Andover, 435

Anida, 435

Anna, 435

_Ann Arbor_ (syn. of White Ann Arbor), 523

Annie M., 435

Anthracnose, 87

Antill, Edward, essay by, 15, 40;
  quoted, 41

Antoinette, 171

Anuta, 435

Arbeka, 435

Archer, 435

_Archer_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Archer, Ellis S., var. orig. by, 435

_Arcott_ (syn. of Cassady), 445

Ariadne, 435

_Arizona grape_ (syn. of _V. arizonica_), 133

_Arizonensis_ (syn. of _V. arizonica_), 133

Arkansas, grapes in, 54

_Arkansas_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

_Arkansas_ (syn. of Cynthiana), 228

_Arkansas_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109

Arkansaw, 435

Armalaga, 435

Armbrilong, 435

Armlong, 435

Arnold, Charles, life of, 200;
  var. orig. by, 174, 190, 200, 375, 450

_Arnold's Hybrid No. 1_ (syn. of Othello), 374

_Arnold's No. 2_ (syn. of Cornucopia), 450

_Arnold's No. 5_ (syn. of Autuchon), 173

_Arnold's No. 8_ (syn. of Brant), 190

_Arnold's No. 16_ (syn. of Canada), 199

_Arnott_ (syn. of Cassady), 445

Aroma, 435

Arrold, 436

_Arrott_ (syn. of Cassady), 445

Arthur, J. S., var. found by, 500

_Ash_ (syn. of Ironclad), 306

_Ash-leaved grape_ (syn. of _V. cinerea_), 131

_Ashy grape_ (syn. of _V. cinerea_), 131

_Asiatic Wine grape_ (syn. of _V. vinifera_), 154

Atavite, 436

Atoka, 436

Auburn Pearl, 436

Aughwick, 436

August Coral, 436

August Giant, 172

_August Isabella_ (syn. of Valentine), 519

August Pioneer, 436

Augusta, 436

Augustina, 436

_Australian_ (syn. of Huntingdon), 471

Australis, 436

Auteonello, 436

Autuchon, 173

Avery, John P., var. orig. by, 436

Avery, Seth, var. orig. by, 462

Avery Prolific, 436

Avilla, 436

Ayres, E. J., var. orig. by, 436

Ayres Pride, 436

Azure, 436


Babcock, D. W., var. orig. by, 527

Bacchus, 174

Bachman, Joseph, var. orig. by, 177, 406, 515

Badart, 437

Bailey, 176

Bailey, L. H., cited, 106, 121, 149;
  life of, 142;
  quoted, 4, 112, 133, 144;
  work on Vitis by, 101;
  writings of, 142

Bailey Prolific, 437

Bailie, 437

Bailie, Samuel, var. orig. by, 437

Baker, 437

Baldwin Lenoir, 437

_Baldwin's Early_ (syn. of York Madeira), 529

Baltimore Seedling, 437

Balziger, 437

Balziger, J., var. orig. by, 437

_Balziger's Concord Seedling No. 2_, 437

_Balziger's No. 32_, 437

Banner, 177

Barbara, 437

Bark, taxonomic value of, 105

Barnes, 437

Barnes, Parker, var. orig. by, 437

Baroness, 437

Barry, 177

Barry, Patrick, cited, 350

_Barry's No. 19_ (syn. of Rochester), 388

Bartlett, 437

Bartram, John, life of, 97

Bartram, William, cited, 161, 162;
  life of, 97;
  quoted, 4, 67, 139;
  species compared by, 98;
  works of, 97

Bashtite, H. T., var. found by, 211

Bates, 437

Bauchman Red Fox, 437

Baxter, 437

Bay State, 437

Beach, 438

Beach, Dr. Soloman, mentioned, 206

Beach, S. A., quoted, 105

_Beach grape_ (syn. of _V. longii_), 123

Beacon, 179

_Beaconsfield_ (syn. of Champion), 210

Beagle, 438

Beansville, 438

Beaufort, 438

Beauty, 180

Beauty of Minnesota, 438

Beaverdam, 438

Beeby Black, 438

Belinda, 438

Bell, 181

Bellomont, Earl of, cited, 13;
  quoted, 12

Belton, 438

Belvidere, 438

Belvin, 438

Ben, 438

Ben Hur, 438

Benjamin, 438

Bentham, George, life of, 135;
  works of, 135

Berckmans, 182

Berckmans, P. J., mentioned, 182

Berks, 439

Berlandier, Jean Louis, life of, 131

Berlaussel, 439

Berlin, 439

_Bermuda vine_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117

Bertha, 439

Bertrand, 183

Bessey, C. E., cited, 106

Beta, 439

Bettina, 439

Beverly, Robert, quoted, 8, 33, 38, 39

_Big B Con_ (syn. of Beacon), 179

Big Berry, 439

Big Black, 439

_Big Bunch_ (syn. of Big Berry), 439

Big Cluster, 439

_Big Concord_ (syn. of Jumbo), 475

_Big Extra_ (syn. of Extra), 460

Big Hope, 439

Big Ozark, 439

_Big Red_ (syn. of Collier), 449

_Bird grape_ (syn. of _V. munsoniana_), 112

Bird's Egg, 439

Bird's-eye rot (See Anthracnose)

Bishop, 440

Bishop, D., var. orig. by, 440

Bismarck, 440

Bissell, J. W., cited, 214

Black, Dr. R. B., var. found by, 478

Black Bear, 440

_Black Cape_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Black Claret, 440

Black Cluster, 440

Black Delaware, 440

_Black Delaware_ (syn. of Nectar), 358

Black Defiance, 184

Black Eagle, 185

_Black El Paso_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Black Fox_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150

_Black German_ (syn. of Marion (I)), 339

_Black German_ (syn. of York Madeira), 529

_Black Gibraltar_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

_Black Grape_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

_Black Guignard_ (syn. of Guignard), 465

Black Hamburg, 186

Black Hawk, 188

Black Heart, 440

Black Herbemont, 440

Black Imperial, 189

_Black July_ (syn. of Devereaux), 235

_Black July_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Black King, 440

_Black Lenoir_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Black Madeira, 440

_Black Palestine_ (syn. of Orwigsburg), 497

Black Pearl, 189

_Black Portugal_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Black Rose, 440

Black-rot, 86

Black September, 440

_Black Souvignon_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Black Spanish_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Black Spanish_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 369

_Black Spanish Alabama_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 369

Blackstone, 441

Black Taylor, 441

_Black Teneriffe_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Black Tennessee, 441

Black Virginia, 441

Blackwood, 441

Blanco, 441

Bland, 441

_Bland's Fox_ (syn. of Bland), 441

_Bland's grape_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125

_Bland's Madeira_ (syn. of Bland), 441

_Bland's Pale Red_ (syn. of Bland), 441

_Bland's Virginia_ (syn. of Bland), 441

Blondin, 441

Blood, 441

Blood, Mr., var. originated by, 441

Blood Black, 441

Blood White, 441

_Bloom_ (syn. of Creveling), 224

_Bloomburg_ (syn. of Creveling), 224

Blue Dyer, 441

_Blue Elsingburg_ (syn. of Elsingburgh), 257

Blue Favorite, 442

_Blue French_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Blue French_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 370

_Blue grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138

_Blue Grape_ (syn. of Devereaux), 235

_Blue grape_ (syn. of _V. bicolor_), 144

_Blue Grape of the South_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Blue Imperial, 442

_Blue Seedling_ (syn. of Bertrand), 183

_Blue Tart_ (syn. of Oporto), 372

_Blue Trollinger_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

_Blue Vine Grape_ (syn. of Oporto), 372

Boadicea, 442

_Bocksaugen_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

_Bogue's Eureka_ (syn. of Eureka (I)), 268

Bokchito, 442

Bolling, Col. Robert, book by, 15;
  quoted, 40

_Bommerer_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Bonne Madame, 442

Bossung, Jacob P., var. orig. by, 509

Bostwick, Rev. William, mentioned, 54, 83

Bottsi, 442

_Bottsi_ (syn. of Herbemont), 288

Boulevard, 442

Bowker, Mr., var. orig. by, 492

Bowman, 442

_Brackett's Seedling_ (syn. of Winchester), 526

_Brackett's Winchester_ (syn. of Winchester), 526

Braddock, 442

Bradley, 442

Braendley, 442

Brand White, 442

Brant, 190

Breck, 442

Breece, J. S., var. orig. by, 436, 451

Bridgewater, 442

Brighton, 191

Brilliant, 193

Broderick, Mr., var. orig. by, 436

Brown, 195

Brown, Mr., var. orig. by, 527

Brown, Jason, var. orig. by, 469

Brown, Wm. B., quoted, 195;
  var. found by, 195

_Brown French_ (syn. of Herbemont), 288

_Brown Hamburgh_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

_Brown Seedling_ (syn. of Brown), 195

_Brown's Early_ (syn. of Brown), 195

Bruce, Philip Alexander, quoted, 32

Brunk, 443

_Buck Grape_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

Buckley, Samuel Botsford, cited, 128;
  life of 116, 117

Buist, 443

Buist, H. B., var. orig. by, 443

_Bull_ (syn. of Scuppernong), 399

Bull, Ephraim W., life of, 221;
  var. orig. by, 221, 223, 264, 389, 479, 481, 488, 508, 519

_Bull grape_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 108

_Bull's Seedling_ (syn. of Concord), 219

_Bullace_ (syn. of Scuppernong), 399

_Bullace_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109

_Bullet_ (syn. of Scuppernong), 399

_Bullet grape_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 108

_Bullis_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109

_Bullit_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109

_Bullitt_ (syn. of Taylor), 408

Bullitt, Cuthbert, mentioned, 409

Bumper, 443

_Bunch grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138

Buncombe, 443

Bundy, 443

Bundy, David, var. orig. by, 217, 443

Burbank, Luther, var. orig. by, 455

_Burgunder_ (syn. of Louisiana), 331

_Burgundy_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Burgundy_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 370

_Burgundy of Georgia_ (syn. of Pauline), 499

Burlington, 443

Burnet, 443

Burr, John, life of, 251;
  var. orig. by, 251, 256, 301,
   322, 337, 405, 449, 460, 462, 472, 474, 486,
   487, 496, 497, 498, 499, 500, 502, 503, 511, 515, 524

_Burr No. 1_ (syn. of Jewel), 321

_Burr No. 9_ (syn. of Ideal), 301

_Burr No. 47_ (syn. of Leavenworth), 479

_Burr's Early_ (syn. of Jewel), 321

_Burr's No. 15_ (syn. of Paragon), 499

_Burr's No. 19_ (syn. of White Jewel), 524

Burroughs, 443

Burrows, J. G., var. orig. by, 443

_Burrows No. 42C_, 443

Burton Early, 443

_Burton's Early August_ (syn. of Early August), 455

Bush, 443

Bush, Isadore, cited, 119, 180, 208;
  life of, 119;
  quoted, 144

_Bush grape_ (syn. of _V. longii_), 123

_Bush grape of Texas_ (syn. of _V. rupestris_), 113

Bushberg, 443

Bushberg Catalogue, quoted, 189, 236

_Bushy grape_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109


Cabot, 444

Cairnano, 444

_California grape_ (syn. of _V. californica_), 135

_California grape_ (syn. of _V. girdiana_), 136

California, grapes in, 25;
  raisins in, 67

California region, 61

California Rosea, 444

California White, 444

Calkins, Mr., var. orig. by, 471

Calloway, 444

_Caloosa_ (syn. of _V. cariboea_), 146

_Caloosa grape_ (syn. of _V. candicans coriacea_), 148

Calypso, 444

Camaks, 444

Camaks, James, var. orig. by, 444

Cambridge, 444

Camden, 444

Cameron, John D., var. orig. by, 494

_Campbell_ (syn. of Campbell Early), 196

_Campbell_ (syn. of Early Golden), 456

Campbell, Geo. W., cited, 115;
  life of, 198;
  var. orig. by, 198, 413, 439, 475, 495, 500, 503, 523, 549, 550

Campbell Early, 196

_Campbell's Concord Hybrid No. 6_ (syn. of Triumph), 411

_Campbell's Seedling No. 6_ (syn. of Triumph), 411

Canaan, 444

Canada, 199

_Canadian Hamburg_ (syn. of Othello), 374

_Canadian Hybrid_ (syn. of Othello), 374

Canandaigua, 201

Canby, 444

Canby, W., var. orig. by, 444

_Canby's August_ (syn. of York Madeira), 529

_Canon grape_ (syn. of _V. arizonica_), 133

Canonicus, 444

_Canyon grape_ (syn. of _V. arizonica_), 133

_Cape_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

_Cape_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

_Cape grape_ (syn. of Alexander), 50

Cape May Prolific, 444

_Cape of Good Hope grape_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

Capital, 444

Captain, 201

_Captraube_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Carlotte, 444

Carman, 202

Carminet, 445

_Carolina_ (syn. of Caroline), 445

Carolina Blue Muscadine, 445

_Carolina Powel_ (syn. of Bland), 441

Caroline, 445

Carpenter, Charles, var. orig. by, 448, 458, 483, 491

_Carpenter's Seedling_ (syn. of Mottled), 491

Carter, 445

_Carter_ (syn. of To-Kalon), 410

Carver, 445

Case, 445

Case, S. D., var. found. by, 451

Case Crystal, 445

Caspar, 445

Caspar, A., var. orig. by, 445

Cassady, 445

Cassady, H. P., var. orig., by, 445

_Cat Bird grape_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125

_Cat grape_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125

Catarobe, 445

Catawba, 50, 203

_Catawba Tokay_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

_Catawissa_ (syn. of Creveling), 224

_Catawissa Bloom_ (syn. of Creveling), 224

Catherine, 445

Catoosa, 445

Cayuga, 208

Caywood, Andrew Jackson, life of, 247;
  var. orig. by, 247, 272, 358, 381, 414, 420,
   445, 471, 480, 483, 487, 490, 524

_Caywood No. 1_, 445

_Caywood No. 50_, 445

Centennial, 208

Central lake district, 72;
  acreage of, 85;
  climate of, 82, 83;
  first plantings in, 83;
  first shipments from, 84;
  fungi in, 86, 87;
  geology of, 81;
  insects in, 85, 86;
  pruning and training in, 85;
  season of, 84, 85;
  soils of, 82;
  topography of, 82;
  wine in, 84

Challenge, 209

_Challenge_ (syn. of Othello), 374

Chambersburg White, 445

Chambril, 445

Champagne, 65;
  production of in U. S., 65

Champanel, 446

_Champania_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

_Champin grape_ (syn. of _V. champini_), 124

Champion, 210

Champova, 446

Chandler, 446

Chandler, N. M., var. orig. by, 446

Chapin, 446

Charles, 446

Charles A. Green, 446

_Chas. Downing_ (syn. of Downing), 242

Charlotte, 446

Charlton, 446

Charlton, John, var. orig. by, 446

Charter Oak, 446

Chase, Col. L., var. orig. by, 494, 575

Chautauqua, 211

Chautauqua district, 61, 72;
  acreage of, 78;
  care of vineyards in, 79;
  climate of, 75, 76;
  first plantings in, 54, 76;
  first shipments from, 77;
  geology of, 73;
  grape juice in, 66;
  history of, 76 et seq.;
  insects in, 79;
  production of grapes in, 79;
  rank of varieties in, 79;
  soil of, 74, 75;
  wine in, 77

Chavoush, 446

Cheowa, 446

Cherokee, 446

_Cherokee_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

_Cherokee_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Chicago, 446

_Chicken-grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138

Chidester, C. P., var. orig. by, 446, 447, 483

_Chidester No. 1_ (syn. of Lyon), 483

Chidester's Seedlings, 446, 447

Childers, James, var. found by, 476

Chillicothe, 447

Chippewa, 447

Chisholm, Dr. L. C., var. orig. by, 235, 334, 435, 443, 447, 463, 478, 525

Chisholm's Seedlings, 447

Chlorosis, 87

Chocolate, 447

Choteau, 448

Christian, Jacob, var. orig. by, 502

_Christie's Improved Isabella_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

_Christine_ (syn. of Telegraph), 409

Christine, Mr., var. found by, 410

Church Seedling, 448

_Cigar Box_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 370

_Cigar Box Grape_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Cincinnati Horticultural Society Report, quoted, 370, 371

_Clarence_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Claret, 448

Clarissa, 448

Clark, 448

Clark, B. W., var. orig. by, 361

Clark, Dr., var. orig. by, 506

Clark, J. T. C., var. orig. by, 449, 459

Clark, James W., var. orig. by, 448, 509

Clark Seedling, 448

Clarkes, 448

Classification of Vitis, 107

Claude, 448

Cleary, M. F., var. orig. by, 451

Clement, Asa, var. orig. by, 244

Cleopatra, 448

Clevener, 212

_Clevener_ (syn. of Louisiana), 331

Clifton, 448

Clifton, William, mentioned, 161

_Clifton's Constantia_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

Climax, 448

Clinton, 213

Clinton-Vialia, 448

Cloantha, 448

Cloeta, 216

Clough, James Milton, var. orig. by, 426

Clover Street Black, 448

Clover Street Red, 448

Cluster, 448

Clyde, 449

Cobb, Mr., var. found by, 409

Coble, H. C., var. orig. by, 452

Cochee, 449

Coe, 449

Coffin, J. T., var. orig. by, 485

_Coleman's White_ (syn. of Cuyahoga), 451

Colerain, 217

Colesvine, 449

Collier, 449

Collina, 449

Colorado, 449

Colp, 449

Columbia, 449

_Columbia Bloom_ (syn. of Creveling), 224

_Columbia County_ (syn. of Creveling), 224

Columbian, 449

_Columbian_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

_Columbian_ (syn. of Columbian Imperial), 218

Columbian Imperial, 218

Columbus, 449

_Common Blue grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138

Compacta, 449

_Conckling's Wilding_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Concord, 55, 57, 66, 219

Concord Chasselas, 449

Concord Muscat, 450

Concordia, 450

Conelva, 450

Connecticut, 450

Connecticut Seedling, 450

Conqueror, 450

_Constantia_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

_Constantia_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

_Continental_ (syn. of Centennial), 208

Cooke, Dr. Thos. R., var. orig. by, 487

Cooper, Joseph, var. orig. by, 450

Cooper Wine, 450

Copley, C. J., var. orig. by, 442, 444, 448,
   450, 452, 453, 482, 488, 498, 508, 523, 529

Copley's Hybrids, 450

Coppermine, 450

Corby, 450

Corby, C. C., var. orig. by, 450, 490

Coriel, 450

Cornelia, 450

Cornucopia, 450

Corporal, 451

Corsican, 451

Cortland, 451

Cotoctin, 451

Cottage, 222

_Courtland_ (syn. of Cortland), 451

Covert, 451

Covert, N. B., var. orig. by, 451

Cowan, 451

Cox, Mr., var. orig. by, 436

Cozy, 451

Craig, 451

Crandall, P. B., var. orig. by, 480

Crans, Peter, mentioned, 344

Crehore, Mrs. Diana, var. orig. by, 240

Creveling, 224

Critic, 451

Croton, 225

Crown, 451

Crystal, 451

Culbert, Dr. W. A. M., var. orig. by, 249, 451, 452, 463, 493, 503, 513

Culbert Seedling, 451

_Culbert's No. 3_ (syn. of Newburgh Muscat), 493

_Culbert No. 5_ (syn. of Golden Berry), 463

_Culbert's Seedling No. 6_ (syn. of Purple Bloom), 503

_Culinary Grape_ (syn. of White Northern Muscat), 524

Cunningham, 227

Cunningham, Jacob, var. orig. by, 228

_Currant grape_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109

Curtis, 451

Curtis, Dr., cited, 236

Curtis, Geo., var. orig. by, 491

Curtis, Mrs., var. orig. by, 464

Cuyahoga, 451

Cuyarano, 452

Cyncon, 452

Cynthiana, 228


Daisy, 230

Dale, Sir Thomas, mentioned, 32

Dana, 452

Dana, Francis, var. orig. by, 452, 494

Danbury, 452

Dankers, Jasper, quoted, 10

Daphne, 452

Dartmouth, 452

Darwin, 452

_David Hall Grape_ (syn. of Logan), 481

Davis, 452

Davkina, 452

Davy, General, mentioned, 206

Dawson, J. H., var. orig. by, 497

De Candolle, Augustin Pyramus, life of, 146;
  writings of, 146

De Candolle, Alphonse Louis Pierre Pyrame, life of, 146;
  writings of, 146;
  cited, 155

De Grasset, 452

Delago, 452

_Delaware and Clinton No. 1_ (syn. of Berckmans), 182

Delaware, 231

Delaware, grapes in, 34

Delaware, Lord, mentioned, 32;
  quoted, 6, 9

Delaware Seedling, 452

_Delaware Seedling No. 2_, 453

_Delaware Seedling No. 4_ (syn. of Delaware Seedling), 452

_Delaware Seedling No. 9_, 453

_Delaware Seedling No. 16_, 453

Delawba, 234

D'Elboux, 453

_D'Elboux Seedling_ (syn. of D'Elboux), 453

Delgoethe, 453

Delicious, 453

Delmar, 453

Delmerlie, 453

De Lyon, Abraham, mentioned, 9

Dempsey, P. C., var. orig. by, 443, 453

Dempsey's Seedlings, 453

Denison, 453

Dennis, John, var. found by, 454

Dennis Seedling, 454

Denniston, 454

Denniston, Isaac, var. found by, 454

Department of Agriculture Report, quoted, 396

Dery, Alexis, var. orig. by, 509

Dery, Magloire, var. orig. by, 463

De Soto, 454

Detroit, 454

Devereaux, 235

_Devereaux_ of "Gardening for the South" (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Devereaux_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Devereaux_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 370

Devereaux, Samuel M., mentioned, 236

_Devereux_ (syn. of Devereaux), 235

_Devereux_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Diamond, 236

_Diamond, Moore_ (syn. of Diamond), 236

Diana, 238

Diana Hamburg, 241

Diaphragm, taxonomic value of, 102

Dickens, Albert, cited, 271

Diller, 454

Dingwall White, 454

Dinkel, 454

_Diogenes_ (syn. of Ironclad), 306

_Dissected vine_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis lincecumii_), 140

Distribution, factors of, 69

_Diverse Leaved_ (syn. of Texas), 516

Dixie, 454

Dixon, Mr., var. orig. by, 475

_Doan's grape_ (syn. of _V. doaniana_), 137

Dr. Bain, 454

_Dr. Collier_ (syn. of Collier), 449

_Dr. Keller_ (syn. of Keller), 475

Dr. Kemp, 454

Dr. Robinson Seedling, 454

Dr. Warder, 454

Doder, 454

Doder, Mr., var. orig. by, 454

Dog Ridge, 454

Dolle, 455

Don Juan, 242

Donnelly, R. J., mentioned, 210

_Dorchester_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Dorinda, 455

Dorr Seedling, 455

Downing, 242

Downing, A. J., quoted, 56, 163

Downing, Charles, quoted, 191, 195, 341

_Downy Canyon grape_ (syn. of _V. arizonica_), 133

_Downy grape_ (syn. of _V. cinerea_), 131

Downy mildew, 86

Dracut Amber, 244

Dry Hill Beauty, 455

_Duck-shot grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138

Dufour, 455

Dufour, John James, cited, 163;
  life of, 17;
  quoted, 17, 18, 19, 20, 24, 47, 57, 162

Dunlap, 455

_Dunlap_ (syn. of Lady Dunlap), 478

Dunn, 455

_Dunn_ (syn. of Herbemont), 288

Duquett, 455

_Duquett's Seedling_ (syn. of Duquett), 455

Durfee, Dr., var. orig. by, 448

Dutch, American grape culture by, 10

_Dutch Hamburgh_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Dutchess, 246


Eames, Luther, var. orig. by, 455

Eames Seedling, 455

Early, 455

Early Amber, 455

_Early Amber_ (syn. of Dracut Amber), 244

Early August, 455

Early Bird, 456

Early Black, 456

_Early Black_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Early Black July, 456

Early Black Summer Grape, 456

_Early Champion_ (syn. of Champion), 210

Early Concord, 456

Early Daisy, 248

Early Dawn, 249

Early Delmonico, 456

Early Golden, 456

Early Harvest, 456

Early Hudson, 456

Early June, 456

Early Lebanon, 456

Early Malvasia, 456

Early Market, 457

_Early Northern Muscadine_ (syn. of Northern Muscadine), 365

Early Ohio, 249

Early Prolific, 457

Early Purple, 457

Early Vicks, 457

Early Victor, 250

Early Wine, 457

Eastern region, 59, 61

Eaton, 252

Eaton, Calvin, var. orig. by, 253

_Eaton's Seedling_ (syn. of Eaton), 252

Ebony, 457

Echland, 457

Eclipse (I), 254

Eclipse (II), 256

Eden, 457

Edmeston, 457

Edmeston, D. G., var. orig. by, 457

_Edmeston No. 1_ (syn. of Edmeston), 457

Edward, 457

Eggert, H., mentioned, 115

_Eggert's grape_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125

Eichelberger, Thomas, mentioned, 44

Elaine, 457

Elbling, 457

Eleala, 457

Electra, 458

Elizabeth, 458

Elkton, 458

Ellen, 458

Ellwanger and Barry, var. orig. by, 350, 388

_El Paso_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_El Paso_ (syn. of Mission), 489

_El Paso_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 370

Elpo, 458

_Elsenburgh_ (syn. of Elsinburgh), 257

_Elsinboro_ (syn. of Elsinburgh), 257

_Elsinborough_ (syn. of Elsinburgh), 257

_Elsinburg_ (syn. of Elsinburgh), 257

_Elsingburg_ (syn. of Elsinburgh), 257

Elsinburgh, 257

Elsmere, 458

Elvibach, 458

Elvicand, 258

Elvin, 458

Elvira, 259

_Elvira Seedling No. 8_ (syn. of Etta), 265

Emerald, 458

Emma, 458

Empire State, 261

Enfield, 458

Englemann, George, life of, 131, 132;
  cited, 106, 118, 123, 128, 132;
  quoted, 104, 105, 143;
  work on Vitis by, 100, 101

Engle, C., var. orig. by, 457, 458, 465, 468,
   469, 472, 487, 488, 503, 516, 520, 565

Engle's Seedlings, 458

English, American grape culture by, 6

Ensenberger, G. A., var. orig. by, 293, 311, 459, 468, 472, 475, 486

Ensenberger's Seedlings, 459

Eolia, 459

Epurill, 459

Erickson, 459

Erskine, E. M., mentioned, 62;
  quoted, 53

Essex, 263

Essex County (Mass.) Seedling, 459

Estave, Andrew, mentioned, 8

Estell, Mr., var. orig. by, 506

Estella, 459

Ester, 264

Etawa, 459

Etta, 265

Eudora, 459

Eufala, 459

Eugenia, 459

Eumedel, 459

Eumelan, 266

Eumorely, 460

Eureka (I), 268

Eureka (II), 268

_European grape_ (syn. _V. vinifera_), 154

European grapes, American culture by French, 9;
  characters of, 3, 4, 155;
  culture in Virginia, 8;
  first plantings in America, 6

Eva, 460

Evaline, 460

Evenden, Mr., var. orig. by, 483

_Everbearing grape_ (syn. of _V. munsoniana_), 112

Everett, 460

Ewing, 460

_Ewing's Seedling_ (syn. of Ewing), 460

Excelsior, 269

Exquisite, 460

Extra, 460


Faith, 270

_Fall grape_ (syn. of _V. berlandieri_), 130

Fallwicke, 460

Fallwicke, Joseph, var. orig. by, 460

_False Scuppernong_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109

Fancher, 460

_Fancher_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

Fanny Hoke, 460

Farmers Club, 460

Farrell, 460

Farrell, D., var. found by, 460

Far West, 461

Fay, Elijah, mentioned, 54;
  life of, 76

Fay, Lincoln, mentioned, 77

Feemster, 461

Feemster Favorite, 461

Fena, 461

_Fern_ (syn. of Fern Munson), 271

Fern Munson, 271

Fidia, 79, 80

_Fidia viticida_ (See Fidia)

Fisher, E. P., var. orig. by, 514, 522, 525

Fisk, 461

Fitchburg, 461

Flea-beetle, 80

_Fleish Traube_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Flickwir, 461

Flora, 461

Florence, 272

Florence, 461

Florida, grapes in, 30

_Florida Bird grape_ (syn. of _V. munsoniana_), 112

_Florida grape_ (syn. of _V. munsoniana_), 112

Flower of Missouri, 461

Flowers, 461

Fluke, Newton K., var. orig. by, 461

Fluke's Hybrids, 461

Folsom, S., var. orig. by, 268

_Foreign grape_ (syn. of _V. vinifera_), 154

Foster, 461

Fox, 461

_Fox_ (syn. of Fitchburg), 461

Fox grape, 39, 41

_Fox grape_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127

_Fox grape_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 149

_Fox grape_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 108

_Fox grape of the Northern States_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150

_Fox grape of the South_ (syn. of Scuppernong), 399

Foxy, defined, 4

_Frakenthaler_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Fraker, William A., var. found by, 436

_Framboisier_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Framingham, 461

Frances E. Willard, 462

_Franc's Hybrid_ (syn. of Hybrid Franc), 300

_Frankendale_ (syn. Black Hamburg), 186

_Frankenthaler gros noir_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Franklin, 462

Fredonia, 462

_Free Black_ (syn. of Fitchburg), 461

French, American grape culture by, 9

_French Grape_ (syn. of Craig), 451

_French grape_ (syn. of Delaware), 231

_French Grape_ (syn. of Franklin), 462

Fritz, 462

Frost, 462

_Frost_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117

_Frost grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138

_Frost grape_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127

_Frost-grape_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150

Fruit, taxonomic value of, 103


Gaertner, 272

Gallup Seedling, 462

Gandy, R. W., var. orig. by, 500

Garber, 462

Garber, J. B., var. orig. by, 433, 462, 485, 494

Garber Red Fox, 462

_Garber's Albino_ (syn. of Albino), 433

_Garber's Red-Fox_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

_Garber's White_ (syn. of Albino), 433

Gardner, Mr., var. orig. by, 466

Garfield, 462

Garnet, 462

Garrigues, 462

Gassman, 462

Gauger, 462

Gazelle, 462

_Gelbholziger Trollinger_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

General Pope, 462

Genesee, 463

Geneva, 274

Georgia, grapes in, 9, 54

Gerbig, A. V., var. orig. by, 463

_Gerbig No. 2_, 463

_Gerbig No. 10_, 463

_German Grape_ (syn. of Marion (II)), 341

German Seedling, 463

_German Wine_ (syn. of York Madeira), 529

Giant, 463

_Giant Leaf_ (syn. of Riesenblatt), 506

Gibb, 463

Gibbs, Mrs. Isabella, mentioned, 308

_Gibb's grape_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

_Gibralter_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Gilbert, Garret, var. orig. by, 463

Gilbert's White Shonga, 463

Gill Wylie, 463

Gilt Edge, 463

Glenfeld, 275

_Globe_ (syn. of Sage), 395

Godard, Francis, var. orig. by, 479

Goethe, 276

Goff, 277

Goff, E. S., var. orig. by, 278

Gold Coin, 280

Gold Dust, 463

Golden Beauty, 463

Golden Berry, 463

Golden Clinton, 463

Golden Concord, 464

Golden Drop, 281, 464

Golden Gem, 464

Golden Grain, 464

_Golden Pocklington_ (syn. of Pocklington), 379

Goldstein, 464

_Goldstein's Early_ (syn. of Goldstein), 464

Good Adle, 464

Goodale, Geo., var. orig. by, 524

Goodhue, C. H., var. orig. by, 498

Goodman, 464

Governor Ireland, 464

Governor Ross, 464

Graham, 464

Graham, W., var. orig. by, 464

Grant, Dr. C. W., life of, 304;
  var. orig. by, 304, 312

Grape districts of New York, 72

Grape fruit worm, 80, 81

Grape-growers, early, in United States, 48

Grape-growing, development of, 58;
  rank of, in states, 72;
  specialization of, 59;
  status of in 1830, 47, 48, 49;
  status of in 1859, 53, 55;
  status of in 1880, 59;
  status of in 1890, 59, 61

Grape juice, 66

Grape leaf-hopper, 80

Grape regions, 59, 60

Grape-vine flea-beetle, 80

Grape-vine fidia, 79

Grapes, adaptation of, 68;
  culture by Dutch, 10;
  culture by English, 6, 7;
  culture by Spaniards, 6;
  culture by Swedes, 10;
  early history of, 26;
  evolution of, 36;
  accounts of by early explorers, 29;
  classification of, 107, 108;
  improvement of, 28;
  evolution of, 26;
  first records of, 29;
  habitat of, 27;
  means of distribution of, 27;
  native, 39;
  value of, 36;
  self-fertility of, 104;
  self-sterility of, 104;
  soil for, 71;
  wild, as index to grape regions, 28;
  wild, in North America, 26

Gravel, 464

Gravestock, John, var. orig. by, 449

Gray, Asa, cited, 106

Gray, J. W., var. orig. by, 528

Gray, W. C., var. orig. by, 464

_Gray Delaware_ (syn. of Delaware), 231

Gray's Seedlings, 464

Grayson, 464

_Great Black Muscadine_ (syn. of Willis Large Black), 525

_Great Cluster_ (syn. of Big Berry), 439

Greeley, Horace, mentioned, 222;
  quoted, 220

Green Castle, 464

Green Early, 281

Greene, O. J., var. found by, 281

Greene, William E., var. found by, 417

Green, William E., var. orig. by, 456, 490

_Green Mountain_ (syn. of Winchell), 425

_Green Muscadine_ (syn. of Scuppernong), 399

_Green Scuppernong_ (syn. of Scuppernong), 399

Green Ulster, 465

Greer, 465

Grein Extra Early, 465

Grein Golden, 282

Grein, Nicholas, var. orig. by, 283, 349, 465

_Grein No. 7_ (syn. of Grein Extra Early), 465

_Grein's No. 1_ (syn. of Missouri Riesling), 349

_Grein's No. 2_ (syn. of Grein Golden), 282

Grein's Seedlings, 465

Grevaduly, 465

Greverson, 465

Grote, 465

Grove, 465

_Guernsey Grape_ (syn. of Willis Fredonia), 525

Guesta, 465

Guignard, 465

_Guignardia bidwellii_ (See Black-rot)

Guinevra, 465

Gula, 465

Gulch, 465

_Gulch grape_ (syn. of _V. arizonica_), 133

_Gulch grape_ (syn. of _V. longii_), 123

Gunn, Ward D., var. found by, 164


Hadden, Mr., var. orig. by, 465

Hadden Seedling, 465

Hagar, 466

_Hagar_ (syn. of Alvey), 434

Halifax, 466

Halifax Seedling, 466

Hall, 466

Hall, Mr., var. orig. by, 466

Hall, David, var. orig. by, 466

_Haltica chalybea_ (See Grape-vine flea-beetle)

Hamill Seedling, 466

Hamilton, 466

_Hampton Court Vine_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

_Hanover_ (southern) (syn. of Isabella), 307

Hardy Chasselas, 466

Hariot, Thomas, cited, 31

Harmer, 466

Harmer Seedling, 466

Harmonists, grape culture by, 19, 20

Harrell, 466

Harrell, Obed, var. orig. by, 466, 495

Harriet Beecher, 466

Harris, 466

_Harris_ (syn. Lenoir), 328

Harris, Mr., var. found by, 466

Harrison, 466, 467

_Hart_ (syn. of Devereaux), 235

_Hart_ (syn. of Lincoln), 480

Hart, Joseph, var. orig. by, 435, 458

Hartford, 284

_Hart's White_ (syn. of White Elizabeth), 523

_Hartford Prolific_ (syn. of Hartford), 284

Harvard Seedling, 467

Harvey, Dr., var. orig. by, 434

Harwood, 467

Harwood, Major, var. orig. by, 467

Hasbrouck, Eli, var. orig. by, 435

Haskell, George, var. orig. by, 467, 508

Haskell, N. R., var. orig. by, 467

Haskell's Seedlings, 467

Haskew, 467

Hattie, 467

Hatton, 467

Hattus, 467

Hawkins, Captain John, cited, 30

Hawkins, D. J., mentioned, 365

Hawkins, William, var. orig. by, 467, 468

_Hawkins No. 3_, 467

_Hawkins No. 10_, 468

Hayes, 286

Headlight, 287

Hearthenge, 468

_Heart-leaved vitis_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127

_Heath_ (syn. of Delaware), 231

Helen, 468

Helen Keller, 468

Helpfer, 468

Hencke, Ludwig, var. orig. by, 461, 479, 487, 508

Henderson, G., var. orig. by, 483

Henrico, 468

Henry, 468

_Hensell's Long Island_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Henshaw, 468

Herald, 468

Herbemont, 288

Herbemont, Nicholas, cited, 329;
  mentioned, 290, 309

_Herbemont Madeira_ (syn. of Herbemont), 288

Herbemont Seedling, 468

Herbert, 291

Hercules, 293

Heriulfusson, Biarni, mentioned, 29

Hermann, 294

_Hermann Jaeger_ (syn. of Jaeger), 314

Hero, 468

Hertia, 468

Hertlein, John, var. orig. by, 449

Hettie, 468

Heunis, 468

Hewitt, Alexander, quoted, 9

Hexamer, 469

Hexamer, Dr., var. orig. by, 469

Hiawasse, 469

_Hickman_ (syn. of Scuppernong), 399

Hicks, 295

Hidalgo, 296

Higginson, Francis, quoted, 12

Highland, 297

_Hilgarde_ (syn. of Fern Munson), 271

_Hill Grape of Ohio_ (syn. of Collina), 449

Hine, 469

_Hine Seedling_ (syn. of Hine), 469

History, of Old World grape, 1

Hoag, C. L., var. orig. by, 361

Hobbs, O. T., var. orig. by, 497

Hock, 469

Hofer, A. F., var. orig. by, 469

_Hofer Seedling No. 2_, 469

Holmes, 469

Honey, 469

_Honey_ (syn. of Raabe), 504

Honey Dew, 469

Hooker, 469

Hopeon, 469

Hopherbe, 469

Hopican, 470

Hopkins, 470

Hopkins, Mr., var. orig. by, 516

_Hopkins Early Red_ (syn. of Wyoming), 431

Horner, 470

Horner, Joe, var. orig. by, 470

Hosford, 299

Hosford, George, var. orig. by, 299, 439

_Hosford's Mammoth Seedling_ (syn. of Hosford), 299

_Hosford's Seedling_ (syn. of Hosford), 299

Hoskins, A., var. orig. by, 470

Hoskins Seedling, 470

Houghton, Francis, var. orig. by, 444

Howell, 470

Hubbard Seedless, 470

Huber, 470

Huber, Theophile, var. orig. by, 339, 433, 434,
   437, 439, 454, 457, 458, 468, 471, 472, 484, 516, 519

Huber's Seedlings, 470, 471

_Hudler_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Hudson, 471

Hudson River district, 72, 88;
  acreage of, 88;
  climate of, 89;
  diseases in, 92;
  early plantings in, 89, 90;
  early viticulturists in, 90;
  first plantings in, 55;
  geology of, 88;
  packing and shipping in, 91, 92;
  rain-fall in, 89;
  training and pruning in, 91;
  varieties in, 90, 91

Hueber, Lewis, var. orig. by, 496

Huguenots, 38

Hulings, Dr., mentioned, 258

Hulkerson's Seedlings, 471

Humboldt, 471

_Hunt_ (syn. of Herbemont), 288

Hunt, R. A., var. found by, 250

Hunt, R. H., var. found by, 371

Hunterville, 471

Huntingdon, 471

Husmann, 471

Husmann, G., cited, 115, 221;
  quoted, 114

_Husson_ (syn. of Devereaux), 235

Hutchinson, 471

Hutporup, 471

_Hybride de Concord No. 6_ (syn. of Triumph), 411

Hybrid, first Labrusca-vinifera, 56

Hybrid Franc, 300

Hyde, Wilkes, var. orig. by, 471

Hyde Black, 471

Hyde Eliza, 471


Icterida, 472

Ida, 472

Ideal, 301

Iden, 472

_Iden_ (syn. of Lake), 478

Illinois, grapes in, 53, 54

Illinois City, 472

Illinois Early, 472

Illinois Prolific, 472

_Imitation Hamburg_ (syn. of Union Village), 415

Imlay, Mr., mentioned, 326

Imperial, 302

_Imperial_ (syn. of Columbian Imperial), 218

Improved Purple Fox, 472

_Improved Warren_ (syn. of Harwood), 467

Indiana, 472

Indiana, grapes in, 20, 54

Indian Field, 472

Infloresence, taxonomic value of, 102

International, 472

Iola, 472

Iona, 302

Iowa, 472

Iowa, grapes in, 61

Iowa Excelsior, 472

Iris, 472

Ironclad, 306

Irvin October, 472

Irving, 473

Isabella, 50, 307

_Isabella Regia_ (syn. of Pierce), 500

Isabella Seedling, 310

_Isabelle d'Amerique_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Israella, 311

_Italian wine grape_ (syn. of Delaware), 231

Ithaca, 473

Ives, 312

Ives, Henry, var. orig. by, 313

_Ives' Maderia_ (syn. of Ives), 312

_Ives' Maderia Seedling_ (syn. of Ives), 312

_Ives' Seedling_ (syn. of Ives), 312

_Ives' Seedling Maderia_ (syn. of Ives), 312


_Jac_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Jac_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 370

Jacent, 473

_Jack_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Jack_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 370

_Jacques_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Jacques_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 370

_Jacquet_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 370

_Jacquet_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Jacquez_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Jacquez_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 370

Jaeger, 314

Jaeger, Hermann, cited, 115;
  var. found by, 461;
  var. orig. by, 455, 473, 474, 481, 492, 523

_Jaeger, Herman_ (syn. of Jaeger), 314

_Jaeger No. 50_ (syn. of Longworth), 481

_Jaeger No. 56_ (syn. of Dufour), 455

_Jaeger No. 70_ (syn. of Munson), 492

Jaeger's Seedlings, 473

James, 315

James, J. H., var. orig. by, 474

James Seedling, 474

Janesville, 316

Jane Wylie, 474

_Janie Wylie_ (syn. of Jane Wylie), 474

Jaques, John, mentioned, 89

Jefferson, 317

Jefferson, Thomas, quoted, 45, 161

Jeffries, Mr., var. orig. by, 526

Jelly, 474

Jemina, 474

Jennie May, 474

Jennings, 474

_Jersey Grape_ (syn. of Willis Fredonia), 525

Jessica, 320

Jessie, 474

Jesuits, 17

Jeter, 474

Jewel, 321

_Jewell_ (syn. of Jewel), 321

Joen, 474

_Joe's Mariole_ (syn. of Mariole), 485

John Burr, 474

Johnson, 474

Johnson, David, var. orig. by, 498

Johnson, J., mentioned, 206

Johnson, S. W., cited, 17;
  quoted, 44

Jolly, 474

Joly, 474

Jonathan, 474

Jones, Calvin, quoted, 51, 400

Jones, Judge J. B., var. found by, 184

Jones, W. W., var. orig. by, 435, 468, 525

_Jones Perfumed_ (syn. of Carolina Blue Muscadine), 445

Joplin, J., var. orig. by, 474

Joplin's Peaks of Otter, 474

_Jordan_ (syn. of Moyer), 354

Jordan Large Blue, 475

_Jordan's Blue_ (syn. of Jordan Large Blue), 475

Joseph Henry, 475

Josselyn, John, quoted, 35

Judd, 475

Judge, 475

Judge Miller, 475

July, 475

_July Sherry_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

July Twenty-fifth, 475

Jumbo, 475

_Jumbo_ (syn. of Columbian Imperial), 218

_June Grape_ (syn. of _V. riparia praecox_), 121

Juno, 475

Juno's Sister, 475


Kalamazoo, 475

Kalista, 475

Kansas July, 475

Kay Seedling, 475

_Kay's Seedling_ (syn. of Herbemont), 288

Keller, 475

Keller White, 475

_Keller's White_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

Kelley, Datus, var. orig. by, 485

Kellog, 476

Kelly, W. B., var. orig. by, 467

Kemp, 476

Kendall, 476

Kenena, 476

Kenrick's Native, 476

Kensington, 322

Kentucky, 476

Kentucky, grapes in, 17, 54

Kentucky wine, 476

Ketchum, 476

_Keuka_ (syn. of Neff), 492

Keuka Lake, first plantings about, 54

Key to species of Vitis, 107, 108

Keystone, 476

Kiamichi, 476

Kilvington, 476

King, 324

_King_ (syn. of Golden Clinton), 463

King Philip, 476

Kingsessing, 476

Kingsessing, Edward G., var. orig. by, 462

King William, 476

Kinney, I., var. orig. by, 476, 477

Kinney's Seedlings, 476, 477

Kiowa, 477

Kitchen, 477

_Kittredge_ (syn. of Ives), 312

Kniffin, William, mentioned, 91

Kniffin system of training, 91

Knob Mountain, 477

Knox, Rev. J., var. orig. by, 504

Koeth, A., var. orig. by, 442

Kosomo, 477

Kramer, J. C., var. orig. by, 438, 477

Kramer Seedling, 477

Krause, 477

Kready, John, var. orig. by, 248, 456, 476

Kruger, 477


Labe, 477

Labrusca, origin of the name, 149

Lacon, 477

Laconia, 477

La Crissa, 477

Ladies, 477

_Ladies Choice_ (syn. of Delaware), 231

Lady, 325

Lady Charlotte, 477

Lady Dunlap, 478

Lady Helene, 478

Lady Washington, 327

Lady Younglove, 478

Lake, 478

_Lake_ (syn. of Iden), 472

_Lama_ (syn. of Laura), 478

La Marie, 478

Lane, Ralph, cited, 31

Langendoerfer, F., var. orig. by, 295, 524

_Languedoc_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Langworthy, L. B., var. found by, 214

La Reine, 478

Large Berry, 478

_Large Blue English_ (syn. of Cape May Prolific), 444

_Large German_ (syn. of York Madeira), 529

Large Leaf, 478

Larrowe, Hon. Jacob, mentioned, 83

La Salle, 478

Laughlin, 478

Laughlin, W. R., var. orig. by, 478

Laura, 478

_Laura Beverly_ (syn. of Creveling), 224

Laussel, 478

Lavega, 478

Lawrence, 478

Laws, John, var. orig. by, 474

Lawson, 479

Lawson, John, life of, 36;
  quoted, 37

Leader, 479

Leaf-hopper (See Grape leaf-hopper)

_Leather-Leaf grape_ (syn. of _V. candicans coriacea_), 148

Leavenworth, 479

Leaves, taxonomic value of, 105, 106

_Lebanon Seedling_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

Le Conte, John Eaton, life of, 144;
  work on Vitis by, 100;
  writings of, 144

Legaux, Peter, cited, 42;
  life of, 16;
  mentioned, 15, 18, 161, 162

_Lehigh_ (syn. of Berks), 439

Lehman, 479

Lehman, William, var. orig. by, 479

Leif the Lucky, 29, 30

Lemosy, Mr., cited, 367

Lenoir, 328

_Lenoir_ (syn. of Devereaux), 235

_Lenoir_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 370

Lenori, 479

Leon, 479

_Lespeyre_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Letovey, 479

Lewis, 479

Lexington, 479

Lida, 479

Lightfoot, 479

Lightfoot, W. H., var. orig. by, 434, 435, 438, 444, 479, 489, 514

_Lightfoot Seedling No. 34_, 479

Lightfoot's Seedlings, 479

_Lilac_ (syn. of Shurtleff Seedling), 512

Limington White, 479

Linceola, 479

Lincoln, 480

_Lincoln_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

_Lincoln_ (syn. of Devereaux), 235

_Lincoln County_ (syn. of Lincoln), 480

Lincoln Downer, 480

Lincrup, 480

Lincy, 480

Lindell, 480

Linden, 480

Lindley, 329

Lindley, John, mentioned, 330

Lindmar, 480

Linelvi, 480

Linherbe, 480

Linley, 480

Linn, 480

Linn Queen, 480

Linnaeus, Carolus, life of, 149, 150;
  quoted, 118, 151, 155

Linville, Robert, var. orig. by, 459

Little Blue, 480

Little Giant, 481

_Little grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138

_Little Mountain grape_ (syn. of _V. berlandieri_), 130

Little Ozark, 481

Livingston, 481

Lizzie, 481

Lobata, 481

Logan, 481

London Company, 6, 7

Long, 481

_Long_ (syn. of Cunningham), 227

_Long_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Long, Col. James, var. found by, 481

Long John, 481

_Long No. 2_ (syn. of Cunningham), 227

Longfellow, quoted, 204

_Long's_ (syn. of _V. longii_), 123

_Long's Arkansas_ (syn. of _V. longii_), 123

Longworth, 481

Longworth Monster, 481

Longworth, Nicholas, books by, 23;
  grapes imported by, 23;
  life of, 22, 23;
  mentioned, 206, 236, 340, 416;
  var. found by, 370;
  var. orig. by, 481

_Longworth No. 20_ (syn. of Longworth), 481

_Longworth's Ohio_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Longworth's Ohio_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 370

Loomis' Honey, 481

Looney, C. S., var. orig. by, 482

Looney Seedling, 482

Lorain, 482

Loretto, 482

Loubat, Alphonse, mentioned, 24

Loudon, F. W., var. orig. by, 281, 316, 446, 474, 482

Loudon Seedling, 482

Louisa, 482

Louise, 482

Louisiana, 331

Louisiana, grapes in, 13

Louisville, 482

_Louisville Seedling_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Lowell Globe, 482

Lucile, 332

Lucky, 482

Luckyne, 482

Lucy Winton, 482

Luders, 482

Luffborough, 482

Lugawana, 482

_Lugiana nera_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Lukfata, 482

Lulie, 482

Lum, H. B., var. orig. by, 478

Luna, 482

Lutie, 334

Lycoming, 483

Lydia, 483

Lyman, 483

Lyon, 483

_Lyon_ (syn. of Presly), 502


Mabel, 483

_MacCandless_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_MacCandless_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 370

_McCowan_ (syn. of Cowan), 451

McDonald's Ann Arbor, 483

_McGowan_ (syn. of Cowan), 451

Macedonia, 483

McKay, E. A., mentioned, 83

_McKee_ (syn. of Herbemont), 288

McKinley, 483

McKinley, J. S., var. orig. by, 218

_McLean_ (syn. of Devereaux), 235

_McLean_ (syn. of Lincoln), 480

McLean, Dr. Wm., var. orig. by, 480

_McLure_ (syn. of Mrs. McLure), 491

McMahon, Bernard, cited, 44

McMurtrie, Dr. William, mentioned, 59

McNeil, 483

_McOwen_ (syn. of Cowan), 451

McPike, 335

McPike, H. G., var. orig. by, 336

Madeira, 483

_Madeira_ (syn. of Black Madeira), 440

_Madeira of York, Pa._ (syn. of Alexander), 160

Madeline, 483

_Madison County_ (syn. of Long), 481

Magee, 484

Magee, George J., cited, 275;
  var. found by, 275

Magnate, 336

Magnificent, 484

Maguel, Francis, cited, 32

Maguire, 484

_Mahogany_ (syn. of Mahogany Colored), 484

Mahogany Colored, 484

Main, 484

Main, Mr., var. orig. by, 484

Maine, grapes in, 13

Malinda, 484

_Malvasier_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Malvin, 484

_Mammoth_ (syn. of Sage), 395

_Mammoth Catawba_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

_Mammoth Globe_ (syn. of Carter), 445

_Mammoth Sage_ (syn. of Sage), 395

Manhattan, 484

Manito, 337

Manockanock, 484

Mansfield, 484

Manson, 484

Marguerite, 484

Marie Louise, 338

Marine's Seedlings, 485

Marine, William M., var. orig. by, 461, 466, 476,
   479, 482, 484, 485, 487, 489, 493, 496, 505

Mariole, 485

Marion (I), 339

Marion (II), 341

_Marion Port_ (syn. of Marion (I)), 33

_Marion Port_ (syn. of York Madeira), 529

Marique, 485

Marker, 485

Marsala, 485

Marshall, Humphrey, life of, 96;
  quoted, 151;
  writings of, 96

Martha, 341

Marvin, D. S., var. orig. by, 208, 209, 405,
   444, 451, 464, 470, 474, 478, 485, 509, 510, 521

Marvina, 485

Marvin's Seedlings, 485

Mary, 485

Mary Ann, 485

Mary Favorite, 485

Mary Mark, 486

Maryland, grapes in, 9, 10, 18

Maryland Purple, 486

Mary Wylie, 486

Mason, 486

Mason, Mrs. E., var. orig. by, 486, 507

Mason, B., var. orig. by, 486

Mason Renting, 486

_Mason's Seedling_ (syn. of Mason), 486

Massachusetts, grapes in, 12

Massachusetts White, 486

Massasoit, 343

Matchless, 486

Mathews, Professor, var. orig. by, 472

Mathilde, 486

_Matlock_ (syn. of Miles), 488

Mauston, 486

Maxatawney, 344

May Red, 486

Mead, John, mentioned, 84

Mead, John, var. orig. by, 486

Mead Seedling, 486

_Mead's Seedling_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

Meanko, 487

Mease, Dr. James, life of, 42, 43;
  mentioned, 45;
  paper by, 43

Medora, 487

_Meisch_ (syn. of Mish), 489

Melasko, 487

Memory, 487

Mendota, 487

Meno, 487

Merceron, 487

_Merceron_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

Merceron, F. E., var. orig. by, 487, 499

Mericadel, 487

Merrimac, 345

Meta, 487

Metis, 487

Metternich, 487

Mianna or Mienna, 487

Michaux, Andre, cited, 126;
  life of, 108;
  quoted, 118;
  works of, 108

Michaux, F. Andre, life of, 108;
  works of, 108

Michigan, 488

_Michigan_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

Michigan, grapes in, 61

Middle region, 59, 60, 61

Middlesex, 488

_Mignonette vine_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117

Miland, 488

Mildew (See Downy and Powdery mildew)

Miles, 488

Millardet, 488

Millardet, cited, 102, 233, 368

Miller, 488

Miller, J. B., var. orig. by, 463

Miller, Samuel, var. orig. by, 188, 342, 460, 482, 483, 488, 529

_Miller No. 1_ (syn. of Martha), 341

_Miller's No. 2_ (syn. of Eva), 460

_Miller's No. 3_ (syn. of Macedonia), 483

_Miller's No. 4_ (syn. of Black Hawk), 188

Miller's Seedlings, 488

Millington, 488

Millington, Dr., var. found by, 488

Millington, Mrs., var. orig. by, 498

Millington White, 488

Mills, 347

Mills, W. H., var. orig. by, 348, 478

Mineola, 488

Miner, T. B., var. orig. by, 172, 418, 433,
   436, 438, 442, 444, 459, 472, 479, 480, 489, 507

Miner's Seedlings, 489

Mingo, 489

Minnehaha, 489

Minnesota, 489

Minnesota Mammoth, 489

Minnie, 489

_Minor's Seedling_ (syn. of Venango), 520

Miriam, 489

Mish, 489

Mission, 489

Missouri, 489

Missouri, grapes in, 52

Missouri Bird Eye, 490

_Missouri Bird's Eye_ (syn. of Elsinburgh), 257

_Missouri grape_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125

Missouri Muscadine, 490

Missouri Riesling, 349

_Missouri Seedling_ (syn. of Missouri), 489

Modena, 490

Moffats, 490

_Mohrendutte_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Moltke, 490

Monarch, 490

Monard, 490

Monlintawba, 490

Monroe, 350

Montclair, 490

Montefiore, 351

_Monteith_ (syn. of York Madeira), 529

Montisella, 490

Montour, 490

Montreal, 490

Moore, Captain John B., var. orig. by, 286, 353, 456, 465

Moore, Jacob, life of, 192;
  var. orig. by, 192, 237, 241, 274, 448, 466, 514, 524

Moore, Rev. Archer, var. orig. by, 209, 450

Moore Early, 353

_Moore's Diamond_ (syn. of Diamond), 236

_Moore's No. 31_ (syn. of Hayes), 286

Morin, 490

Morneberg, J. G., var. orig. by, 461

Morrell, Mr., var. orig. by, 490

Morrell Seedling, 490

Morse, 491

Morton, Thomas, quoted, 35

Mosher, S., mentioned, 206

Mottier, John E., var. orig. by, 523

_Mottier_ (syn. of Purple Marion), 504

Mottled, 491

Mountain, 491

_Mountain grape_ (syn. of _V. berlandieri_), 130

_Mountain grape_ (syn. of _V. monticola_), 116

_Mountain grape of Texas_ (syn. of _V. rupestris_), 113

Mount Lebanon, 491

Moyer, 354

_Moyer's Early Red_ (syn. of Moyer), 354

Mrs. McLure, 491

Mrs. Munson, 491

Mrs. Stayman, 491

Muench, 491

Muench, F., var. orig. by, 376, 471, 511, 521

Multiple, 491

Muncie, 491

_Muncy_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

Muncy Black, 491

_Muncy Pale Red_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

Munier, 491

Munson, 492

Munson, Thomas Volney, cited, 105, 106, 114,
   118, 124, 128, 134, 143, 149, 233, 267, 271, 287, 290, 331;
  life of, 122;
  quoted, 122, 126, 216;
  var. orig. by, 122, 169, 170, 176, 179, 181,
   194, 202, 216, 259, 271, 280, 287, 296, 315, 337,
   385, 393, 394, 421, 433, 434, 435, 436, 437, 438,
   439, 440, 441, 442, 443, 445, 448, 449, 450, 451,
   452, 453, 454, 456, 457, 458, 459, 460, 463, 464,
   465, 470, 471, 474, 475, 476, 477, 478, 479, 480,
   481, 482, 484, 485, 486, 487, 488, 489, 490, 491,
   492, 493, 494, 495, 496, 497, 498, 500, 501, 502,
   503, 504, 505, 508, 509, 510, 511, 512, 513, 514,
   515, 516, 517, 518, 519, 520, 521, 522, 525, 526, 528;
  work on Vitis by, 101

Munson, W. K., var. found by, 324

_Munson's No. 13_ (syn. of Striped Ruby), 515

_Munson's No. 21_ (syn. of Bell), 181

_Munson No. 22_ (syn. of Gold Dust), 463

_Munson's No. 29_ (syn. of Old Gold), 495

_Munson's No. 33_ (syn. of Red Bird), 505

_Munson No. 45_ (syn. of Linelvi), 480

_Munson No. 47_ (syn. of Red Eagle), 385

_Munson's No. 76_ (syn. of Fern Munson), 271

_Munson No. 81_ (syn. of Jaeger), 314

_Munson's No. 107_ (syn. of Multiple), 491

_Munson's No. 111_ (syn. of Sweetey), 515

_Munson's No. 130_ (syn. of Texas Highland), 516

_Munson's No. 181_ (syn. of Texas), 516

_Munson's Riparia_ (syn. of _V. longii microsperma_), 123

_Munson's Riparia_ (syn. of _V. longii_), 123

Murdock, 492

Murdock, Judge, var. orig. by, 492

Murry, William, mentioned, 206

Muscadine Superior, 492

_Muscadine_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109

_Muscadine_ (syn. of Scuppernong), 399

_Muscadine grape_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 108

Muscat, 492

Muscat Catawba, 492

Muscat Hamburg, 356

Musky, defined, 4

_Mustang_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109

_Mustang grape_ (syn. of _V. candicans_), 147

_Mustang grape_ of Chapman (syn. of _V. munsoniana_), 112

Mylitta, 492


Nahab, 492

Naomi, 357

Nashua, 492

Native grape, 39, 41, 42, 43;
  described by Prince, 49;
  evolution of, 36;
  habitat of, 27;
  means of distribution of, 27;
  value of, 36

Naumkeag, 492

Nazro, 492

Nazro, Henry, var. orig. by, 492

_Neal grape_ (syn. of Herbemont), 288

Nebraska, 492

Nectar, 358

Neff, 492

Neff, Mr., var. orig. by, 492

_Neil grape_ (syn. of Herbemont), 288

Nell, 492

Nelson, 492

Nelson, Roger, var. orig. by, 492

Neosho, 492

Neponset, 493

Nerluton, 493

_Neva_ (syn. of Neva Munson), 493

Neva Munson, 493

Neverfail, 493

Newark, 493

New Buda, 493

Newburgh, 493

Newburgh Muscat, 493

New England, grapes in, 12, 13, 34, 35;
  wine in, 13

_New Hanover_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

New Haven, 493

_New Haven Red_ (syn. of New Haven), 493

New Jersey, grapes in, 53

Newman, 493

Newman, C. C., cited, 111, 400

New Mary, 493

New Netherland, grapes in, 11

Newport, 493

Newton, 493

Newtonia, 494

New York, champagne in, 65;
  grapes in, 10, 11, 12, 23, 24, 53, 54;
  grape districts of, 72 et seq.;
  viticulture in, 68;
  wine in, 11, 12

Niagara, 359

Niagara district, 72;
  acreage of, 92;
  climate of, 93;
  diseases in, 94;
  geology of, 92;
  markets of, 93;
  soil of, 93

Nicholson, James, var. orig. by, 468

Nicolls, mentioned, 11

Nimalba, 494

Nina, 494

Ninekah, 494

Nizola, 494

_No. 93 A_ (syn. of Imperial), 302

Noah, 362

Nonantum, 494

Nonpareil, 494

Nora, 494

Norfolk, 364

_Norfolk Muscat_ (syn. of Norfolk), 364

Norseman, account of grapes by, 29

North America, 494

_North California grape_ (syn. of _V. californica_), 135

North Carolina, 494

North Carolina, grapes in, 38, 54

_North Carolina Muscadine_ (syn. of Mary Ann), 485

_North Carolina Seedling_ (syn. North Carolina), 494

North Carolina White, 494

North Star, 495

_Northern aestivalis_ (syn. of _V. bicolor_), 145

_Northern Fox Grape_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150

Northern Light, 494

Northern Muscadine, 365

Northern Muscat, 495

_Northern Summer grape_ (syn. of _V. bicolor_), 145

Norton, 366

_Norton_ (syn. of Cynthiana), 228

Norton, Dr. D. N., mentioned, 367

Norton, E. Q., quoted, 27

_Norton's Seedling_ (syn. of Norton), 366

_Norton Virginia_ (syn. of Cynthiana), 228

_Norton's Virginia_ (syn. of Norton), 366

_Norton's Virginia Seedling_ (syn. of Cynthiana), 228

_Norton's Virginia Seedling_ (syn. of Norton), 366

Norwood, 369

Noyes, Dr., mentioned, 215

Nuttall, Thomas, quoted, 56, 57;
  life of 98;
  writings of, 98


Obed, 495

Oberon, 495

Occidental, 495

Octavia, 495

Odart, Count, quoted, 144

Offer, 495

Ohio (I), 369

Ohio (II), 371

_Ohio_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Ohio, grapes in, 22, 52, 53, 54

_Ohio Cigar Box_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Ohio Claret, 495

Oklahoma, grapes in, 61

Oktaha, 495

Old Ford, 495

Old Gold, 495

_Oldhouse_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Old House Grape_ (syn. of Harris), 466

Old Hundred, 495

Old World grape, 19, 24;
  failure in America, 29;
  habitat of, 1
  history of, 1, et seq.

Olita, 495

Olitatoo, 496

Olmstead, 496

Olympia, 496

Omega, 496

_Omega_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

Onderdonk, 496

Onderdonk, G., var. orig. by, 455

Oneida, 371

Oneovem, 496

One Seed, 496

Onondaga, 496

Ontario, 496

_Ontario_ (syn. of Union Village), 415

Onyx, 496

Opal, 496

Oporto, 372

Oriental, 373

Oriole, 497

Orphan Boy, 497

Orwigsburg, 497

Osage, 497

Osceola, 497

Osee, 497

Oskaloosa, 497

Osmond, 497

Oswego, 497

Othello, 374

Otoe, 497

Ouachita, 498

Owego, 498

Owens White, 498

Owens, Wm., var. orig. by, 498

Owosso, 498

Ozark, 376

Ozark Seedling, 498


Pacific region, 59;
  development of, 60, 61

Pagan, 498

_Paign's Isabella_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Pale, Tennis, mentioned, 34

_Pale Wooded Trollinger_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Palermo, 498

_Palmate grape_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125

_Palmate-leaved grape_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125

_Palmate-leaved vine_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125

_Palmated leaves_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125

Palmer, 498

Palmetto, 498

_Palmetto-leaved grape_ (syn. of _V. simpsoni_), 149

Pamlico, 498

Paradox, 498

Paragon, 498, 499

_Parker_ (syn. of Ithaca), 473

Parker, Dr. S. J., cited, 431

Parker Rocky Mountain Seedling, 499

Parmentier, M., mentioned, 23, 24

Parry, cited, 134

Pattison, 499

Pauline, 499

Paultne, 499

Pawnee, 499

Paxton, 499

_Payne's Early_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Peabody, 377

Peake, E. M., var. found by, 384

Pearl, 499

Pearson, A. W., cited, 306

_Pearson's Ironclad_ (syn. of Ironclad), 306

Pedee, 499

Peerless, 500

Peggy, 500

Pell, G. T., var. orig. by, 500

Pell's Illinois, 500

Penn, William, mentioned, 10

Pennsylvania, grapes in, 19, 44, 53, 54

Peola, 500

Perfection, 377

Perfume, 500

Perkins, 378

Perkins, Jacob, var. orig. by, 378

Perry, 500

Peter Wylie, 500

_Peter Wylie No. 1_ (syn. of Peter Wylie), 500

_Petit Noir_ (syn. of Adelia), 433

Phelps, J. S., var. orig. by, 448

Phinney, Elias, var. found by, 437

Phylloxera, 5

_Phylloxera vastatrix_ (See Phylloxera)

Pierce, 500

_Pigeon grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138

_Pine-wood grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis lincecumii_), 140

Pioneer, 500

Piper, D. J., var. orig. by, 475, 513

Piqua, 500

Pittsburg Seedling, 500

Pizarro, 500

Planchette, 501

Planchon, Jules Emile, cited, 106, 124, 126, 131;
  life of, 124

Planet, 501

Plant lice (See Phylloxera)

Plantagenet, Beauchamp, quoted, 34

_Plasmopara viticola_ (See Downy mildew)

Pliny, cited, 2

_Plum grape_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150

Plymouth, 501

_Plymouth White_ (syn. of Plymouth), 501

Pocklington, 379

Pocklington, John, var. orig. by, 380, 455

Pocohontas Red, 501

Poeschel Mammoth, 501

Poeschel, William, var. orig. by, 461, 501

Pollock, 501

Pollock, Mr., var. orig. by, 501

_Polychrosis viteana_ (See Grape fruit worm)

Pond, Samuel, var. orig. by, 501

Pond's Seedling, 501

Ponroy, 501

Pontotoc, 501

Porup, 501

_Possum grape_ (syn. of _V. baileyana_), 129

_Possum grape_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127

_Post-oak grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis lincecumii_), 52, 140

Post-oak No. 1, 501

Post-oak No. 2, 501

Post-oak No. 3, 501

Potter, 501

_Potter's Early_ (syn. of Potter), 501

_Potter's Seedling_ (syn. of Potter), 501

_Potter's Sweet_ (syn. of Potter), 501

Poughkeepsie, 381

_Poughkeepsie Red_ (syn. of Poughkeepsie), 381

Powdery mildew, 86

_Powell_ (syn. of Bland), 441

Prairie State, 502

Prentiss, 382

Prentiss, J. W., mentioned, 83;
  var. orig. by, 383

President, 502

_President Lyon_ (syn. of Presly), 502

Presly, 502

_Pres. Lyon_ (syn. of Lyon), 483

Primate, 502

_Prince Edward_ (syn. of Cunningham), 227

Prince Nurseries, 48

Prince, William Robert, cited, 121;
  life of, 21, 22;
  quoted, 57, 161;
  writings of, 22

Pringle, C. G., var. orig. by, 281, 464, 477, 484, 520

Professor Brunk, 502

_Prof. Curtis' grape_ (syn. of _V. caribaea_), 146

Professor Gulley, 502

Professor Hillgard, 502

Profitable, 502

Profusion, 502

Progress, 502

Prolific, 503

Prolific Chicken Grape, 503

Provost, Paul H., mentioned, 233

Provost White, 503

Prunella, 503

Pukwana, 503

Pulaski, 503

Pulliat, 503

Pulliat, M., var. orig. by, 503

Pulpless, 503

_Pungo of N. C._ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Purity, 503

Purple Bloom, 503

Purple Favorite, 503

_Purple Favorite_ (syn. of Blue Favorite), 442

_Purple Fox_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150

_Purple Hamburgh_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

_Purple Hamburgh of Troy_ (syn. of Troy), 518

Purple Marion, 504

_Purple Urbana_ (syn. of Logan), 481

Pursh, cited, 128

Putnam, 504

Putnam, J. A., var. orig. by 164, 333, 467


Quassaic, 504

_Queen Loretto_ (syn. of Loretto), 482

Queen of Sheba, 504

Quinnebang, 504

Quintina, 504


Raabe, 504

Raabe, Peter, var. orig. by, 504

_Raabe's Honey_ (syn. of Raabe), 504

_Raabe's No. 3_ (syn. of Raabe), 504

Raabe's seedlings, 504

_Raccoon grape_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127

Rachel, 504

Racine, 504

Rafinesque, Constantine Samuel, book by, 47;
  life of, 99;
  quoted, 42, 47, 113;
  works of, 99

Ragan, 504

Raisin, 504

_Raisin de cassis_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Raisin de Cote, 505

_Raisin du Cap_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

_Raisin Fraise_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

_Raisin Framboise_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Raisins, how made, 67

Ramsey, 505

Randall, 505

_Randall_ (syn. of Agawam), 159

Randall, Mr., var. orig. by, 505

Raritan, 505

Rautenberg, F. E. L., var. orig. by, 434, 440,
   446, 448, 467, 490, 505, 506

Rautenberg's Seedlings, 505

Ravenel, H. W., cited, 114;
  mentioned, 206

Ravesies, Frederick, quoted, 21

_Ray's Victoria_ (syn. of Victoria), 520

Read, M. A., var. orig. by, 505

Read, William H., var. orig. by, 320, 355, 416, 480

Read Seedling, 505

_Read's Hybrid_ (syn. of Lincoln), 480

_Reagan_ (syn. of Ragan), 504

Rebecca, 383

Red Bird, 505

_Red Bland_ (syn. of Bland), 441

Red Eagle, 385

_Red Elben_ (syn. of Louisiana), 331

_Red Elben_ (syn. of Rulander), 508

_Red Fox_ (syn. of V. labrusca), 150

Red Giant, 505

_Red grape_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125

_Red Hamburgh_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Red Jacket, 505

Red Juice, 505

Red Leaf, 505

_Red Lenoir_ (syn. of Pauline), 499

_Red Muncy_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

Red Riesling, 505

_Red Riesling_ (syn. of Delaware), 231

_Red River_ (syn. of Cynthiana), 228

Red Rover, 505

_Red Scuppernong_ (syn. of Bland), 441

Red Sheperd, 506

Red Sweet Water, 506

Regal, 386

Regina, 506

Regions of grape growing, 59

Reichenbach, John, var. orig. by, 461, 462

Reinecke, 506

Reinike, 506

Reisinger, Andrew, mentioned, 54, 83;
  var. orig. by, 448

Reliance, 506

Rentz, 506

Rentz, Sebastian, var. orig. by, 506

_Rentz Seedling_ (syn. of Rentz), 506

Requa, 387

Rhenish, 506

Rhode Island, grapes in, 13

_Riatz_ (syn. of Rentz), 506

Rice, A. F., var. orig. by 407, 484, 502

Richards, Paul, mentioned, 11, 12

Richmond, 506

_Richmond Villa Hamburgh_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Ricketts, James H., life of, 318, 319;
  quoted, 269;
  var. orig. by, 158, 169, 175, 242, 243, 257, 262, 269,
   298, 302, 318, 319, 327, 357, 377, 402, 433, 434, 435,
   455, 462, 464, 478, 493, 500, 501, 504, 505, 508, 519, 522

_Ricketts' Delaware Seedling No. 1_ (syn. of Raritan), 505

_Ricketts' Delaware Seedling No. 2_ (syn. of Putnam), 504

_Ricketts' No. 1_ (syn. of Downing), 242

_Ricketts' No. 37_ (syn. of Highland), 297

Riehl, E. A., var. orig. by, 255, 506

_Riehl's New Early Grape_ (syn. of Eclipse), 254

_Riehl's No. 10_ (syn. of Eclipse), 254

Riehl's Seedlings, 506

Riesenblatt, 506

_Riesling_ (syn. of Missouri Riesling), 349

_Riverbank_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117

_River grape_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117

_Riverside grape_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117

_Roanoke_ (syn. of Scuppernong), 399

Roanoke Red, 506

Robert Wylie, 506

Robeson, 507

Robeson, Mr., var. orig. by, 507

Robeson Seedling, 507

Robinson Unnamed Seedling, 507

Robusta, 507

Rochester, 388

_Rock grape_ (syn. of _V. rupestris_), 113

_Rock House Indian_ (syn. of Waterloo), 521

Rockingham, 507

Rockland Favorite, 507

Rockwood, 389

Roe, E. P., var. orig. by, 514

Roenbeck, 507

Roenbeck, Fred, var. orig. by, 439, 440, 462, 478

Rogers, A. D., quoted, 392

Rogers, Edward Staniford, life of, 390;
  var. orig. by, 158, 170, 178, 263, 273, 276, 292,
   330, 343, 346, 387, 390, 397, 424, 507, 508

Rogers' Hybrids discussed, 390

_Rogers' No. 1_ (syn. of Goethe), 276

_Rogers' No. 3_ (syn. of Massasoit), 343

_Rogers' No. 4_ (syn. of Wilder), 423

_Rogers' No. 5_, 507

_Rogers' No. 9_ (syn. of Lindley), 329

_Rogers' No. 13_, 507

_Rogers' No. 14_ (syn. of Gaertner), 272

_Rogers' No. 15_ (syn. of Agawam), 159

_Rogers' No. 19_ (syn. of Merrimac), 345

_Rogers' No. 22_ (syn. of Salem), 397

_Rogers' No. 24_, 507

_Rogers' No. 28_ (syn. of Requa), 387

_Rogers' No. 32_, 508

_Rogers' No. 39_ (syn. of Aminia), 170

_Rogers' No. 41_ (syn. of Essex), 263

_Rogers' No. 43_ (syn. of Barry), 178

_Rogers' No. 44_ (syn. of Herbert), 291

_Rogers' No. 53_ (syn. of Salem), 397

Rombrill, 508

Rommel, 393

Rommel, Jacob, life of, 352;
  var. orig. by, 180, 260, 265, 270, 352, 434,
   440, 441, 453, 456, 470, 475, 499, 518, 523, 525

_Rommel's Amber_ (syn. of Amber), 434

_Rommel's Etta_ (syn. of Etta), 265

_Rommel's No. 3_ (syn. of Etta), 265

_Rommel's No. 19_ (syn. of Black Taylor), 441

_Rommel's Taylor Seedling No. 10_ (syn. of Pearl), 499

_Rommel's Taylor Seedling No. 14_ (syn. of Montefiore), 351

Root worm (See Fidia)

Rosalie, 508

Roscoe, 508

Rose, 508

Rose, Alfred, var. orig. by, 167

Rose, Henry, mentioned, 84

Rose, Reuben, var. orig. by, 475

_Rose Colored Delaware_ (syn. of Delaware), 231

_Rose Grape_ (syn. of Bland), 441

_Rose of Tennessee_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

Roslyn, 508

Roswither, 508

Rot (See Black-rot)

_Rothrock of Prince_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

_Royal Isabella_ (syn. of Pierce), 500

Ruby, 508

Ruckland, 508

_Ruff_ (syn. of Delaware), 231

Rulander, 508

_Rulander_ (syn. of Louisiana), 331

Rupel, 509

Rupert, 509

Rustler, 509

Rusty Coat, 509

Rutland, 509

R. W. Munson, 394

Ryckman, G. E., cited, 78


_Saccharissa_ (syn. of La Crissa), 477

_Sacks of Wine_ (syn. of Harwood), 467

Sacksteder, J., var. orig. by, 475, 477, 478

_Sacrissa_ (syn. of La Crissa), 477

Sage, 395

Sage, Henry E., var. found by, 395

Saginaw, 509

St. Albans, 509

St. Augustine, 509

St. Catherine, 509

_St. Genevieve_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_St. Genevieve_ (syn. of Louisiana), 331

_St. Genevieve_ (syn. of Rulander), 508

St. Hilaire, 509

St. John, 509

St. Louis, 396

_Sainte-Helene_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Salabra, 510

Salado, 510

Salem, 397

Salisbury, E. S., var. orig. by, 516

_Salisbury Violet_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Sally, 510

Salt Creek, 510

Saluda, 510

_Saluda_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Salzer Earliest, 510

Salzer, John A., var. orig. by, 510

Samuels, 510

Samuels, M. M., var. orig. by, 520

Sanalba, 510

Sanborn, Jos. N., var. orig. by, 477

Sanbornton, 510

_Sanbornton_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

_Sanborton_ (syn. of Sanbornton), 510

_Sand-beach grape_ (syn. of _V. rupestris_), 113

_Sand grape_ (syn. of _V. longii_), 123

_Sand grape_ (syn. of _V. rupestris_), 113

San Jacinto, 510

Sanmelaska, 510

Sanmonta, 510

Sanrubra, 510

Santa Clara, 511

_Saratoga_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

_Saratoga_ (syn. of Fancher), 460

Saunders, Dr. William, var. orig. by, 323, 458

Saxe White Seedling, 511

Saxe, W. H., var. orig. by, 511

Schenck White, 511

Schiller, 511

Schmitz Seedling, 511

Scholl, Mrs., mentioned, 205

Schoonemunk, 511

Schraidt, Casper, var. orig. by, 190

_Schraidt's Seedling_ (syn. of Black Pearl), 189

Schroeder, Dr. H., var. orig. by, 437

_Schuylkill_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

_Schuylkill_ (syn. of Orwigsburg), 497

_Schuylkill Muscadel_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

_Schuylkill Muscadell_ (syn. of Alexander), 50

_Schuylkill Muscadine_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

_Schwarzeblauer Trollinger_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

_Schwarzer Gutedel_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

_Schwarzwelscher_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Scott, 511

_Scott_ (syn. of Ironclad), 306

Scott, Colonel, mentioned, 306

Scott, Gen. John, var. orig. by, 511

Scuppernong, 399

_Scuppernong_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109

Scuppernong, origin of the word, 51

Secretary, 402

Secunda, 511

Seedlin, 511

_Seedling No. 502_ (syn. of Paradox), 498

Seeds, taxonomic value of, 103

Seelye, C. W., var. orig. by, 505

_Segar Box_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Segar Box_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 370

Segessman, G., var. orig. by, 511

Self-fertility, 104, 105

Self-sterility, 104, 105

Selma, 511

Senasqua, 403

Seneca, 511

Septimia, 512

Seward, 512

Sex, taxonomic value of, 104

_Shaker_ (syn. of Union Village), 415

Shala, 512

Sharon, 512

_Sharon_ (syn. of Cayuga), 208

Sharp Beak, 512

Shelby, 404

Shelley, Daniel, var. orig. by, 512

Shelley Seedling, 512

Shephard, Orlando, mentioned, 83

Shepherd, Mr., mentioned, 340

_Shepherd's Port Wine_ (syn. of York Madeira), 529

Sheppard, J, N., var. orig. by, 512

Sheppard Delaware, 512

Sheppard, 512

Sherman, 512

_Sherry_ (syn. of Devereaux), 235

_Sherry of the South_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Sheruah, 512

Shirland, W. W., mentioned, 83

Short, Miss R. R., var. orig. by, 524

Shull, J., var. orig. by, 512

_Shull No. 2_, 512

Shurtleff, Dr. S. A., var. orig. by, 512

Shurtleff Seedling, 512

Shuttleworth, mentioned, 148

Siglar, 513

Silkyfine, 513

Silvain, 513

Silver Dawn, 513

Simpson, J. H., mentioned, 113

Simpson, R., var. orig. by, 511

_Simpson's grape_ (syn. of _V. simpsoni_), 148

Sinawissa, 513

_Singleton_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

_Skunk grape_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150

_Skunnymunk_ (syn. of Schoonemunk), 511

_Skuppernong_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109

Sloe, 513

Sluyter, Peter, quoted, 10

_Small German_ (syn. of York Madeira), 529

_Small grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138

Small Leaf, 513

_Smart's Elsingborough_ (syn. of Elsingburgh), 257

_Smart's Elsingburgh_ (syn. of Elsingburgh), 257

Smallwood, 513

Smallwood, E., var. orig. by, 513

Smith, Captain John, quoted, 31, 32

Smith, S. V., var. orig. by, 512

_Smooth Canyon Grape_ (syn. of _V. treleasei_), 122

Snelter, 513

Snelter, L., var. orig. by, 439, 513

Snow, Seward, var. orig. by, 356

Snowflake, 513

Solander Large Purple, 513

Solrupo, 513

Somerville, 513

Sophia, 513

Souland, 514

_Sour grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138

_Sour or Pungent Winter grape_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127

_Sour Winter grape_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127

_South California grape_ (syn. of _V. girdiana_), 136

South Carolina, 514

South Carolina, grapes in, 54

_Southern Aestivalis_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis bourquiniana_), 142

Southern Champion, 514

_Southern Fox grape_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109

Southern region, 59, 60, 61

Spangler, A. M., var. orig. by, 461

Spaniards, American grape culture by, 6

_Spanish grape_ (syn. of _V. berlandieri_), 130

Species, blooming order of, 103;
  botanical key to, 107, 108;
  compared by Bartram, 98;
  conspectus of, 107, 108;
  resistance to Phylloxera, 5;
  seed characters of, 103

Spencer, 514

Spencer, Henry B., var. orig. by, 434, 458, 509

_Sphaceloma ampelinum_ (See Anthracnose)

Spinosa, 514

Spofford, Dr., var. orig. by, 411

_Spofford Seedling_ (syn. of To-Kalon), 410

Spotswood, Alexander, mentioned, 8

Spotted Globe, 514

Springfield, 514

_Spring Mill Constantia_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

_Springstein_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Stayman, Dr. J., life of, 422;
  quoted, 155, 422;
  var. orig. by, 189, 230, 268, 337, 376, 378,
   422, 423, 446, 450, 452, 460, 486, 491, 497, 499, 503, 513, 523

Stace, S., var. orig. by, 514

Stace White, 514

Standard, 405

Staples, Isaac, var. orig. by, 466

Stark-Star, 406

Steele, Paphro, var. found by, 285

_Steele's Seedling_ (syn. of Hartford), 284

Stelton, 514

Sterling, 514

Stetson, Amos W., var. orig. by, 444, 514

Stetson, Nahum, var. orig. by, 451

_Stetson No. 1_ (syn. of Cabot), 444

_Stetson's Seedling No. 4_ (syn. of Curtis), 451

Stetson's Seedlings, 514

Stewart, Philemon, mentioned, 365

Stewart, P., var. orig. by, 475, 515

Stinger, B. F., var. orig. by, 433

Stock, 112, 114, 121, 148

Stone, J. I., mentioned, 210

Storm King, 514

Strachey, William, quoted, 32

Stratton, Benjamin, var. orig. by, 467

Strawberry, 515

Striped Ruby, 515

Success, 515

Sugar Grape, 515

_Sugar grape_ (syn. of _V. rupestris_), 113

_Summer grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138

_Summer grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis lincecumii_), 141

Summer White, 515

Sumner, 515

_Sumpter_ (syn. of Devereaux), 235

_Sumpter_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Sunrise, 515

Superb, 407

Superior, 515

Supreme, 515

_Swamp grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138

Swatara, 515

Swedes, American grape culture by, 10

_Sweet Mountain grape_ (syn. of _V. monticola_), 116

_Sweet scented_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117

_Sweet scented grape_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117

_Sweet Winter grape_ (syn. of _V. cinerea_), 131

Sweetey, 515


Taft, 515

Talala, 516

Talequah, 516

_Tallman_ (syn. of Champion), 210

_Tallman's Seedling_ (syn. of Champion), 210

Tamala, 516

Tasker, Mr., mentioned, 50, 161

_Tasker's grape_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

Tatnall, Edward, var. orig. by, 470

Taylor, 408

Taylor, A., var. orig. by, 443

Taylor, Judge John, mentioned, 409

_Taylor Bullit_ (syn. of Taylor), 408

_Taylor's Seedling No. 14_ (syn of Montefiore), 351

Tekoma, 516

_Tekomah_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

Telegraph, 409

Tenderpulp, 516

Ten-Dollar-Prize, 516

Tendrils, continuous, 102;
  intermittent, 102;
  taxonomic value of, 102

Tennessee, 516

Tennessee, grapes in, 54

Tennessee Island, 516

Texas, 516

Texas Highland, 516

_Texas Panhandle Large Grape_ (syn. of _V. doaniana_), 137

_Texas Post-oak grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis lincecumii_), 141

Thacher, H., var. orig. by, 372

_The Beautiful_ (syn. of To-Kalon), 410

_The Black_ (syn. of Ohio (I)), 369

Themis, 516

Theodosia, 516

Theophile, 517

Thomas, 517

Thomas, Drury, var. found by, 517

Thompson, Abram, mentioned, 232

Thompson, David, var. orig. by, 460, 517

Thompson, Mr., var. orig. by, 517

Thompson, R. O., var. orig. by, 517

Thompson, W., var. orig. by, 514

Thompson Red Seedling, 517

Thompson's Seedlings, 517

Thompson Wine, 517

Thorne, Mr., var. orig. by, 267

_Thurmond_ (syn. of Devereaux), 235

_Thurmond_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Thurlow, Thomas C., var. orig. by, 459

Tinker, Dr. G. L., var. orig. by, 494

Tishomingo, 517

Togni, 517

To-Kalon, 410

_Tokay_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

_Tolman_ (syn. of Champion), 210

_Tolman's Seedling_ (syn. of Champion), 210

Tonkawa, 518

Tournefort, Joseph Pitton de, life of, 95;
  mentioned, 118

_Traminer_ (syn. of Delaware), 231

Transparent, 518

Trask, 518

_Trask_ (syn. of Brighton), 191

Trask, Jas. W., var. orig. by, 507

Triumph, 411

Triumphant, 518

_Troller_ (syn. Black Hamburg), 186

Trollinger, 518

_Trollinger_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Trowbridge, 518

Troy, 518

_Troy Hamburg_ (syn. of Troy), 518

_True Frost grape_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127

_Tryon_ (syn. of York Madeira), 529

Tryone, 518

Tucker, Mr., var. orig. by, 473

_Tucker's Parker_ (syn. of Ithaca), 473

Tuckerman, 518

Tuckerman, J. B., var. orig. by, 442, 511, 518

_Tuley_ (syn. of Devereaux), 235

_Turkey grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis lincecumii_), 141

Tuskahoma, 518

_Two-colored-leaved vine_ (syn. of _V. bicolor_), 144

_Typhlocyba comes_ (See Grape leaf-hopper)

Tyrker, mentioned, 30


U. B., 518

Uhland, 518

Uller Mammoth, 518

Ulrey, 519

Ulster, 414

_Ulster Prolific_ (syn. of Ulster), 414

Una, 519

_Uncinula necator_ (See Powdery mildew)

Underhill, 519

Underhill, Dr. A. K., var. orig. by, 519

Underhill, Robert, life of, 226;
  mentioned, 23, 24

Underhill, R. T., life of, 226;
  mentioned, 24

Underhill, Stephen W., life of, 26;
  var. orig. by, 184, 185, 226, 404, 473

Underhill, William A., life of, 226;
  mentioned, 24

_Underhill's Celestial_ (syn. of Underhill), 519

_Underhill's seedling_ (syn. of Underhill), 519

_Underhill's 8-8 Hybrid_ (syn. of Black Defiance), 184

_Underhill's 8-12_ (syn. of Black Eagle), 185

Undine, 519

Union village, 415

Universal, 519

_Uno_ (syn. of Juno), 475

Urbana, 519

_Urbana_ (syn. of Logan), 481

Ursula, 519

_Uva Fragola_ (syn. of Isabella), 307


Vahl, Martin, cited, 126;
  life of, 125

Valencia, 519

Valentine, 519

_Valentines_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Valhallah, 519

Valiant, W., var. orig. by, 524

Valk, Dr. William W., mentioned, 56;
  var. orig. by, 433

_Valk's Seedling_ (syn. of Ada), 433

Valle, John, var. orig. by, 464, 493

_Valle's White Concord_ (syn. of Golden Concord), 464

_Valley grape_ (syn. of _V. girdiana_), 136

Valverde, 519

VanDeman, 519

Van Deman, H. E., quoted, 371

Vanderburgh, 519

Van Lindley, J., var. orig. by, 315

Van Wormer, E. L., var. found by, 201

_Variable grape_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150

Venango, 520

Vergennes, 416

Vergil, quoted, 2, 3, 303

Vermont, 520

Vermont Giant, 520

Vermorel, 520

_Vernet_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Vesta, 520

_Vevay_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

Viala, 520

Viala, P., cited, 229

Vialla, 520

Vibert, M., var. orig. by, 503

Victoria, 418, 520

_Victoria_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Villars, Charles, cited, 20

Vine and Olive Colony, 20, 21

Vine Arbor, 520

_Vine Wood grape_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis lincecumii_), 141

Vinita, 520

Vinland, 29

Vinrouge, 520

Virginia, 521

Virginia, grapes in, 8, 14, 31, 32, 33, 38;
  wine in, 8, 40

_Virginia Amber_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

_Virginia grape_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125

_Virginia Muscadell_ (syn. of Bland), 441

_Virginia Seedling_ (syn. of Norton), 366

Viticulture of New York, 68

Vitis, characters of, 28
  classification of, 107, 108
  classified by Rafinesque, 100
  described by Linnaeus, 95, 96;
    by Marshall, 96;
    by Michaux, 97;
    by Nuttall, 98, 99;
    by Tournefort, 95;
    by Walter, 96, 97
  distribution of, 26
  genus of, 95
  number of species of, 106
  sexual status of, 104

_Vitis acerifolia_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109
  _aestivalis_, 108, 138;
    (syn. of _V. bicolor_), 144;
    (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117

_Vitis aestivalis bourquiniana_, 142
  _lincecumii_, 140
  var. _bicolor_ (syn. of _V. bicolor_), 145
    _canescens_ (syn. of _V. cinerea_), 131
    _canescens_ (syn. of _V. cinerea canescens_), 133
    _cinerea_ (syn. of _V. cinerea_), 131
    _Lincecumii_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis lincecumii_), 141
    _monticola_ (syn. of _V. berlandieri_), 130
  _Americana_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138
  _angulata_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109
  _araneosus_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138
  _Argentifolia_ (syn. of _V. bicolor_), 144
  _Arizonensis_ (syn. of _V. arizonica_), 133
  _arizonica_, 107, 133
  _arizonica glabra_, 134
  _Arizonica_ var. _glabra_ (syn. of _V. arizonica glabra_), 134
  _baileyana_, 107, 129
  _berlandieri_, 107, 130
  _bicolor_, 108, 144
  _blanda_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
  _blandi_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
  _Bourquina_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis bourquiniana_), 142
  _Bourquiniana_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis bourquiniana_), 142
  _bracteata_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138
  _californica_, 107, 135
  _Californica_ (syn. of _V. arizonica_), 133
    var. _Girdiana_ (syn. of _V. girdiana_), 136
  _callosa_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117
  _Canadensis aceris folio_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117
  _candicans_, 108, 147;
    as stock, 148
    _coriacea_, 148
    _Florida form_ (syn. of _V. candicans coriacea_), 148
  _canina_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
  _caribaea_, 108, 146
  _Caribea_ (syn. of _V. candicans coriacea_), 148
  _caribea_ var. _coriacea_ (syn. of _V. candicans coriacea_), 148
  _champini_, 107, 124
  _cinerea_, 107, 131
    _canescens_, 133
    _floridana_, 133
  var. _canescens_ (syn. of _V. cinerea canescens_), 133
    _Floridana_ (syn. of _V. cinerea floridana_), 133
  _cordifolia_ 107, 127; (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117
    _coriacea_ (syn. of _V. berlandieri_), 130
    _foetida_, 128
    _helleri_, 129
    _sempervirens_, 129
  _cordifolia_ var. (syn. of _V. cordifolia helleri_), 129
    _foetida_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia foetida_), 128
    _Helleri_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia helleri_), 129
    _riparia_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117
    _sempervirens_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia sempervirens_), 129
  _coriacea_ (syn. of _V. candicans coriacea_), 148
  _dimidiata_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117
  _diversifolia_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis lincecumii_), 140
  _doaniana_, 108, 137
  _ferruginea_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
  _Floridana_ (syn. of _V. munsoniana_), 112
  _Floridana_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109
  _girdiana_, 108, 136
  _hyemalis_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117
  _Illinoensis_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117
  _incisa_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127;
    (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117;
    (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 108
  _incisifolia_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis lincecumii_), 141
  _intermedia_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138;
    (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117
  _labrusca_, 4, 102, 108, 149
  _Labrusca_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138;
    (syn. of V. _cordifolia_), 127
  _labrusca_ var. _aestivalis_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138
  _Labrusca var._ _alba_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
    _nigra_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
    _rosea_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
  _labruscoides_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
  _latifolia_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
  _linsecomii_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis lincecumii_), 140
  _longii_, 107, 123
  _longii microsperma_, 123
  _luteola_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
  _Missouriensis_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117
  _monosperma_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125
  _monticola_, 107, 116;
    (syn. of _V. berlandieri_), 130
  _multiloba_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis lincecumii_), 140
  _munsoniana_, 107, 112
  _muscadina_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 108
  _Mustangensis_ (syn. of _V. candicans_), 147
  _Nortoni_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138;
    (syn. of Cynthiana), 228
  _Novo Mexicana_ (syn. of _V. longii_), 123;
    var. (syn. of _V. longii microsperma_), 123
  _Nuevo Mexicana_ (syn. of _V. longii_), 123
  _obovata_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
  _occidentalis_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138;
    (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
  _odoratissima_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117;
    (syn. of _V. riparia praecox_), 121
  _Palmata_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125
  _peltata_ (syn. of _V. munsoniana_), 112;
    (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109
  _prolifera_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
  _pullaria_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127
  _riparia_, 107, 117;
    (syn. of _V. arizonica_), 133
    var. _palmata_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125
    _praecox_, 121
  _rotundifolia_, 50, 51, 107, 108
  _rubra_, 107, 125
  _rugosa_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
  _rupestris_, 70, 71, 107, 113, 114
    _dissecta_, 115
    var. _dissecta_ (syn. of _V. rupestris dissecta_), 115
  _serotina_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127;
    (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117
  _simpsoni_, 108, 148
  _Solonis_ (syn. of _V. longii_), 123
    var. _microsperma_ (syn. of _V. longii microsperma_), 123
  _sylvestris_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138;
    (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150
    _Virginiana_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 149
  _taurina_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 149;
    (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 108
  _tenuifolia_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117
  _Texana_ (syn. of _V. monticola_), 116
  _treleasei_, 107, 122
  _verrucosa_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 108
    _vinifera_, 3, 4, 25, 108, 154
    _americana_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138
    _sylvestris americana_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 149
  _Virginiana_ (syn. of _V. baileyana_), 129;
    (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127; (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117
  _virginiana_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125
  _Virginiensis_ (syn. of _V. rubra_), 125
  _vulpina_ (syn. of _V. aestivalis_), 138;
    (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127;
    (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 149;
    (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117;
    (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 108
    var. _cordifolia_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127
      _praecox_ (syn. of _V. riparia praecox_), 121

Vivie, M., var. orig. by, 521

Vivie Hybrid, 521

_Vivie's Hartford_ (syn. of Vivie Hybrid), 521

Waddel, 521

Waddel, John F., var. orig. by, 521

Waldo, J. B., var. orig. by, 521

Waldo Seedling, 521

Wales, 521

Wallis, Henry, cited, 396;
  mentioned, 295

Walter, 419

Walter, Thomas, life of, 96

Waneta, 521

Wapanuka, 421

Ward, Edmund, var. orig. by, 446

Warder, J. A., mentioned, 311;
  var. orig. by, 452

Warmita, 521

_Warner's_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

_Warner's Black Hamburgh_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

_Warner's Hamburgh_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Warren, 521

_Warren_ (syn. of Herbemont), 288

_Warren_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

_Warrenden_ (syn. of Herbemont), 288

_Warrenton_ (syn. of Herbemont), 288

_Warty grape_ (syn. of _V. rotundifolia_), 109

Washington, 521

_Washington_ (syn. of Doder), 454

_Washington_ (syn. of Eumelan), 266

Washita, 521

Wasserzieher, Otto, var. orig. by, 363

Waterloo, 521

Waterman, N. M., var. orig. by, 445

Watertown, 521

_Watertown_ (syn. of Laura), 478

Watova, 522

Waubeck, 522

Waverly, 522

W. B. Munson, 522

Webb Grape, 522

Webb, Samuel, var. orig. by, 522

Weeks, Dr. Cyrus, var. orig. by, 522

Weeks Seedling, 522

Weidmeyer, Wm., var. orig. by, 518

_Weissholziger Trollinger_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

Weller, Sidney, var. orig. by, 466

_Weller's Halifax_ (syn. of Halifax), 466

Wells, 522

_Wells_ (syn. of Spencer), 514

Wells, Mr., var. orig. by, 522

_Wells Seedling_ (syn. of Arkansaw), 435

_Wells' Seedling_ (syn. of Wells), 522

_Wells White_ (syn. of Spencer), 514

_Welscher_ (syn. of Black Hamburg), 186

_Wemple_ (syn. of Cuyahoga), 451

Wemple, Mr., var. found by, 451

_Wemple's Seedling_ (syn. of Cuyahoga), 451

Western Beauty, 522

Western region, 59, 60, 61

Wetumka, 522

Wewoka, 522

Wheaton, 522

Wheaton, John C., var. orig. by, 481, 522

White, Nelson Bonney, life of, 364;
  var. orig. by, 166, 172, 364, 369, 374, 437, 440, 472, 476, 495

White, Hugh, mentioned, 215

White Ann Arbor, 523

White Beauty, 523

White Cape, 523

_White Catawba_ (syn. of Catawba), 204

White Clinton, 523

White Cloud, 523

White Delaware, 523

_White Delaware_ (syn. of White Clinton), 523

White Elizabeth, 523

White English, 524

_White Fox_ (syn. of _V. labrusca_), 150

_White grape_ (syn. of _V. monticola_), 116

Whitehall, 524

_White Herbemont_ (syn. of Herbemont), 288

White Imperial, 422

_White Isabella_ (syn. of White Elizabeth), 523

White Jewel, 524

_White Moline_ (syn. of Newburgh Muscat), 493

White Mountain, 524

White Muscadine, 524

_White Muscadine_ (syn. of Scuppernong), 399

_White Muscat of Newburgh_ (syn. of Newburgh Muscat), 493

White Musk, 524

_White's Northern Muscadine_ (syn. of White Northern Muscat), 524

White Northern Muscat, 524

White Norton, 524

White Rose, 524

_White Scuppernong_ (syn. of Scuppernong), 399

White Sugar, 524

White Tennessee, 524

White Ulster, 524

_White Virginia Seedling_ (syn. of White Norton), 524

Wier, D. H., var. orig. by, 477

Wilcox, 525

Wilder, 423

Wilder, Marshall P., quoted, 391;
  var. orig. by, 489

_Wild Grape_ (syn. of _V. californica_), 135

_Wild green Muscadine_ (syn. of Scuppernong), 399

Wilding, 525

Wilkins, O. Fitzalwyn, var. orig. by, 525

Wilkins Seedling, 525

Willard, 525

Williamson, 525

Williamsport, 525

William Wine, 525

Willie, 525

_Willie Bell_ (syn. of Bell), 181

Willis, 525

Willis Fredonia, 525

Willis Large Black, 525

Wilmington, 526

_Wilmington Red_ (syn. of Wyoming), 431

_Wilmington White_ (syn. of Wilmington), 526

Winchell, 425

Winchell, C. E., mentioned, 426

Winchester, 526

Windsor, 526

Wine, 53, 62;
  color of, 62, 63;
  how made, 62, 63;
  kinds of, 63;
  production of in U. S., 63, 64

Winedrop, 526

_Wine Grape_ (syn. of Delaware), 231

_Wine grape_ (syn. of V. vinifera), 154

Wine House, 526

Wine King, 526

Wineland, 30

Wine-making, 55;
  premiums for, 7

Wingworth, G., var. orig. by, 509

_Winne_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

Winona, 526

Winslow, 526

Winslow, Charles, var. orig. by, 526

Winslow, Governor Edward, quoted, 35

_Winter grape_ (syn. of _V. berlandieri_), 130

_Winter grape_ (syn. of _V. bicolor_), 145

_Winter grape_ (syn. of _V. cordifolia_), 127

_Winter grape_ (syn. of _V. riparia_), 117

Winter Wine, 526

Winthrop, John, mentioned, 13

Witherbee, J. G., var. found by, 157

Witt, 526

Witt, Michael, var. orig. by, 526

_Wolfe_ (syn. of York Madeira), 529

Wood, William, quoted, 35

Woodbury, 526, 527

Woodbury, D. B., var. orig. by, 526

_Woodbury White_ (syn. of Woodbury), 526

Woodcock Seedling, 527

Woodford, 527

Woodriver, 527

Woodruff, 427

Woodruff, C. H., var. orig. by, 428, 494, 523

Woodruff, W. W., var. orig. by, 459

_Woodruff's No. 1_ (syn. of Etawa), 459

_Woodruff Red_ (syn. of Woodruff), 427

Woodson, 527

_Woodward_ (syn. of Isabella), 307

Woodward, A. W., var. orig. by, 386

Woodward, W. A., var. found by, 511

_Wooly Riparia_ (syn. of _V. longii_), 123

Worden, 429

Worden, Schuyler, var. orig. by, 430

_Worden's Seedling_ (syn. of Worden), 429

_Worthington_ (syn. of Clinton), 213

_Wylie_ (syn. of Lenoir), 328

Wylie, Dr. A. P., life of, 182, 183;
  var. orig. by, 182, 462, 463, 474, 486, 491, 500, 506, 527, 528

Wylie's Seedlings, 527, 528

Wyman, 527

_Wyman_ (syn. of To-Kalon), 410

_Wyman's Seedling_ (syn. of Wyman), 527

Wynant, 527

Wyoming, 431, 527

_Wyoming Red_ (syn. of Wyoming), 431


Xenia, 528

Xlnta, 528


Yellow-leaf (See Chlorosis)

_Yellow Muscadine_ (syn. of Scuppernong), 399

Yoakum, 528

Yomago, 528

Yonkers, 528

_Yonkers Honey Dew_ (syn. of Honey Dew), 469

York Claret, 528

York Lisbon, 529

_York Lisbon_ (syn. of Alexander), 160

York Madeira, 529

Young, Frank L., var. orig. by, 483

Young America, 529

_Youngken's Honey Dew_ (syn. of Honey Dew), 469

_Yunker's Honey Dew_ (syn. of Honey Dew), 469


Zane, 529

Zane, Mr., var. orig. by, 529

Zelia, 529

Zinnia, 529

Zita, 529

Zoe, 529

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES:

[1] De Candolle, Alphonse. _Origin of Cultivated Plants_: 191. 1882.

[2] Translation of Dryden.

[3] Perhaps the most marked distinguishing feature between ancient and
modern grape-growing is the training of vines to trees as indicated in
the above verse. Pliny says of this practice: "In Campania they attach
the vine to the poplar; embracing the tree to which it is thus wedded,
the vine grasps the branches with its amorous arms, and as it climbs,
holds on with its knotted trunk till it has reached the very summit; the
height being sometimes so stupendous that the vintager when hired, is
wont to stipulate for his funeral pile and grave at the owner's
expense."

[4] Bailey gives the following interpretation of the word "fox" and its
derivatives as applied to grapes: "The term fox-grape was evidently
applied to various kinds of native grapes in the early days, although it
is now restricted to the _Vitis labrusca_ of the Atlantic slope. Several
explanations have been given of the origin of the name fox-grape, some
supposing that it came from a belief that foxes eat the grapes, others
that the odor of the grape suggests that of the fox--an opinion to which
Beverly subscribed nearly two centuries ago--and still others thinking
that it was suggested by some resemblance of the leaves to a fox's
track. William Bartram, writing at the beginning of this century, in the
Medical Repository, is pronounced in his convictions: 'The strong,
rancid smell of its ripe fruit, very like the effluvia arising from the
body of the fox, gave rise to the specific name of this vine, and not,
as many have imagined, from its being the favourite food of the animal;
for the fox (at least the American species) seldom eats grapes or other
fruit if he can get animal food.' I am inclined to suggest, however,
that the name may have originated from the lively foxing or intoxicating
qualities of the poor wine which was made from the wild grapes. At the
present day we speak of 'foxiness' when we wish to recall the musk-like
flavor of the wild _Vitis labrusca_; but this use of the term is of
later origin, and was suggested by the name of the grape." Bailey, L. H.
_Evolution of Our Native Fruits_: 5. 1898.

[5] The phylloxera (_Phylloxera vastatrix_ Planch.) has four forms: the
leaf-gall form, the root form, the winged form, and the sexual form.
Individual leaf insects produce from 500 to 600 eggs, the root insect
about 100, the winged insect from 3 to 8, and the sexual insect but 1.
The last is laid in the fall on old wood; the following spring a louse
hatches from it and at once goes to the upper surface of a leaf and
inserts its beak. The irritation thus produced causes a gall to form on
the lower side of the leaf. In fifteen days the louse becomes a
full-grown wingless female and proceeds to fill the gall with eggs after
which it dies. In about a week females hatch from the eggs and migrate
to form new colonies. Several generations of females occur in a summer.
At the approach of winter the lice go into the ground where they remain
dormant until spring when they attack the roots forming galls analogous
to those on the leaves and passing through a series of generations
similar to those above ground. In the fall of the second year some of
the root forms give rise to winged females which fly to neighboring
vines. These lay eggs in groups of two or four on the wood of the grape.
The eggs are of two sizes; from the smaller size, males hatch in nine or
ten days; from the larger, females. In the sexual stage no food is taken
and the insects quickly pair. The female produces an egg which fills its
entire body and after three or four days lays it, this being the winter
egg, the beginning of the cycle.

There are no remedies worthy the name and the only efficient preventive
is to graft susceptible varieties on resistant stocks. Species are
resistant about in the order named: _V. rotundifolia_, _V. riparia_, _V.
rupestris_, _V. cordifolia_, _V. berlandieri_, _V. cinerea_, _V.
aestivalis_, _V. candicans_, _V. labrusca_, _V. vinifera_.

[6] Delaware wrote as follows: "In every boske and hedge, and not farr
from our pallisade gates we have thousands of goodly vines running along
and leaving to every tree, which yealds a plentiful grape in their
kinde. Let me appeale, then, to knowledge if these naturall vines were
planted, dressed and ordered by skilfull vinearoons, whether we might
not make a perfect grape and fruitfull vintage in short time?"
Delaware's Relation. _Brown's Genesis of the United States._ 1611.

[7] Discourse of the Old Company, _British State Papers_, Vol. III:40
See _Virginia Magazine of History_, Vol. I:159.

[8] Laws and Orders of Assembly, Feb. 16, 1623. _McDonald Papers_, Vol.
I:97. Va. State Library.

[9] The clause in this act reads: "That all workers upon corne and
tobacco shall this spring plant five vyne plants per pol, and the next
year, before the first day of March, 20 per pol, upon penaltie to
forfeite one barrell of corne for every one that shall make default."

[10] Roger Beverly, writing a century later, describes the early
grape-growing in Virginia as follows: "The Year before the Massacre,
_Anno_ 1622, which destroyed so many good projects for Virginia; some
French vignerons were sent thither to make an experiment of their vines.
These people were so in love with the country, that the character they
then gave of it in their letters to the company in England, was very
much to its advantage, namely: 'That it far excelled their own country
of _Languedoc_, The vines growing in great abundance and variety all
over the land; that some of the grapes were of that unusual bigness,
that they did not believe them to be grapes, until by opening them they
had seen their kernels; that they had planted the cuttings of their
vines at Michaelmas, and had grapes from those very cuttings, the spring
following. Adding in the conclusion, that they had not heard of the like
in any other country.' Neither was this out of the way, for I have made
the same experiment, both of their natural vine, and of the plants sent
thither from England." _Beverly's Virginia_, Second Edition: 107. 1722.

[11] Fiske, John. _Old Virginia and Her Neighbors._ Vol. II:372, 385.

[12] _American Farmer_, Baltimore, 11:35. 1829-30. _Ib._, 12:396.
1830-31.

[13] Dankers, Jasper, and Sluyter, Peter. _Journal of a Voyage to New
York in 1679-80_: 130.

[14] _Documents Relating to the Colonial History of the State of New
York_, Holland Documents, 1603-1656. Vol. I:277.

[15] The grant of the bounty is recorded in Volume II, _Deeds of New
York_, page 87, on file in the office of the Secretary of State at
Albany. It runs as follows:--

"Whereas Paul Richards an inhabitant of this Citty of New York hath made
knowne to mee his intent to plant vines at a certaine Plantation that
hee hath upon Long Island, called the little ffiefe, which if it
succeed, may redound very much to the future benefitt and advantage of
the inhabitants within this Government; and in regard, it will require
much labour and a considerable charge to provide vines and to p'pare the
ground and make it fitt for production of wines; ffor an Encouragemt to
the said Paul Richards in his proceedings therein, I have thought fitt
to grant unto him these following privileges (viz.)

"That all wines of the growth of such vines as the said Paul Richards
shall plant, or cause to bee planted at the place aforesaid, shall be
free from any kind of impositions for ever if sold in grosse, and not by
retaile:

"That the said Paul Richards, his heirs, executors, or assignes shall
have the privilege to have such wines sold by retaile in any one house
in New York for the term of thirty years to come, from the time of the
first selling of his wines, free from all imposts or excise:

"That every person who shall hereafter for thirty years to come, plant
vines within any place in this Government, shall upon the first yeares
improvement pay unto the said Paul Richards, his heirs, executors, or
assignes, five shillings for every acre so planted as an acknowledgement
of his being the first undertaker and planter of vines in these parts.
For the confirmacon of the privileges above specified, I have hereunto
put my hand and seale.

"Given at ffort James in New York this 10th day of January, 1664. RIC.
NICOLLS."

[16] Bellomont's letter is as follows: "As to propagating vines in these
plantations to supply all of the dominions of the Crown, I can easily
make that appear. In the first place Nature has given us an index in
these Plantations that points to us what may be done in that by the help
of art. There grows wild grapes in all of the woods here in very great
abundance; I have observed them in many places but especially above
Albany on the side of the Hudson river where the vines all along twine
around great trees and fair clusters of grapes appear sometimes above 30
foot from the ground. I have eaten of the wild grapes which I thought
tastefull enough, only somewhat harsh as an effect of their wildness."
Then follows an account of how the French had previously made wine in
Canada but that the Court of France had forbade its being made fearing
that it might be prejudicial to the wine trade of the French. Earl of
Bellomont to the Lords of Trade, Nov. 28, 1700. _Documents Relating to
Colonial History of the State of New York_, 4:787.

[17] Francis Higginson wrote in 1630: "excellent Vines are here up and
downe in the Woods. Our Governour hath already planted a Vineyard with
great hope of encrease."

[18] Bellomont records that a company of French immigrants had made good
wine in Rhode Island toward the close of the 17th century but they were
driven out of the Colony by the English and the industry ceased. _N. Y.
Col. Doc._, 4:787.

[19] _American Farmer_, Baltimore, 10:387. 1828-29.

[20] _American Farmer_, Baltimore, 10:387. 1828-29. _Ib._, 11:172.
1829-30.

[21] Vol. I:117-198. 1769-71.

[22] All that is known of the life of Edward Antill is found in
_Johnson's Rural Economy_ where he is spoken of as "Mr. Antill, late of
Middlesex County, New-Jersey, a gentleman who cultivated the grape with
sedulous attention." _Johnson's Rural Economy_: 164. 1806.

[23] Legaux's paper is found as a treatise on the cultivation of the
vine in _The True American_ of March 24, 1800. The article contains
about 2000 words, the main part of it being "A Statement of the Expense
and Income of a Vineyard, Made on Four Acres of Land, situated in
Pennsylvania, in the 40th Degree of Latitude."

Of Legaux's life, little is known, other than that he was a French
vine-grower with an experimental vineyard, as he says in the above
article, at "Spring Mill, 13 miles N. N. W. from Philadelphia." Johnson
speaks of Legaux as a philanthropist; McMahon calls him a "gentleman of
Worth and Science"; while Rafinesque accuses him of fraud and deception
in the matter of calling the native grapes Bland and Alexander,
_Madeira_ and _Cape_.

Judging the man from his article in _The True American_ and from the
words of his contemporaries, he was a capable, enthusiastic and
intelligent grape-grower. His philanthropy is more doubtful. It is true
that he distributed many grape plants but as he himself says to "fellow
citizens possessing pecuniary means." That he practiced deceit in the
matter of the introduction of the Alexander as the Cape is probable.
However, his deceit, if such it were, may be forgotten and he should be
remembered as the chief disseminator of the Alexander, the first
distinctive American variety of commercial value.

[24] _The True American_, March 24, 1800.

[25] Johnson, S. W., _Rural Economy_: 156. New Brunswick, N. J., 1806.

[26] John James Dufour, born in the canton of Vaud, Switzerland, in
1763, came to America in 1796 to engage in grape-growing and
wine-making. An account of his work is given in the text. In 1826 Dufour
published the _Vine Dresser's Guide_, which became the authority on the
culture of this fruit at that time. Dufour must be remembered for this
book, for the dissemination of the Cape or Alexander grape, and as one
of the pioneer vineyardists and wine-makers of the New World.

[27] Dufour, John James. _Vine Dresser's Guide_: 307. 1826.

[28] _U. S. Statutes at Large_, 3:374.

[29] _American State Papers_, Public Lands, 3:396.

[30] For fuller accounts of this dramatic episode in French and American
history, and in American agriculture, see: _The Napoleonic Exiles in
America_, J. S. Reeves, Johns Hopkins University Studies, 23 Series, pp.
530-656; _The Bonapartists in Alabama_, A. B. Lyon, _Gulf State
Historical Magazine_, March, 1903; _The French Grant in Alabama_, G.
Whitfield Jr., _Ala. Hist. Soc._, Vol. IV; _The Vine and Olive Colony_,
T. C. McCorvey, _Alabama Historical Reports_, April, 1885.

[31] The last official account of this colony in the records of the
United States Government is found in _American State Papers_, Vol. III.
"In a letter of Frederick Ravesies to the treasury department dated
January 18, 1828, is the following: 'We have suffered severely from the
unparalleled drought of the last summer; many of our largest and finest
looking vines, which had just commenced bearing luxuriantly, were
totally killed by the dry hot weather. Yet, notwithstanding this
misfortune, the grantees, with increased diligence, are using every
exertion to procure others which are thought to be more congenial to the
soil and climate, and are now generally engaged in replanting.'" Quoted
from _Studies in Southern and Alabama History_, 1904:131.

[32] William Robert Prince, fourth proprietor of the Prince Nursery and
Linnaean Botanic Garden, Flushing, Long Island, was born in 1795 and died
in 1869. Prince was without question the most capable horticulturist of
his time and an economic botanist of note. His love of horticulture and
botany was a heritage from at least three paternal ancestors, all noted
in these branches of science, and all of whom he apparently surpassed in
mental capacity, intellectual training and energy. He was a prolific
writer, being the author of three horticultural works which will always
take high rank among those of Prince's time. These were: _A Treatise on
the Vine_, _Pomological Manual_, in two volumes, and the _Manual of
Roses_, beside which he was a lifelong contributor to the horticultural
press. All of Prince's writings are characterized by a clear, vigorous
style and by accuracy in statement. His works are almost wholly lacking
the ornate and pretentious furbelows of most of his contemporaries
though it must be confessed that he fell into the then common fault of
following European writers somewhat slavishly. During the lifetime of
Wm. R. Prince, and that of his father Wm. Prince, who died in 1842, the
Prince Nursery at Flushing was the center of the horticultural nursery
interests of the country; it was the clearing-house for foreign and
American horticultural plants, for new varieties and for information
regarding plants of all kinds.

[33] Prince, Wm. R. _A Treatise on the Vine_: 337. 1830.

[34] Nicholas Longworth, known as the "father of American grape
culture", was born in 1783, in Newark, New Jersey. At an early age he
went West making his home in Cincinnati where he became a lawyer,
banker, and a man of large business affairs in what was then the far
frontier. From his boyhood Longworth was interested in horticulture and
as a young man became greatly interested in native grapes. He was one of
the men to whom John Adlum sent the Catawba and he became its
disseminator and a promoter for the region in which he lived, making
this grape the first great American grape and Cincinnati the center of
the foremost grape-growing region of the Continent. He was the first
vineyardist to make wine on a large scale and perfected methods of
making wine from the native grapes so that the product was comparable to
that from the best wine cellars of Europe. Longworth introduced the
first cultivated variety of the wild black raspberry, _Rubus
occidentalis_, under the name of the Ohio Everbearing. His interest in
the strawberry was second only to that in the grape and he not only did
much to encourage its cultivation in America but also, after a long
controversy with horticulturists and botanists, fully established the
fact that many varieties of this fruit are infertile with themselves and
that under cultivation infertile varieties must have sorts planted near
them capable of cross-pollinating them. Longworth took a deep interest
in horticulture generally and gathered about him a group of pioneer
horticulturists who did much for American fruit-growing in the middle of
the nineteenth century, in many respects molding and guiding the
horticulture of that time in this country. Longworth wrote much for the
contemporary horticultural magazines and published two small books,
"_The Cultivation of the Grape and Manufacture of Wine_" and "_Character
and Habits of the Strawberry Plant_." He died in 1863, aged 80, at
Cincinnati, one of the most distinguished, enterprising and wealthy
citizens of his State. For further discussion of his life see Bailey's
_Evolution of Our Native Fruits_: 61-65. 1898.

[35] Probably the northern part of the vine region of France; the Jura
mountains are in the east central part.

[36] _Transactions New York State Agricultural Society_, 6:689. 1846.

[37] Fuller, Andrew S. _Record of Horticulture_: 21. 1866.

[38] There is a wild grape vine (probably _Vitis aestivalis_) near
Daphne, Alabama, on the shores of Mobile Bay, known as the "General
Jackson vine" because of General Jackson having camped under it during
the war with the Seminole Indians in 1817-18, which for age and size is
truly remarkable. Mr. E. Q. Norton of Daphne writes of this vine as
follows: "There is little known regarding the Jackson grape vine beyond
the fact that the oldest man living here when I came here--20 years
ago--told me that the Indians told him when he came here as a boy--90
years ago--that the vine was at that time an old one, which had been
growing longer than any of them could remember. It was 27 inches through
the trunk, four feet above the ground, when I measured it ten years
since, and the vines were running over the surrounding trees for many
rods. The grapes were very small, quite hard and not very juicy."

[39] The following is an account of the discovery of grapes in Vinland
translated from the Icelandic manuscript by Reeves:

"When they had completed their house Leif said to his companions, 'I
propose now to divide our company into two groups, and to set about an
exploration of the country; one half of our party shall remain at home
at the house, while the other half shall investigate the land, and they
must not go beyond a point from which they can return home the same
evening, and are not to separate. Thus they did for a time; Leif
himself, by turns, joined the exploring party or remained behind at the
house. * * *

"It was discovered one evening that one of their party was missing, and
this proved to be Tyrker the German. Leif was sorely troubled by this,
for Tyrker had lived with Leif and his father for a long time, and had
been very devoted to Leif, when the latter was a child. Leif severely
reprimanded his companions, and prepared to go in search of him, taking
twelve men with him. They had proceeded but a short distance from the
house, when they were met by Tyrker, whom they received most cordially.
Leif observed at once that his foster-father was in lively spirits. * *
* Leif addressed him, and asked: 'Wherefore art thou so belated,
foster-father mine, and astray from the others'. In the beginning Tyrker
spoke for some time in German, rolling his eyes, and grinning, and they
could not understand him; but after a time he addressed them in the
Northern tongue: 'I did not go much further [_than you_], and yet I have
something of novelty to relate. I have found vines and grapes.' 'Is this
indeed true, foster-father?' said Leif. 'Of a certainty it is true',
quoth he, 'for I was born where there is not lack of either grapes or
vines.' They slept the night through, and on the morrow Leif said to his
shipmates: 'We will now divide our labours, and each day will either
gather grapes or cut vines and fell trees, so as to obtain a cargo of
these for my ship.' They acted upon this advice, and it is said, that
their after-boat was filled with grapes. A cargo sufficient for the ship
was cut, and when the spring came, they made their ship ready, and
sailed away; and from its products Leif gave the land a name, and called
it Wineland." _Finding of Wineland the Good_: 66. Oxford University
Press, London, 1890.

[40] Winsor, Justin. _Narrative and Critical History of America_, Vol.
III:61.

[41] First Voyage to Virginia, _Hakluyt's Voyages_, 3:301-306.

[42] _Hakluyt's Voyages_, 3:311.

[43] Discourse of Thomas Hariot, _Hakluyt's Voyages_, 3:326.

[44] _Smith's History of Virginia_, 1:122 (1629) Reprint 1819.

[45] _Works of Capt. John Smith_, p. 502.

[46] Bruce, Philip Alexander. _Economic History of Virginia in the
Seventeenth Century_, Vol. 1:219. 1896.

[47] Report of Francis Maguel, Spanish Archives, _Brown's Genesis of the
United States_: 395. 1610.

[48] _The History of Travaile into Virginia_: 120. 1610, printed 1849.

[49] Anonymous. _A Perfect Description of Virginia._ 1649, Peter Force's
Tracts, Vol. II, 1838.

[50] "Grape vines of the English stock, as well as those of their own
production, bear most abundantly, if they are suffered to run near the
ground, and increase very kindly by slipping; yet very few have them at
all in their gardens, much less endeavor to improve them by cutting or
laying. But since the first impression of this book, some vineyards have
been attempted, and one is brought to perfection, of seven hundred and
fifty gallons a year. The wine drinks at present greenish, but the owner
doubts not of good wine, in a year or two more, and takes great delight
that way.

"When a single tree happens in clearing the ground, to be left standing,
with a vine upon it, open to the sun and air, that vine generally
produces as much as four or five others, that remain in the woods. I
have seen in this case, more grapes upon one single vine, than would
load a London cart. And for all this, the people till of late never
removed any of them into their gardens, but contented themselves
throughout the whole country with the grapes they found thus wild."
Beverly, Robert. _The History of Virginia_: 260. 1722, Reprint, 1855.

[51] "Will fox," _i. e._ intoxicate. See footnote on page 4.

[52] _New English Canaan_, 1632. Reprinted in _Force's Tracts_, 1838.

[53] _Vine_, much differing in the fruit, all of them very fleshy, some
reasonably pleasant; others have a taste of Gun Powder, and these grow
in swamps, and low wet Grounds. Josselyn, John, Gent. _New England's
Rarities_: 66. London, 1672.

[54] Speaking of the Horne-bound tree (probably hornbeam from his
description) he says: "This Tree growing with broad spread Armes, the
vines winde their curling branches about them; which vines affoard great
store of grapes, which are very big both for the grape and Cluster,
sweet and good: these be of two sorts, red and white, there is likewise
a smaller kind of grape which groweth in the Islands which is sooner
ripe and more delectable; so that there is no knowne reason why as good
wine may not be made in those parts, as well as in _Burdeuax in France_;
being under the same degree. It is a great pittie no man sets upon such
a venture, whereby he might in small time inrich himselfe, and benefit
the Countrie, I know nothing which doth hinder but want of skilfull men
to manage such an employment; For the countrey is hot enough, the ground
good enough, and many convenient hills lye towards the south Sunne, as
if they were there placed for the purpose." Wood, William. _New
England's Prospect_: 20. London, 1634.

[55] Lawson, John. _History of North Carolina_: 169-171. 1714, Reprint
1860.

[56] Lawson, John. _History of North Carolina_: 141. 1714, Reprint 1860.

[57] _Ib._: 184-189.

[58] Beverly, Robert. _History of Virginia_: 105-107. 1722, Reprint
1855.

[59] _Transactions American Philosophical Society_, 1:191-193. 1769-71.

[60] _The True American_, Philadelphia, March 24, 1800.

[61] But little is known of Dr. James Mease other than that he was one
of the editors of _The Domestic Encyclopedia_, a Fellow of the _American
Philosophical Society_ and Vice-President of the _Philadelphia
Agricultural Society_. That he was a student of American grapes is shown
in his letter of transmissal of Bartram's paper to the _Medical
Repository_ in which he says: "It is my present intention to publish the
description of one species of vine every year in Latin and English, with
a coloured plate, and I had made arrangements for the publication of the
first fascicle last year; but the very unfavourable season, which had
prevented the ripening of the species (Bland's Grape) I had resolved
first to describe, obliging me to defer the task until the present year,
when I hope the weather will prove more favourable. Medical gentlemen,
and others fond of natural history, and anxious to have the description
of American vines and their classification completed, will have it much
in their power to assist my undertaking. I have taken measures to have
the _Bull_ or Bullet grape of Carolina and Georgia sent me; but I shall
nevertheless be much indebted for any specimens of the plant that may be
transmitted."

[62] The same year, 1804, Mease published Bartram's paper, with some
omissions, in the _Medical Repository_ (Second Hexade, 1:19) under the
heading, "Account of the Species, Hybrids, and other Varieties of the
Vine of North-America. By Mr. William Bartram, of Pennsylvania." The
same paper was again published in 1830 in Prince's _A Treatise on the
Vine_, pp. 216-220.

[63] Bartram states that "bull" is an abbreviation of bullet; the grapes
being so called because they were of the size of a bullet. He held that
the name "_taurina_" applied to the species was not proper.

[64] _Johnson's Rural Economy_: 155-197. New Brunswick, N. J., 1806.

[65] _McMahon's Gardening_: 226-241. Philadelphia, Pa., 1806.

[66] _American Farmer_, 8:116. Baltimore, 1826.

[67] Adlum, John. _Cultivation of the Vine_: 149. Second Edition,
Washington, 1828.

[68] John Adlum, a native of Pennsylvania, was born in 1759 and died at
Georgetown, D. C., in 1836. Adlum was one of the first men to see
clearly the possibility of improving the wild grapes of America and of
bringing them under cultivation. He published accounts of this fruit in
his _Cultivation of the Vine_ and in the agricultural papers of his
time, thereby aiding in bringing it into public notice as a cultivated
plant. At "The Vineyard", near Georgetown, he established an
experimental plantation of grapes from which he distributed many vines,
chief of which were those of the Catawba, a variety for whose
dissemination he is largely responsible. Adlum tried without avail to
have the national government found an experimental farm for the culture
of grapes and his effort was one of the first to secure governmental aid
in agricultural experimentation. Beside his work with the grape, Adlum
was deeply interested in other phases of agriculture and in the
scientific movements of his time. He was a soldier of the Revolution, a
brigadier-general in the militia of Pennsylvania, a county judge, and a
civil engineer and surveyor. In spite of his work in the early part of
the last century for agriculture and for his State and country, Adlum
was practically unknown to the present generation until a sketch of his
life and work appeared in Bailey's _The Evolution of Our Native Fruits_
from which this sketch is written. Adlum's memory is perpetuated in the
name of the beautiful climbing fumitory of one of the Northern Atlantic
States, _Adlumnia cirhosa_, bestowed upon him by his contemporary,
Rafinesque. (For a more complete account of Adlum's life, see Bailey's
_Evolution of Our Native Fruits_, pp. 50-61.)

[69] Adlum, John. _Cultivation of the Vine._ Preface. 1823.

[70] For a full account of Dufour's attempts to grow European grapes see
Bailey's _Evolution of Our Native Fruits_, pp. 21-42.

[71] Rafinesque has also preserved for us the names of many of the
vine-growers of his time. The following is his list: "Wishing to
preserve the names of the public benefactors who had in 1825 established
our first vineyards, I herewith insert their names. They are independent
of the vineyards of York, Vevay, and Vincennes.

"In New York, George Gibbs, Swift, Prince, Lansing, Loubat, etc.

"In Pennsylvania, Carr, James, Potter, J. Webb, Legaux, Echelberger, E.
Bonsall, Stoys, Lemoine, Rapp.

"In Delaware, Broome, J. Gibbs, etc.

"In Maryland, Adlum, W. Bernie, C. Varle, R. Sinclair, W. Miles, etc.

"In Virginia, Lockhart, Zane, R. Weir, Noel, J. Browne, J. Duling, etc.

"In Carolina, Habersham, Noisette, etc.

"In Georgia, Maurick, James Gardiner, S. Grimes, Checteau, M'Call.

"In New Jersey, Cooper at Camden. Another at Mount Holly.

"In Ohio, Gen. Harrison, Longworth, Dufour, etc.

"In Indiana, Rapp of Harmony, the French of Vincennes.

"In Alabama, Dr. S. Brown, at Eagleville."

Continuing, he gives an idea of grape production in 1830:--"The average
crop of wine with us is 300 gallons per acre. At York, where 2700 vines
are put on one acre, each vine has often produced a quart of wine, and
thus 675 gallons per acre, value $675 in 1823, besides $200 for 5000
cuttings. One acre of vineyard did then let for $200 or 300, thus value
of the acre about $5000: This was in poor soil unfit for wheat, and for
mere Claret.

"Now in 1830, that common French Claret often sells only at 50 cents the
gallon, the income must be less. I hope our claret may in time be sold
for 25 cents the gallon, and the table grapes at one cent the lb. and
even then an acre of vineyard will give an income of $75, and be worth
$1000 the acre.

"The greatest check to this cultivation is the time required for grapes
to bear well, from 3 to 6 years: our farmers wishing to have quick
yearly crops; but then when a vineyard is set and in bearing, it will
last forever, the vines themselves lasting from 60 to 100 years, and are
easily re-placed as they decay.

"The next check is the precarious crops if badly managed. Every year is
not equally plentiful and sometimes there is a total failure when rains
drown the blossoms; but an extra good crop of 500 or 600 gallons
commonly follows and covers their loss." Rafinesque, C. S. _American
Manual of the Grape Vines._, Philadelphia. 1830. pp. 43-45.

[72] Tradition relates that the first Scuppernong vine known by
civilized man was found on the coast of North Carolina by Amadas and
Barlowe in 1584 and was transplanted by them to Roanoke Island. An old
vine of great diameter of stem and spread of vine, gnarled in trunk and
branch, evidently of great age, is known as the "Mother Scuppernong" and
is supposed to be the vine transplanted in 1584.

[73] Calvin Jones writing June 17, 1817, in the _American Farmer_,
=3=:332, from Raleigh, North Carolina, gives the following account of
the name Scuppernong: "This grape & wine, had the name of Scuppernong,
given to them by Henderson & myself, in compliment to Jas. Blount, of
Scuppernong, who first diffused a general knowledge of it in several
well written communications in our paper--and it is cultivated with more
success on that river, than in any other part of the state, perhaps,
except the Island of Roanoke." It is worthy of note that Scuppernong is
largely a sea-board name for _Vitis rotundifolia_ and is not commonly
applied to it outside of the Atlantic States.

[74] There is some evidence to show that the Clinton contains Labrusca
blood.

[75] Buchanan, Robert. _Grape Culture_: 61. 1850.

[76] British Parliamentary Papers (Library of Congress), Vol. 30. 1859.

[77] _American Pomological Society Report_ for 1852:45.

[78] _Horticulturist_, 6:445. 1851.

[79] _Horticulturist_, 6:444. 1851.

[80] _American Pomological Society Report_ for 1852:45.

[81] _Magazine of Horticulture_, 11:134. 1845.

[82] Nuttall says: "It is probable that hybrids betwixt the European
Vine (_Vitis vinifera_) and those of the United States would better
answer the variable climates of North America, than the unacclimated
vine of Europe. When a portion of the same industry shall have been
bestowed upon the cultivation of the native vines of America, which has
for so many ages and by so many nations, been devoted to the
amelioration of _Vitis vinifera_, we cannot imagine that the citizens of
the United States will be longer indebted to Europe for the luxury of
wine. It is not however in the wilds of uncultivated nature that we are
to obtain vines worthy of cultivation. Were this the case, Europe would
to the present have known no other Malus than the worthless austere
crab, in place of the finest apple; no other Pyrus than the acerb and
inedible Pyraster or stone Pear, from which cultivation has obtained all
the other varieties. It is from seed that new and valuable varieties are
invariably to be obtained. There is however at the present time, a
variety of one of the native species cultivated under the name of
'Bland's grape', a hybrid no way in my opinion inferior to some of the
best European grapes."

[83] "People who have a good deal of leisure time, ought to make those
experiments which take many years to know the result. If any where in
the United States a public Botanic garden should be established, there
would be the proper place, to have a corner of it appropriated solely
for the purpose of trying the raising of new species of grapes, either
by seeds or grafts; and if there was a green or hot house, several
species of the best grapes, and even a male plant of the most vigorous
indigenous ought to be introduced in it, and trained so that the
crossing of the breed may be easily done, by bringing two different
sorts of grapes together in time of blossoming, and sow the seeds. I
think we may anticipate some very good results from such an
arrangement." _Vine Dresser's Guide_: 228. 1826.

[84] Of hybridization he says: "In all attempts at artificial
fecundation, I would recommend that one of the varieties selected be of
native origin, as there exists no want of hybrids between European
varieties alone; a large proportion of those now in cultivation having
been doubtless produced by natural admixture of the pollen, in the
vineyards where they originated. For the purpose of hybridizing, the
varieties of _Vitis aestivalis_ should be selected in preference to
those of _Vitis labrusca_, on account of the much higher vinous
properties of the former; and there cannot exist a doubt but that we may
readily produce well acclimated hybrids between the native and foreign
varieties, without the trouble of continuing the course of reproduction
for many generations, although such reproduction from species so
dissimilar may continue to present additional modifications of
character." _A Treatise on the Vine_: 253-254. 1830.

[85] U. S. Dept. of Agriculture. Special Report, No. 36. 1880.

[86] Wine is the fermented juice of the grape. When the juice or must of
the grape is exposed to temperatures ranging from 55 deg. to 65 deg.F. the
micro-organisms which accompany the fruit, the yeast of the wine-maker,
are transformed from a comparatively dormant state to one of great
activity. The action of the organisms on grape must is called
fermentation and through it certain physical and chemical changes take
place whereby the must is changed in taste and in color, and a part or
all of its sugar is changed into alcohol. The methods of making wine
differ in different countries and in different localities depending upon
the climate, kind of grapes grown, condition of growth, and the kind of
wine produced, yet the principles and chief processes are much the same
and may be briefly described as follows:

In general grapes are not picked for wine-making until they have reached
full maturity thus insuring a higher sugar content, richness of flavor
and perfect color. It is customary to determine the composition of the
must as to sugar and acid content by various instruments devised for the
purpose and if it lack sugar this ingredient is added; if it be too acid
water is added; or the composition may be otherwise changed depending
upon a number of circumstances though manifestly reputable wine-makers
change the natural grape juice as little as possible. Soon after
harvesting the grapes are crushed. The ancient method, which still
prevails in many parts of Europe, was to tramp the grapes with bare feet
or wooden shoes. Tramping is for most part superseded by mechanical
crushers which break the skins but do not crush the seeds. For some
wines the stems of the grapes are removed; for others it is essential
that the grapes be not stemmed. Stemming may be done by hand, by a rake
over a screen, or by specially devised machines. If white wine is to be
made the juice is separated from skins and pulp at once; if red wine is
desired fermentation takes place in the crushed grapes or marc.

Fermentation is carried on in large tanks or vats varying in capacity
from 1000 gallons to 10,000 gallons or more. Some wine-makers prefer
open vats, others keep them closed. The duration of fermentation depends
upon many conditions and varies from two or three to fifteen or twenty
days, depending upon the amount of sugar in the must, the temperature,
activity of ferments, etc., etc. Wine-makers observe several distinct
stages of fermentation which must be closely watched and controlled. A
most important influence is exerted on fermentation by temperature. The
limits below which and above which fermentation does not take place are
55 deg. and 90 deg.F. In general it is desirable that fermentation take place at
temperatures ranging about 70 deg.. When it is found that the sugar is
practically all converted into alcohol, or that such conversion has
proceeded far enough, the new wine is drawn or pumped from the
fermenting vats into casks or barrels where it ages though it may
require special treatment for clearing. Before bottling it is usually
necessary to rack the wine into new barrels twice or three times to stop
secondary fermentations which invariably take place.

Special treatments result in several distinct classes of wine. Thus we
can divide wine into _red_ and _white_ as to color. Red wines are
produced from colored grapes the color being extracted in the process of
fermentation. White wines are made from light colored grapes or if from
colored fruit the must is not allowed to ferment on the marc and so
extract the color. We may again divide wines into _dry_ and _sweet_. Dry
wines are those in which the sugar is practically all converted into
alcohol. Sweet wines are those which retain more or less sugar. These
are often fortified by the addition of alcohol. A third division is that
of _still_ and _sparkling_ wines. Still wines are those in which the
carbonic acid gas formed by fermentation has wholly escaped. Sparkling
wines retain a greater or less amount of this carbonic acid gas.

All of the above classes are further divided into well marked types
according to their color and taste, their alcoholic content, and the
countries in which they are produced. The following are the leading
wines made from native grapes: _Catawba_, _Delaware_, _Concord_,
_Norton's Virginia_, _Ives_, _Scuppernong_, _Iona_, _Claret_, _Port_ and
_Champagne_. Of these _Claret_, _Norton's Virginia_ and _Ives_ are red
dry wines. _Catawba_, _Delaware_, _Iona_ and _Scuppernong_ may be either
dry or sweet white wines. _Port_ is a red sweet wine.

[87] Vol. 22: No. 3:22.

[88] Champagne obtains its name from the fact that it is chiefly
produced in the Province of Champagne in France. Its special
characteristic is that during fermentation, which is usually brought
about in the bottle, the carbonic acid gas generated is absorbed by the
wine. When the bottle is opened the gas is disengaged and the wine
effervesces or "sparkles". Good champagne requires grapes of high
quality and of special adaptability; the fruit must be well ripened,
free from decayed berries, and clean. The first fermentation takes place
during a period of several months in the regular receptacles for this
purpose after which the wine from several varieties of grapes is
blended. Good champagne usually contains some old wine. After bottling,
the wine is held at slightly different temperatures for varying lengths
of time to secure proper fermentation in the bottle until at the end of
several months it is held at a comparatively low temperature in which
the bottles remain from three to four years. The bottles must then
receive some treatment which will remove the sediment which has been
formed by fermentation. This is usually done by placing them in racks
cork down at about an angle of 45 degrees or a little more. By
dexterously shaking and jarring the bottles the sediment is loosened and
deposited in the neck of the bottle. Lastly the sediment is disgorged by
skillfully withdrawing the cork, a small portion of the wine being
wasted in the operation. The bottles are then filled with a dosage of
rock-candy dissolved in an old dry wine, the amount used determining the
sweetness of the champagne. The bottles are then corked, wired, capped,
labelled and cased, after which the champagne is ready for the market.

[89] _Champagne: Decrease in Imports and Increase in Domestic
Production_, April 25, 1907, p. 427.

[90] Grape juice is made from clean, sound but not over-ripe grapes. The
juice is pressed out by machinery in commercial practice but in the home
manufacture of the product, the grapes may be pressed by the hands. If a
light-colored juice is desired the liquid is extracted without heating
the grapes; for a red juice the pulp is heated before pressing and the
grapes must be dark in color. In either case the heating is done in a
double boiler so that the juice does not come in direct contact with the
fire. The proper temperature ranges from 180 deg. F. to 200 deg. F. and must
never exceed the 200 deg. mark if the flavor of uncooked grapes is desired.
After heating, the juice is allowed to settle for twenty-four hours in a
glass, crockery or enameled vessel after which it is carefully drained
from the sediment and strained through some sterilized filter. In home
practice several thicknesses of flannel, previously boiled, will do for
a filter. The liquid is then filled into clean bottles leaving room for
expansion in the second heating. The bottled juice is now heated a
second time after which it is immediately corked and sealed. The
principles involved in making grape juice are the same as those observed
in canning fruit and the operation may be varied in the former as it is
in the latter if only certain fundamental processes are followed.

[91] A raisin is a dried and cured grape. Raisin-making is a simple
process. The grapes are arranged on shallow trays, and placed in the sun
to dry, being turned now and then by placing an empty tray on a full one
and turning both over after which the top tray is removed. When the
grapes are properly dried they are put in bins to sweat preparatory to
packing and shipping. The finishing touch in the drying is sometimes
given in curing-houses, however, to avoid injury from rain or dust.
Seeding, grading, packing and selling are now separate industries from
growing and curing. At present all raisins are made from varieties of
the Old World grape, no American sort having been found suitable for
raisin-making. A variety adapted for making a raisin, something better
than simply a "dried grape", must have a large percentage of sugar and
solids, a thin skin, and a high flavor. American grapes lack in sugar
content and have a skin so thick and tough that the fruit does not cure
properly for a good raisin. The raisin industry in the United States is
carried on only in California, the great bulk of the crop coming from
the San Joaquin Valley and a few of the southern counties of that State.
Formerly the raisins used in this country were wholly imported; now this
product of the grape is exported and in increasing quantities. The
annual production of raisins is in the neighborhood of 100,000,000
pounds.

[92] According to Bartram, the aborigines of eastern America made
raisins from the wild grapes. He describes the process they used as
follows: "The Indians gather great quantities of wild grapes which they
prepare for keeping, by first sweating them on hurdles over a gentle
fire, and afterwards dry them on their bunches in the sun and air, and
store them up for provisions."

[93] Tarr, R. S., _Cornell_ (_N. Y._) _Exp. Sta. Bul._, 109. 1896.

[94] Burke, R. T. Avon, and Marean, Herbert, Field Operations, Bureau of
Soils, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture. 1901.

[95] Tarr, R. S., _Cornell_ (_N. Y._) _Exp. Sta. Bul._, 109. 1896.

[96] Burke, R. T. Avon, and Marean, Herbert, Field Operations, Bureau of
Soils, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture. 1901.

[97] Elijah Fay was born in Southborough, Massachusetts, in 1781. He
moved to Brocton, Chautauqua County, New York, in the fall of 1811. The
early history of not only the viticulture but of the horticulture of the
Chautauqua region is interwritten with that of the Fay family. Elijah
Fay's children and grandchildren inherited a love of horticulture from
their ancestor and several of them, as mentioned in the text, have been
noted for their horticultural work in this region. Lincoln Fay, a nephew
of Elijah Fay, one of the first men to grow and sell grape vines in the
region, originated the Fay currant which was afterwards introduced by
him and his son Elijah H. Fay. Of the Fay family, noted in the annals of
grape-growing in this region, only G. E. Ryckman and L. R. Ryckman,
grandchild and great-grandchild of Elijah Fay, are now living. Elijah
Fay lived to the ripe age of eighty, dying in 1860. His memory should be
long cherished as one of the founders of the viticulture of New York.

[98] The writer is indebted to Mr. G. E. Ryckman of this firm, for the
information given here.

[99] _The Grape Belt_, 16: No. 20, Feb. 26, 1907.

[100] _The Grape Belt_, 16: No. 20, Feb. 26, 1907.

[101] The grape-vine fidia (_Fidia viticida_ Walsh) is a robust beetle,
a quarter of an inch in length, brown in color but whitened by a thick
covering of yellowish-white hairs. The beetle lays its eggs in the
cracks and crevices of the bark of the grape vines well above ground.
The eggs are produced in large numbers, often as many as several hundred
to the vine. Upon hatching, the larvae quickly worm their way into the
ground and begin to feed upon the fibrous roots of the vine, passing
from these to the larger roots. Possibly the chief damage is done on the
larger roots which are often entirely stripped of bark for a length of
several feet. The larvae attain their full size, a half inch in length,
by the middle of August, and then hibernate until the following June.
The winter is spent in earthen cells. After about two weeks as pupae in
June, the full grown beetles emerge from the ground and begin to feed
upon the upper surface of the leaves, eating out the cellular tissue,
thus skeletonizing the foliage. The adults disappear the succeeding
August. The most efficient means of checking the fidia so far found is
an application of an arsenical spray applied during the time the beetles
are feeding on the foliage.

[102] Grape-vine flea-beetle (_Haltica chalybea_ Ill.).--The adult
insects are shining steel-blue flea-beetles measuring about one-fifth of
an inch in length. They live during the winter under the bark of the old
vines or in rubbish in the fields. They emerge from their winter
quarters during the first warm days of spring, and feed upon the opening
buds and young leaves. Egg-laying begins late in April or early in May.
The eggs are placed singly near the buds or upon the leaves and hatch in
about ten days. The young larvae are dark brown in color but soon become
prominently marked with black dots and patches. They are full grown in
from three to four weeks at which time they measure about a quarter of
an inch in length. They feed on the leaves devouring only the soft parts
at first, but finally eating irregular holes through the leaves. When
ready to pupate they go a short distance into the ground. The adults
emerge during the latter part of June or early in July. They probably
feed during all of the summer, finally seeking shelter for the winter as
above indicated.

The vines should be sprayed with paris green, one pound to fifty gallons
of water, just before the buds begin to swell or with some other
arsenite. Much pains should be taken to make this application thorough.
Later when the worms appear on the leaves, paris green may be applied at
the usual strength, one pound to 150 gallons of lime and water, or
combined with bordeaux mixture. Both upper and under surfaces of the
leaves should be covered. Applications of arsenicals for the grape-vine
fidia will help greatly to keep this insect in check.

[103] Grape leaf-hopper (_Typhlocyba comes_ Say).--There are several
species of leaf-hoppers which attack the grape but this species is
probably the most common in this State. These little leaf-hoppers are
often erroneously called thrips. The adult insects measure about
one-eighth of an inch in length. They vary greatly in color but the
prevailing color is usually light yellowish-green. The back and wings
are ornamented with bright red, yellow and brown. They are found upon
the vines from spring until fall. They feed together, sucking the sap
from the leaves, principally from the under surface, causing them to
turn brown in patches. The eggs are deposited singly in the tissue of
the under surface of the leaves. The young resemble the adults in form
but are not provided with wings and are green or yellowish-green in
color. There are several broods during the season. Some of the adults of
the last brood hibernate in any convenient rubbish about the vineyard.
Treatment for young hoppers should be made early in July. To obtain the
best results use whale-oil soap at the rate of one pound to ten gallons
of water, directing the spraying with the hand. Vineyards and adjacent
land should be kept as free as possible from grass and weeds as they
afford shelter to the insect.

[104] Grape berry moth (_Polychrosis viteana_ Clem.).--The young
caterpillars feed within the grapes finally causing them to turn dark
colored and to wither. This injury is sometimes mistaken for the
black-rot. After devouring the soft parts of one grape the caterpillar
goes to another, fastening the two together by a silken thread. This may
be continued until several in a bunch have been destroyed by one
caterpillar. The young caterpillars are very light green in color with a
brown head. When full grown they measure about one-fourth of an inch in
length and are dark olive green in color tinged slightly with red. The
cocoon is formed on a leaf and is partially composed of two small pieces
cut out of the leaf. The adults of the spring brood emerge in from
twelve to fourteen days. The fore-wings have a bluish tinge and are
marked with brown, while the posterior wings are dull brown. The moths
are small measuring nearly half an inch from tip to tip when the wings
are spread. The eggs are probably laid late in June or early in July.
There are two broods annually in this State. As the caterpillars spend
most of their lives within the grape berries, spraying does not entirely
control the pest. Yet the arsenicals applied for the grape-vine fidia
will help much in keeping it in check. Picking and destroying the
infested fruit and the leaves containing the cocoons helps much.

[105] For a full account of the geology of these lakes and the valleys
in which they lie, see the _Physical Geography of New York State_ by
Ralph S. Tarr. New York. 1902.

[106] Black-rot (_Guignardia bidwellii_ (Ell.) V. & R.) usually appears
first on the leaves where it forms circular, reddish-brown spots on
which black pimples, or spore cases, develop. Within these spore cases,
at maturity, are the summer spores. These are distributed by the
elements to the growing parts of the plant and form new centers of
infection. The diseased berries show analogous circular spots bearing
spores and as the disease progresses the grapes wither, turn black, and
become hard and shrivelled, sometimes clinging to the vine until the
following spring. Growing shoots are attacked as well as leaves and
fruit. During the winter and spring the resting spores are formed,
usually upon the shrivelled berries.

Treatment consists of destroying as far as possible all diseased fruit,
old leaves and prunings and in spraying thoroughly with bordeaux mixture
as follows:--

1. Just as the pink tips of the first leaves appear.

2. From ten days to two weeks after the first spraying.

3. Just after the blossoming.

4. From ten to fourteen days after the third spraying.

5. After an interval of from ten to fourteen days from the fourth
spraying.

[107] Downy mildew (_Plasmopara viticola_ (B. & C.) Berl. & De Toni) is
a troublesome fungus attacking all of the tender growing parts of the
grape. It does most damage to the leaves, upon the upper surface of
which it produces greenish-yellow spots of irregular outline. At the
same time a loose white downy growth appears on the under side of the
leaves. This growth consists of short filaments bearing spores, the
summer spores, which are carried by the elements to other growing parts
of the plant, thus spreading the disease. Affected berries, if young,
first show a brown spot, and become covered with the gray down which
distinguishes the fungus. On older berries the fungus causes a
brown-purple spot which spreads until it takes in the whole berry, which
then becomes soft and often falls, or they may become hard and persist.
At this stage the disease is commonly known as "brown rot". The winter,
or resting, spores are produced in the tissue of fruit and leaves and
with a thick protective covering. The winter spores are dark, almost
black, in color. Downy mildew spreads and does most damage in hot wet
weather. Spraying with bordeaux mixture as indicated for black-rot will
keep downy mildew in check.

[108] Powdery mildew (_Uncinula necator_ (Schw.) Burr.) is caused by a
fungus which lives on the surface of the leaves. It subsists by means of
sucker-like organs which penetrate the walls of the surface layer of
cells. The vegetative portion of the parasite consists of fine white
filaments which spread over the surface of the leaves, shoots and fruit.
In the summer these filaments send up short, irregular stalks upon which
large numbers of barrel-shaped spores are produced in chain-like
arrangement. These are the summer spores of the fungus. They are borne
in greatest quantity on the upper surfaces of the leaves and give the
leaf a gray, powdery appearance--hence the name, powdery mildew.
Affected leaves finally become light brown and often fall. Diseased
fruits are gray in color, scurfy, become specked with brown, fail to
develop and often burst on one side thereby showing the seeds. The
winter or resting spores are borne in sacs, in the latter part of the
season. The spore sacs, in their turn, are borne in small, black,
spherical spore cases, each furnished with a number of slender
appendages having curled tips. The powdery mildew, unlike most other
fungus troubles of the grape, is most prevalent in hot dry weather. The
disease is combatted by dusting with flowers of sulphur or by spraying
with bordeaux mixture as for black-rot.

[109] Anthracnose (_Sphaceloma ampelinum_ De By.).--This disease attacks
any of the tender portions of the growing vine. When the leaves are
affected dark spots are first formed on their surface. As the disease
advances these spots enlarge, and irregular cracks are often formed
through the dead tissue. Frequently many of these small cracks run
together, forming a long irregular slit through the leaf. Similar marks
are formed on the tender shoots, though they are not so noticeable. When
the fruit is attacked the disease is sometimes called bird's-eye rot.
Circular spots are formed on the surface of the berry. The spots may be
of different colors and usually have a dark border; as the spots enlarge
and eat in, a seed is often exposed in the center. In rotting the tissue
becomes hard and wrinkled. Sometimes the disease girdles the stem of a
fruit cluster, cutting off the supply of sap from the grapes beyond the
diseased line and causing them to shrivel and die.

Anthracnose does not spread as rapidly as some other vineyard diseases,
neither does it yield as readily to treatment. When a vineyard is badly
infested with anthracnose, it requires prompt attention and a careful
treatment to control the disease. It is not satisfactorily controlled by
bordeaux mixture alone. It is suggested that in addition to such
treatment with this mixture as is given for black-rot the plan be
followed which is advocated by certain European authorities, of applying
a warm saturated solution of copperas (iron sulphate) in spring when the
buds are swelling but before they begin to open. One per ct. or more of
sulphuric acid may be added to the solution before it is applied. This
solution must be handled with care as it is very caustic. It is applied
with swabs or if the acid is not used it may be sprayed. It is essential
that the work be done thoroughly, covering all the surface of the canes.

[110] Chlorosis or yellow leaf.--The name is applied to a grape disease
in which the foliage turns yellow, later becoming brown. It is common in
several parts of the State but more particularly in the Central Lakes
district. Chlorosis is more likely to appear in wet seasons. Some
varieties, as the Diamond, are much more susceptible than others. In
some seasons portions of the leaves may become yellow but eventually
regain their normal color so that at the close of the season the vine
appears to be in a healthy condition. In other instances the yellow
color extends over the entire leaf; brown, dead patches appear; the leaf
curls and eventually drops from the vine. If the vine loses its leaves
two or three seasons in succession it is likely to die. One striking
peculiarity of the disease is the fact that a badly diseased vine may
appear by the side of a perfectly healthy vine of the same variety.

The cause of chlorosis, as given by foreign investigators, is the
presence of a large amount of lime in the soil which prevents the roots
from taking up an amount of iron sufficient for satisfactory growth.
Their experiments seem to show that the difficulty may be overcome by
applying a small amount of sulphate of iron around affected plants. But
since there are a number of good American varieties that are not subject
to chlorosis, perhaps the better method to pursue is to plant only such
varieties as are known to be free from this trouble.

The standard varieties given in the following list are, so far as we
know, practically exempt from chlorosis: Moore Early, Concord, Winchell,
Delaware, Worden, Niagara, Catawba, Vergennes and Agawam.

[111] Tarr, R. S., _The Physical Geography of New York State_: 4. 1902.

[112] See _Story of the Vine_, E. R. Emerson: 198. 1902.

[113] Joseph Pitton de Tournefort, a French botanist of considerable
reputation in his day, was born at Aix, Provence, in 1656 and died in
1708. He was educated by the Jesuits for a priest but following a
natural inclination he later became a botanist. In 1683 he became
professor of botany at the Jardin des Plantes in Paris. While occupying
this position he made trips through western Europe, Greece and Asia
Minor. His principal work, and the one quoted here, is _Institutiones
Rei Herbariae_ in three volumes, published in Paris in 1700. He was one
of the most prominent systematic botanists who preceded Linnaeus.

[114] Humphrey Marshall was born in the town of West Bradford,
Pennsylvania, in 1722, of Quaker parents. He was a cousin of John
Bartram, their mothers being sisters. Like Bartram, he had few
opportunities for education, not going to school after he was twelve
years of age. He was a stone-mason by trade, studying botany in his
leisure moments. In 1773 he started a botanic garden at Marshallton. In
1785 he published _Arbustrum Americanum, The American Grove, or An
Alphabetical Catalog of Forest Trees and Shrubs, Natives of the American
United States_. This work had been in preparation about five years
previous to its publication. It is said to be the first botanical work
of a native American. Marshall died in 1801.

[115] But little is known of the life of Thomas Walter. He was a native
of Hampshire, England, and migrated to St. John's Parish, South
Carolina, where he had a plantation on the Santee River. Here he died in
1788 at about the age of forty-eight years. His only publication of note
is the _Flora Caroliniana_, published in the year of his death. He must
have been in correspondence with European botanists of that time as his
herbarium is preserved in the British Museum.

[116] Grapes are not to-day considered dioecious but polygamo-dioecious,
a distinction which will be defined later.

[117] John Bartram was born near the village of Darby in Delaware (then
Chester) County, Pennsylvania, in 1699. Bartram is generally credited
with having established the first botanical garden in America. This
garden was founded about 1728, some four miles south of what was the
town of Philadelphia and is now a part of the Park System of that city.
He was bred a Quaker but owing to his liberal opinions was excluded from
that Society in 1758. During his life he was in correspondence with many
of the leading scientific men of Europe to whom he sent many specimens
of plants and other things of scientific interest. He made many trips
into various parts of the colonies, to Ontario, Lake George, the
Carolinas, Florida and Georgia, in search of information. The last of
these journeys, that to the southern states, was made after he was
seventy years of age. Bartram is blamed by all of his contemporaries for
not having published more than he did. His death occurred in 1777.

William Bartram, son of John Bartram, was born in 1739 and died in 1823.
Much of his work was done in connection with his father under whom he
received his botanical training. His best known work is his _Travels in
the Carolinas, Georgia and Florida_ (1791), in which he gives an
interesting account of that region, including descriptions of a number
of new southern plants. His article on grapes which is here quoted was
published in the _Domestic Encyclopedia_, 1804, and also in the _Medical
Repository_ of the same year.

[118] Thomas Nuttall was born in Settle in Yorkshire, England, in 1786.
He migrated to the United States in 1807, making his home in
Philadelphia where he became acquainted with William Bartram and Dr.
Barton. It was largely owing to the influence of these men that he
turned his attention to botany. Nuttall was an extensive traveler and
made botanical expeditions into many parts of the country. He explored
the Middle West up to the Rocky Mountains and made a trip around the
Horn to California. From 1825 to 1834 he was connected with Harvard
College. In 1842 he was called to England by a bequest from an uncle
left to him conditional on his residing for nine months of each year in
England; compliance with this request caused a cessation of his
botanical work in America. He died at Nutgrove, Lancashire, in 1859.
Nuttall's first and probably greatest work was his _Genera of North
American Plants and Catalogue of the Species_, published in 1818.
Besides various accounts of his expeditions he made an addition of three
volumes to Michaux's _Sylva_ bringing that work up to six volumes.

[119] Constantine Samuel Rafinesque was born in Galata, a suburb of
Constantinople in European Turkey, in 1783. He was of French-German
descent, his father being a French merchant of Marseilles, and his
mother of Saxon parentage. In 1802 he came to Philadelphia. While here
he was busied with mercantile pursuits, occupying a position as clerk,
but studied botany out of office hours for amusement. In 1805 he went to
Sicily where he spent the next ten years. Here he commenced the
extensive series of publications which have made his name so well known
to scientists. In 1815 he returned to the United States, traveling about
from place to place for some time and finally settling in Lexington,
Kentucky, where he became a professor in Transylvania University. He
left Lexington in 1825, removing to Philadelphia, where he spent the
remainder of his life, dying in poverty in 1840. Rafinesque's biographer
gives 420 differently titled articles on nearly all scientific subjects
as the product of his pen. His monograph on grapes, entitled _American
Manual of the Grape Vine and The Art of Making Wines_, etc., was
published in Philadelphia in 1830.

[120] _Mo. Ent. Rpt._, =1874=:71.

[121] _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:9.

[122] _N. Y. Sta. An. Rpt._, =17=:518. 1898. _N. Y. Sta. Bul._ =157.=
1898.

[123] _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:239. 1900.

[124] _Gar. and For._, =8=:47. 1895.

[125] W. Brennan, Gilgandra, N. S. W.

[126] Andre Michaux was a French botanist, born at Satory, Versailles,
in 1746. He took up the study of botany and made many trips to foreign
lands in behalf of the French Government. One of these was an expedition
to North America where he remained from 1785 to 1796 exploring the
country and gathering many botanical specimens through Canada, Nova
Scotia and the United States as far west as the Mississippi. His chief
works are _Histoire des chenes de l'Amerique Septentrionale (History of
the Oaks of North America)_, 1801; and _Flora Boreali Americana_, 1803.
He described and named _Vitis rotundifolia_, _V. aestivalis_, _V.
cordifolia_, _V. riparia_, and _V. rubra_, as well as giving much
information on other species. Michaux died on the Island of Madagascar
in 1802.

F. Andre Michaux was born at Versailles in 1770 and died at Vaureal in
1855. He was a son of Andre Michaux and also a botanist, and like his
father employed by the French Government to explore North America with a
view of introducing valuable plants into France. He published in
=18=10-13 a _Histoire des Arbres Forestieres de l'Amerique
Septentrionale_ which was later translated into English under the name
_North American Sylva_. He also published _A Voyage a l-ouest des Monts
Alleghanys_, 1804.

[127] For discussion of _Vitis vulpina_ see foot-note under _Vitis
riparia_.

[128] All grapes, other than the Rotundifolia, are in the South known as
"bunch grapes" because they are sold on the market in clusters, the
Rotundifolia being sold off the stems.

[129] _S. C. Sta. Bul._ =132. 1907.=

[130] _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:22.

[131] Husmann, =1895=:188.

[132] Husmann, G. C., _California Fruit Grower_, Mar. 14, 1908.

[133] Samuel Botsford Buckley was born in 1809, in Yates County, New
York, and was educated at Wesleyan University, where he graduated in
1836. In 1866 he was appointed State Geologist of Texas where he resided
until he died in 1884. Buckley traveled extensively in connection with
his work, explored the southwestern region of the Appalachian Mountains,
as well as the southwestern portion of the United States. He was at
great disadvantage in his publications in that they were prepared
without the benefit of a library. His articles on grapes were published
in the _Proceedings of the Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences_ for
1861, and in the _United States Patent Office Report_ for the same year.

[134] The description of _Vitis vulpina_ by Linnaeus is so meager,
including the leaves only, that for many years botanists were in doubt
as to the species intended. Muhlenberg was the single exception when he
gave Linnaeus' Vulpina and Michaux's Cordifolia as synonymous. Whether
he did this from knowledge, or whether it was by chance, it is
impossible to say. He states no reasons and consequently received no
following among other botanists. Elliott supposed that Linnaeus intended
to describe the southern Rotundifolia and this view seems to have been
generally accepted.

In the late eighties or early nineties, Planchon first, and later
Britton, by referring to Linnaeus' specimens, determined that the
latter's Vulpina was the same as Riparia, and in accordance with
botanical rules, presented the name Vulpina as the correct name for this
species. Bailey, however, states (_Ev. Nat. Fr._, =1898=:102) that he
found two specimens in the Linnaeus collection labeled Vulpina, one of
which was the true Riparia and the other Cordifolia. Since a change of
the name would bring confusion to more than ninety years of botanical
and horticultural literature, it seems inadvisable to make one on such
contradictory evidence.

[135] Planchon is our authority for calling this Riparia.

[136] Translation from the Latin.

[137] Isadore Bush was born at Prague, Bohemia, in 1822. Bush was one of
those Germans who, taking part in the troubles of the Fatherland in
1848, found it necessary to seek a home in the New World. He went to
Missouri upon his arrival in the country and there spent the remainder
of his life. During the Civil War he was secretary to General Fremont
and at various times occupied many other positions of trust. He
established the Bushberg nursery which for many years was the leading
grape nursery of this country. With the aid of Engelmann and others he
wrote the _Bushberg Catalogue and Grape Manual_, a work which has passed
through many editions and has probably been more popular and useful than
any other book on American grapes published in the English language.
Bush died in St. Louis in 1898, having been a citizen of that place for
forty-nine years.

[138] Thomas Volney Munson, the well-known nurseryman, viticulturist,
and plant-breeder, was born near Astoria, Illinois, September 26, 1843.
He graduated from Kentucky University, Lexington, Kentucky, in 1870. His
nursery has for thirty-one years been located at Denison, Texas. Munson
has introduced more hybrid grapes than any other man in America and
probably in the world. He has paid great attention to grape botany,
particularly to the southwestern species. Monographs on grapes, from his
hand, have appeared in the proceedings of various horticultural
societies and in horticultural journals. Bulletins written by him have
been issued by the United States Department of Agriculture and the Texas
Experiment Station. He has at present a book ready for publication
entitled _Foundations of American Grape Culture_. The varieties produced
by Munson are particularly successful in the Southwest where conditions
are such that most of our northern varieties fail. The most valuable of
those that have been thoroughly tested are Brilliant, America, Carman,
Gold Coin and Rommel.

[139] See page 21.

[140] Jules Emile Planchon, a French systematic and horticultural
botanist, was born in Ganges (Herault) in 1823, and died at Montpellier
in 1888. Planchon was a writer of many valuable monographs on botanical
subjects and in combination with F. Sahut and J. Bazille discovered that
the cause of a mysterious and serious malady which had been affecting
the French vineyards for some years, was due to an insect on the roots,
the phylloxera. Later, he and C. V. Riley determined that this insect
was a native of America. Planchon was one of the first to suggest, and
always urged, the reconstitution of French vineyards by the use of
American stocks. During the later years of his life he was professor of
botany in the School at Montpellier. His most noted contribution to
grape literature is his monograph of the grape vine and other plants of
the Ampelopsis family which appeared as the second half of the fifth
volume of the continuation of De Candolle's _Prodromus Systematis
Naturalis_.

[141] Martin Vahl, a Norwegian, was born in 1749, and died in 1804. As a
pupil of the great Linnaeus, Vahl became a prominent worker in botany
and natural history in Denmark and was an author and writer of note on
these subjects, publishing much on botany. He traveled extensively, but
it does not appear that he visited North America, though he wrote three
large volumes on the flora of tropical America. It is probable that he
named and described _Vitis palmata_ from herbarium specimens.

[142] Jean Louis Berlandier was a Belgian pupil of the great De
Candolle, but left Europe about 1828 for America and became a druggist
in Matamoras, Mexico. He was one of the first botanists to explore
northern Mexico and Texas. In attempting to cross one of the small
streams south of the Rio Grande in 1851, he was drowned. Many of his
papers, plants and some paintings are preserved in the herbarium of
Harvard University and his services to botany are commemorated by the
genus Berlandiera, dedicated to him by De Candolle, and the species
_Vitis berlandieri_ here described.

[143] George Engelmann was born at Frankfurt-on-the-Main in 1809. He was
educated at the Universities of Heidelberg, Berlin and Wurzburg,
receiving a doctor's degree in medicine from the latter institution. In
1832 Dr. Engelmann sailed for America and spent some months in exploring
the forests of the Mississippi Valley studying the plants of the region,
having become deeply absorbed in botany. He soon after began the
practice of medicine in St. Louis where he spent the remainder of his
life, dying in 1884. Engelmann was one of the most patient and devoted
students of natural history of his time. He mastered several difficult
genera of plants, doing his work so well that his monographs will long
remain, not only authorities on the plants described, but models for the
systematic botanist. Among the genera to which he devoted his time was
Vitis, upon which he published several monographs. These appeared in
various publications, particularly the _Proceedings of the Academy of
Science of St. Louis_ in 1860, the _American Naturalist_ for 1868,
Riley's reports as entomologist of Missouri for 1872 and 1874, and the
third and all later editions of the _Bushberg Catalogue_.

[144] George Bentham was born near Plymouth, England, in 1800. His
father was a man of considerable wealth and the son was privately
educated. Early in life he showed an inclination toward botany, writing
a book on _The Plants of the Pyrenees and Lower Languedoc_ which was
published when he was only twenty-six years old. For a time he studied
law in which he showed considerable talent and where his original views
attracted some attention. Later, however, he gave his attention to
botany almost exclusively, joined the London Horticultural Society and
the Linnaean Society, and was more or less closely connected with the
workers at Kew. In connection with J. D. Hooker he wrote the _Genera
Plantarum_. Others of his well-known works are _Flora Australiensis_ and
_Handbook of the British Flora_. Bentham died in 1884.

[145] This name has been spelled "Lincecumii" and "Linsecomii." Buckley
tells us (_U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1861=:486) that this grape was named
in honor of "Dr. Gideon Linsecom" of Long Point, Washington County,
Texas. Engelmann changed the spelling to Lincecum without giving any
reason for the change. Munson states that a daughter of Dr. Lincecum
says that her father always spelled his name Lincecum. It is
inconceivable that Buckley did not know how to spell his friend's name.
There is other corroborative evidence that Buckley was either a poor
penman, or did not read proof, or both. In his Latin description of this
species nearly every other word is misspelled, and the mistakes are
those of a printer rather than of one whose Latin is weak, such as
"totis" for "lobis," etc. Munson says that on the different herbarium
specimens of this species collected by Buckley, the name is spelled both
ways but he is not able to tell which are in Buckley's hand. As the
original error seems to be one by the printer or amanuensis it does not
seem desirable to perpetuate it. We have consequently adopted the
spelling of Engelmann and Munson.

[146] Liberty Hyde Bailey was born in 1858 in South Haven, Michigan. He
graduated from the Michigan Agricultural College in 1882 and then
studied botany for two years with Asa Gray at Harvard University. He
became professor of horticulture at his Alma Mater in 1885 and resigned
in 1888 to accept the Chair of Horticulture in Cornell University, a
position which he filled until 1904 when he became Director of the
Cornell University Agricultural Experiment Station and Dean of the New
York State College of Agriculture. In 1907 he was given the degree of
Doctor of Laws by the University of Wisconsin. Dr. Bailey is known as a
teacher and experimenter but is better known for his horticultural and
botanical writings. He has published many popular books on agricultural
subjects. The best known of these are: _The Nursery Book_; _The Rule
Book_; _Principles of Vegetable Gardening_; _Garden Making_; _The
Pruning Book_; _The Survival of the Unlike_; _The Evolution of Our
Native Fruits_. Besides these popular, or semi-popular works he has
published two cyclopedias: _The Cyclopedia of American Horticulture_ and
_The Cyclopedia of American Agriculture_. Dr. Bailey's position in
American horticultural literature is unique in that he represents the
botanical side of horticulture. He has written monographs on several of
our cultivated fruits, notably grapes and plums, both appearing in _The
Evolution of Our Native Fruits_.

[147] _Am. Gard._, =12=:584. 1891.

[148] John Eaton Le Conte was born near Shrewsbury, New Jersey, in 1784
and died at Philadelphia in 1860. In 1817 he entered the army as a
topographical engineer, and in 1831 was retired with the grade of major.
Le Conte early became interested in natural history and his military
expeditions gave him ample opportunity for studying the flora and fauna
of eastern America. He published a number of important botanical papers,
one of which was _The Vines of North America_ published in 1854-55. His
contributions to the genus Vitis will be found under that head.

[149] Augustin Pyramus De Candolle was born at Geneva, Switzerland,
1778, and died at Turin, Italy, in 1841. He came of an ancient French
family which had been driven out of Provence in the middle of the
sixteenth century owing to their religion. He began his scientific
studies at the College of Geneva, but later removed to Paris where he
attended courses of lectures on natural science under the greatest
scientists of that day. His best known works are: _Historia plantarum
Succulentarum_; _Synopsis plantarum in flora Gallica descriptarum_; and
_Prodromus Systematis regni vegetabilis_ (1824-), this last being only
about two-thirds completed at the time of his death.

Alphonse Louis Pierre Pyrame De Candolle was born in Paris, France, in
1806. Like his father, whose life is sketched above, he became a noted
botanist. His most important works have been translated into English and
are as follows: _Geographical Botany_, 1855; _Origin of Cultivated
Plants_, 1883; and the _Memoirs_ of his father, 1862. He died in Geneva,
Switzerland, in 1893.

[150] The name Labrusca is an old one originally applied to a grape
growing wild in Italy. Engelmann states that this grape is still known
to the Italians by the name Brusca. It was probably applied to the
American species by Linnaeus under the mistaken supposition that our
northern Fox grape was the same as the wild Italian species.

[151] Carl von Linne, better known in the Latin form of Carolus
Linnaeus, was born in 1707 at Rashult in the province of Smaeland,
Sweden. His father, a minister, endeavored to educate his son to follow
the same profession. In this he failed, as Linnaeus from his earliest
years took no interest in the classical studies then taught. His father
was finally induced to educate young Linnaeus as a physician. Linnaeus
was the greatest systematist in the history of botany. His general
system, though much modified, is still in use. Although he named many
species of plants, it was not as a traveler and explorer but as a
recipient of the results of travels of others that the specimens were
secured from which the descriptions were made. Linnaeus died at Upsala,
Sweden, in 1778. His herbarium after his death was sold and finally
became the property of the Linnaean Society of London, where the
specimens are frequently used by botanists from various parts of the
world for purposes of comparison.

[152] Husmann, =1895=:189.

[153] _Grape Cult._, =1=:4. 1869.

[154] _U. S. D. A. Rpt._, =1862=:198.

[155] _Gar. and For._, =2=:584. 1889.

[156] Numbers in parentheses designate authors or publications cited in
the list of references.

[157] Adlum, John. _Cultivation of the Vine_: 149. 1828.

[158] Downing, =1872=:119 app.

[159] _Traite gen. de vit._, =5=:201. 1903.

[160] _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:71.

[161] _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:89.

[162] Dr. A. P. Wylie was a southern hybridizer. His life was one of
exceptionally varied usefulness. Besides being a physician he worked
with many different plants, producing new varieties of cotton, peach,
nectarine, magnolia and other species. His hybrids were produced chiefly
during the sixties and early seventies. His method of testing hybrid
grapes was unique; as soon as the fruit from the cross-fertilized
blossoms ripened, the seeds were planted and the seedlings forced the
first winter in a hothouse. In the spring it was planted by the side of
a mature vine outside and the seedling grafted by inarching on the
established vine. In this manner, his son writes us, he frequently
secured fruit the second summer. In 1873 he suffered the irreparable
misfortune of losing his residence by fire. This destroyed all of his
seeds and also his seedlings, which were in an adjacent hothouse. The
number of Dr. Wylie's grape seedlings cannot be accurately told as many
of them were never disseminated. Of his better known sorts there are
Berckmans, Dr. Wylie, Mrs. McClure, and Peter Wylie, the best known of
which is the first. Dr. Wylie was the first man to hybridize the _Vitis
rotundifolia_ with other species of grapes. Unfortunately these hybrids
appear to have been lost to cultivation. He died at his home in Chester,
South Carolina, in 1877.

[163] _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =48=:1153. 1898.

[164] _Mag. Hort._, =1863=:67.

[165] Fuller, =1867=:237.

[166] _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:75.

[167] Downing, =1869=:532.

[168] Jacob Moore was born in Brighton, New York, in 1835. He early
engaged in the nursery business and about 1860 began to experiment in
hybridizing grapes, his first production of note being Diana Hamburg
which proved too tender to be of value in New York. In 1873 he sold the
Brighton to its introducer, the grape having come from a union of Diana
Hamburg and Concord. In 1882 Moore's third grape of note, the Diamond,
was introduced, its parents being Concord, fertilized by Iona. One other
grape completes his list of varieties of this fruit--the Geneva, a
Vinifera-Labrusca hybrid from seed planted in the spring of 1874. Beside
these grapes, Moore was the originator of the Ruby, Red Cross and
Diploma currants and the Bar-seckel pear. Jacob Moore died in January,
1908, having devoted a life to the improvement of fruits and having
spent a patrimony of no small amount and all of his earnings in carrying
on experiments in horticulture. It saddens one to know that after having
devoted a half century to the enrichment of agriculture, poor Moore
should have passed his last years in comparative poverty, and that they
were embittered with the thought that, unlike the inventor, the producer
of new fruits can in no way protect the products of his originality,
even though they added millions to the wealth of the country as have his
fruits.

[169] Advertising circular sent out by Wm. B. Brown in 1899.

[170] George W. Campbell was born in Cortlandville, New York, in 1817.
The family moved to Ohio in 1821. In early life Campbell was a printer
and editor, as his father had been before him. In 1849 he moved from
Sandusky, Ohio, to Delaware in the same State and it was in the latter
place that his attention was first turned to horticulture as a
livelihood, although he had been interested in it as an amateur much
earlier. He was a continuous member of the American Pomological Society
from the time of its organization in 1850 until his death. He raised
thousands of seedling grapes, of which the following were given names:
Campbell Early, Concord Chasselas, Concord Muscat, Juno, Lady, Purity,
Triumph, White Delaware. All of these are practically obsolete in the
North except Campbell Early and Lady.

Campbell died at his home in Delaware, Ohio, in 1898. For many years
before his death he had been the leading writer and speaker in the North
on the culture of the grape and on grape-breeding, and his work had a
marked influence on the improvement of viticulture.

[171] Charles Arnold was born in Bedfordshire, England, in 1818. In 1833
he removed to Paris, Ontario. He was an enthusiastic hybridizer in many
lines, producing a white wheat, the Ontario apple, and the American
Wonder pea. In 1853 he established the Paris Nurseries. Of his numerous
seedling grapes he gave names to Autuchon, Brant, Canada, Cornucopia and
Othello. He was for many years prominent in the agricultural and
scientific associations of his adopted country. His object in crossing
grapes was to secure varieties sufficiently hardy and early for the
Canadian climate. In this he was in a measure successful but his crosses
are so susceptible to mildew and rot that their culture has been
generally abandoned in both Canada and the United States. He died at his
home in Paris, Canada, in 1883.

[172] _Cat._, =1908=:18.

[173] Ephraim W. Bull was born in Concord, Massachusetts, in 1805 and
died in 1895. He will long be remembered by grape-growers as the
originator and introducer of the Concord grape, the history of which is
given in the above account of that variety. Bull grew many other
seedlings, none of which attained a reputation among growers unless it
be Cottage. Ephraim Bull's ninety years were spent in the quiet of his
Concord home and he would have remained unknown by others than his
neighbors, who honored and loved him, had it not been for his fortunate
discovery of the Concord grape, which must always give him a place in
the history of American grape culture. The grape which has added
immensely to the wealth of a nation, brought its originator scarcely a
year's competence. As a partial recompense for his great service to
horticulture and to the nation, the memory of Ephraim W. Bull should
live long.

[174] No one family has furnished so many members who have been
prominent in American grape-growing as the Underhills. The first of this
remarkable family, Robert Underhill, was born in Yorktown, Westchester
County, New York, in 1761. During his early life he appears to have been
engaged in various enterprises. At one time he was part owner and
conductor of a flouring mill at the head of navigation on the Croton
River; later he sold his interest in this business and in 1804 removed
to Croton Point, which he had previously bought. Here, during the War of
1812, the supply of watermelons from the South being cut off, he planted
eighty acres of melons, and it is said that as many as six vessels were
lying off Croton Point at one time waiting for the melons to mature.
Among other of his ventures was the growing of castor beans, and toward
the end of his life he became interested in viticulture. An account of
his operations cultivating grapes is given in the first part of this
work. Robert Underhill died at Croton Point in 1829. After his death his
two sons, William Alexander Underhill and Robert T. Underhill, bought
from their father's estate the two hundred and fifty acres comprising
Croton Point. Their holdings were not in common, William A. Underhill
having about one hundred and sixty-five acres and his brother the
balance.

R. T. Underhill was born on the Croton River in 1802 and died in 1871 at
Croton Point. William A. Underhill was born at the same place as his
brother in 1804, and died suddenly while on a trip to New York City in
1873. The first three Underhills were pioneer vineyardists in this
State, and were men of great enterprise and initiative, contributing
much to American viticulture by precept and example; but none of them
was an originator of new varieties.

Stephen W. Underhill, son of William A. Underhill, was born at Croton
Point in 1837. In his boyhood he became familiar with the grape-growing
operations of his father and uncle, and about 1860 became interested in
hybridizing as a means of originating new varieties. Most of his work
was done between 1860 and 1870. He originated Black Defiance, Black
Eagle, Croton, Irving, Senasqua and many other named and unnamed sorts.
Of his varieties it may be said that they generally show too many
Vinifera weaknesses for profitable commercial sorts. S. W. Underhill is
still living at Croton-on-Hudson, a short distance from Croton Point,
the scene of the labors of three generations of the Underhill family.
Since the death of his father, in 1873, he has devoted himself almost
exclusively to brick-making, an occupation in which his father had been
interested.

[175] _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:89.

[176] _Traite gen. de vit._, =6=:278. 1903.

[177] _Ib._, p. 279.

[178] The grape vine in the vineyard is not ornamental, but only because
its beauty is marred by the formal shapes in which it must be trained to
meet the purposes of the cultivator. But as a festoon for an arbor, or
for hiding a neglected building, for the porch of the farmhouse, or for
any place where a bold or picturesque effect is wanted, or for giving an
expression of strength, no vine surpasses some of the varieties of our
native grapes. Properly planted they are not only beautiful in
themselves but attractive through their suggestiveness. To sit under
one's own vine and fig tree is the ancient idea of a life of peace,
contentment and security; and this association with the patriarchal use
of the vine is one of the charms of the grape.

[179] Often incorrectly spelled Devereux.

[180] _Horticulturist_, =12=:458. 1857.

[181] _Gar. Mon._, =2=:265. 1860.

[182] _Bush. Cat._, =1894=:116.

[183] After the above was in type we received a communication from
Ricketts stating that Downing came from seed of Concord fertilized by
Muscat Hamburg. If this is true it is difficult to account for the
apparent Aestivalis characters.

[184] This variety was named after Dutchess County, New York, and the
spelling is as given in this text and not "Duchess" as usually spelled.

[185] Andrew Jackson Caywood was born near Modena, Ulster County, New
York, in 1819. During his early life he was a mason and contractor and
engaged in building operations in Orange and Ulster counties. When about
twenty-five years of age he became interested in fruit culture and was
soon one of the leading fruit-growers in his section. Caywood's
grape-breeding work appears to have started about 1850, while he still
lived at Modena. In 1861 he removed to Poughkeepsie, and about 1865,
what was probably his first grape, the Walter, was brought to the
attention of the public. In 1877 he removed to Marlboro, where for many
years he conducted a nursery business in connection with fruit raising,
first under the firm name of Ferries & Caywood, and later as Caywood &
Son, his son Walter having entered the business. Caywood's last years
were clouded with financial troubles and failing health. In 1889 he died
at his home in Marlboro. No record is available of Caywood's productions
nor his manner of work. He appears to have differed from the
grape-breeders of his day in that he produced second rather than first
generation hybrids. Of these his most important productions are:
Dutchess, Metternich, Nectar, Poughkeepsie, Ulster and Walter, though he
raised many others, most of which were never named nor disseminated.
Caywood's years of unremitting labor in improving grapes will long make
his name prominent in American viticulture.

[186] John Burr was born in Bridgeport, Connecticut, in 1800. In early
life he removed to Ohio, where, although he was engaged in mercantile
pursuits, he passed his leisure time in experimenting with strawberries.
In this work he was quite successful, producing Burr's Pine and Burr's
Seedling, once popular sorts. In 1858 Burr moved to Kansas and soon
after began breeding grapes. For this work he was a believer in natural
pollination and planted the varieties which he desired to use as parents
in close proximity that they might pollinate each other. Burr at first
used Concord, Hartford, Isabella, and other grapes of this class as
parents, but later he destroyed all of the seedlings of these and used
Delaware, Goethe, Salem, Catawba, and other Vinifera hybrids. He did not
take trouble to note from which variety the seed came but mixed and
planted all together. The records of the parentage of his productions
are consequently usually unsatisfactory. Most of his grape productions
were introduced to the public by Stayman & Black, a nearby nursery firm.
Of Burr's many seedlings he gave names to the following: Cochee, Early
Victor, Eclipse, Evaline, Ideal, Iola, Jewel, Magnate, Matchless,
Mendota, Omega, Osage, Osee, Paragon, Peola, Primate, Pulasky, Seneca,
Superior, Standard, Supreme, and White Jewel. Burr died at his home in
Leavenworth, Kansas, in 1892.

[187] _Traite gen. de vit._, =6=:192. 1903.

[188] _Cat._, =1907-8=:18.

[189] This variety was named Glenfeld by Mr. Magee, its originator, not
Glenfield as it is frequently spelled.

[190] _Tex. Sta. Bul._, =56=:267. 1900.

[191] Munson regards them as identical.

[192] Dr. C. W. Grant was born in Litchfield, Connecticut, in 1810.
Early in life he became a Doctor of Medicine but soon became
dissatisfied with that profession as it was then practiced, and entered
dentistry. He settled in Newburgh, New York, where he built up a very
large dental practice. Dr. Grant was an enthusiastic amateur
horticulturist and numbered among his friends such men of national note
as A. J. and Charles Downing, Horace Greeley, Henry Ward Beecher, W. C.
Bryant, Donald G. Mitchell and others like these who were interested in
rural pursuits. He bought Iona Island in the Hudson River and planted
thereon a commercial vineyard. On the death of his wife in 1856 he gave
up his dental practice and took up his residence on Iona Island. Here
for twelve years he grew grapes and conducted a grape nursery.
Unfortunately Dr. Grant's business experience was not such as to enable
him to make a success of a commercial nursery. In 1868 he retired from
active pursuits and returned to his old home at Litchfield, where he
died in 1881. Dr. Grant's chief interest to grape-growers lies in the
fact that he was the originator of Iona and Israella and the introducer
of Anna and Eumelan. He was one of the first and a most ardent
grape-breeder, working especially toward improving the quality of
commercial varieties of grapes.

[193] On account of criticisms of the justice of the award, Grant
returned the prize to be competed for a second time. At the second trial
it went to Concord on vine characters.

[194] _Sou. Agr._, =2=:552. 1829.

[195] In 1889 Munson sent out a grape under the name Jaeger and in 1890
he introduced the variety here described under the name Hermann Jaeger,
at the same time withdrawing the former variety from further
dissemination. As the first named Jaeger is apparently obsolete there
seems to be no objection to shortening the name so as to conform in
nomenclature with the recommendations of the American Pomological
Society.

[196] James H. Ricketts was born in Oldbridge, Middlesex County,
Massachusetts, in 1830, the family moving to Indiana while Ricketts was
still a child. When a young man Ricketts learned the trade of
bookbinding in Cincinnati and later practiced this art in New York City.
In 1857 he established a bookbinding business at Newburgh, New York;
here he became interested in raising fruit, devoting to it such time as
could be be spared from his business. In 1861 he started his work in
grape improvement, reading all the books then published on this subject
in order to prepare himself to carry on the work intelligently. His
first production was Raritan which he says he thought not much
improvement. In 1862, he built a glass house in order that he might have
Vinifera vines for crossing with natives outside. His first production
of foreign cross-breeds was the Charles Downing, now known as Downing.

Ricketts produced many hundred seedlings, and for ten or twelve years
exhibited them at various fairs, horticultural society meetings and
other places, where their magnificent appearance and fine flavor
attracted universal and favorable attention and made him the recipient
of many medals and prizes. Unfortunately Ricketts, like many other
American grape-breeders, fell into financial difficulties, and in 1877
lost his vineyard and home by foreclosure. In 1888, he moved to
Washington, D. C., to work at his trade but has again started to improve
grapes and is now growing a number of new varieties which will probably
be shown to the public in the near future.

[Illustration: JEFFERSON]

Ricketts' seedlings are characterized by a large size of bunch and
berry, and by high quality. Unfortunately it has been the experience of
growers in nearly all grape regions that the vine characters of his
varieties are not equal to those of the fruit, the vines being subject
to mildew and other Vinifera weaknesses. However, Ricketts produced
magnificent specimens of his grapes, year after year, under conditions
which every one admits were less favorable than those of the average
grape-grower. The secret of his success seems never to have been
discovered. This anomaly is so striking that Campbell did not hesitate
to suggest that the fault was with the American grape-grower rather than
with Ricketts' grapes or the location of the vineyard. The best known of
his varieties are: Advance, Bacchus, Don Juan, Downing, Eldorado, Empire
State, Highland, Jefferson, Lady Washington and Secretary. Besides these
he produced many others, some of which were named but many of which were
known only under numbers.

[197] _Amer. Farmer_, =11=:237, 412. 1829-30.

[198] The illustrations in _The Grapes of New York_, unless otherwise
mentioned, are life-size; but it must be remembered that when objects
having three dimensions are reproduced on a flat surface there is
seemingly a considerable reduction in size. Allowance should be made for
this illusion in comparing fruit with illustration.

[199] _Bush. Cat._, =1883=:120.

[200] Downing, =1857=:341.

[201] Pronounced Reezling.

[202] Jacob Rommel was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in 1837. The
family moved to Hermann, Missouri, in 1838 where his father, Jacob
Rommel, Sr., engaged in the nursery business and became interested in
grape-growing and wine-making. In 1860 the younger Rommel removed to
Morrison where he entered into partnership with H. Sobbe to grow nursery
stock and cultivate grapes. At this time much dissatisfaction was felt
among the grape-growers of the Middle West with the standard varieties
then grown, most of which were table grapes secured from the East, and
were poorly adapted to wine-making and to Missouri conditions. To remedy
this defect Rommel originated many new varieties, using Taylor chiefly
as a parent. Among others he produced Amber, Beauty, Black Delaware,
Elvira, Etta, Faith, Montefiore, Pearl, Transparent and Wilding.
Rommel's seedlings are characterized by extreme vigor and
productiveness. They were not designed for table grapes and they lack
the qualities to recommend them as such. In 1900 Rommel retired from
business and removed to Chamois, Missouri, where he still lives.

[203] Nelson Bonney White was born in the town of Putney, Windham
County, Vermont, in 1824. During his younger years he lived for a time
in Ohio and in New York but finally settled in Norwood, Massachusetts.
White was a cabinet maker by trade, but coming under the influence of E.
S. Rogers at the time when Rogers' hybrids were causing a stir in New
England, he took up grape-breeding as a pastime. He is probably the
oldest grape-breeder of note now alive, as he has been engaged in this
occupation over fifty years. His best known productions are August
Giant, Amber Queen, and Norfolk. Two other of his varieties,
International and King Philip, are very highly spoken of but have not
yet been distributed.

[204] _Horticulturist_, =16=:286. 1861.

[205] _Mag. Hort._, =9=:430. 1843.

[206] _Traite gen. de vit._, =6=:166. 1903.

[207] _U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt._, =1855=:308.

[208] A. J. Caywood, of Marlboro, New York, published the claim that
this variety was originated by him, that he had named it Hudson but had
delayed sending it out on the advice of several grape experts till it
had been further tested. For this purpose Caywood says he sent the
variety to about sixty men, among them J. W. Prentiss. Those who
examined fruit from the two original vines said they were certainly very
similar if not identical.

[209] Edward Staniford Rogers was born in the old family mansion on
Essex Street, Salem, Massachusetts, June 28, 1826, and died in Peabody,
Massachusetts, March 29, 1899. He was the son of Nathaniel Leverett
Rogers, an old-time Salem merchant, who, with his brothers John and
Richard, was engaged in the maritime trade. Edward Rogers was educated
in Master Ira Cheever's school, a famous Salem school of the day, and,
later, he made several voyages in his father's ships as clerk and
supercargo and, finally, passed a number of years in the counting-room
of the firm in Salem. After his father's death, Mr. Rogers lived in the
old family home with his brother and their mother, and in the garden
back of the house, quite large for a city lot, he indulged his natural
taste for horticulture and conducted his experiments in grape
hybridization.

By temperament Mr. Rogers was quiet and retiring and so generous that he
gained practically no profit from his horticultural productions, for he
freely gave cuttings and rooted plants of the hybrids he raised to
friends and visitors before his own stock was by any means large. Mr.
Rogers possessed literary ability and was an extensive reader, but could
rarely be drawn into conversation excepting among his most intimate
friends who were wont to "drop in" at his long, low greenhouse in the
garden or at his office, extemporized in the old colonial barn at the
rear of the house. After the death of his mother the old house was sold
and the brothers removed to another house in Salem and some years later,
after the death of his brother, Mr. Rogers bought the place, his last
home, in Peabody, Massachusetts, where he cultivated trees and flowers
for pleasure and experiment. An accident which resulted in a permanent
lameness prevented much physical labor during his last years and
probably in a measure hastened his death.

[210] In the eastern portion of the Southern States, the section where
this variety originated and where it is still most largely grown,
Scuppernong is applied only to a white variety of _Vitis rotundifolia_.
Unfortunately in many portions of the South and in the North, the word
Scuppernong is apparently taken as meaning a grape of the southern Fox
or Rotundifolia class; thus we find some writers using such
contradictory expressions as White Scuppernong, Green Scuppernong, and
Black Scuppernong. In the South, at least, this use of the term appears
to have arisen in the last fifty years, usage previous to that time
being practically unanimous in recognizing that the Scuppernong was the
white Rotundifolia which had been selected at an early day for
cultivation on account of certain superior cultural characters
distinguishing it from the rest of the species.

[211] _Amer. Farmer_, =3=:332. 1822.

[212] _S. C. Sta. Bul._, =132=:17, 18. 1907.

[213] Dr. Joseph Stayman was born in Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, in
1817. The family was of German descent and had long been identified with
the Mennonites of the region of his birthplace. Stayman's father was a
farmer and miller and during early life the son was engaged in these
occupations. In 1839 he accompanied his parents to Ohio, where he was
engaged in the milling business with his father for a time and later
entered the lecture field and studied medicine. In 1849 he married and
established his home in Carlisle, Pennsylvania, removing two years later
to Abingdon, Illinois. For several years he practiced medicine but in
1858 purchased a nursery which was the beginning of his connection with
the fruit business. In 1860 he removed to Leavenworth, Kansas, where he
lived the remainder of his life, dying at his home in that city in 1903.

Dr. Stayman was a man of great originality and had varied interests. In
plant-breeding he worked with strawberries, apples, raspberries and
grapes, producing among others the Clyde strawberry, the Stayman apple
and a host of varieties of grapes. Of his named sorts of grapes there
are: Black Imperial, Cherokee, Concordia, Daisy, Darwin, Exquisite,
Marsala, Mary Mark, Mrs. Stayman, Osceola, Oscaloosa, Oswego, Ozark,
Pawnee, Perfection, Prolific, Snowflake, White Beauty, White Cloud and
White Imperial.

Stayman and John Burr were neighbors and friends, and held similar
opinions as to the best methods of procedure in originating new
varieties. Neither believed in artificial pollination but grew the
several varieties from which crosses were desired in close proximity and
then planted seed from the best developed fruits. Their methods
certainly gave them varieties with a high standard of excellence.
Stayman may be regarded as one of the leading viticulturists of the
Great Plains region. He was, too, one of the pioneers of America in
breeding fruits. His many contributions to our lists of fruits make his
name memorable to fruit-growers and lovers of fine fruits.


       *       *       *       *       *

Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

suspectible=> susceptible {pg 136}

while the the chalaza=> while the chalaza {pg 119}

suceptible=> sucseptible {pg 228}

Must 888=> Must 88 deg. {pg 261}

Must 808=> Must 80 deg. {pg 314}

1889 and it still retained=> 1889 and is still retained {pg 329}

possiby=> possibly {pg 346}

apperance=> appearance {pg 469}

goverment=> government {pg 521}

Munson' scrosses=> Munson's crosses {pg 493}

enlongated=> elongated {pg 500}

Brillant, 193=> Brilliant, 193 {pg 540 index}

selfsterility of, 104;=> self-sterility of, 104; {pg 546 index}

means of dstribution of, 27;=> means of distribution of, 27; {pg 553}









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Grapes of New York, by U. P. Hedrick

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GRAPES OF NEW YORK ***

***** This file should be named 45978.txt or 45978.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/9/7/45978/

Produced by Steven Giacomelli, Mark C. Orton, Chuck Greif
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
produced by Core Historical Literature in Agriculture
(CHLA), Cornell University)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
