The Project Gutenberg EBook of Charities and the Commons: The Pittsburgh
Survey, Part I: The People, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Charities and the Commons: The Pittsburgh Survey, Part I: The People

Author: Various

Release Date: June 19, 2014 [EBook #46029]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARITIES AND THE COMMONS: ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing, Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









  VOL. XXI        JANUARY 2, 1909       NO. 14

  CHARITIES
  AND THE COMMONS

  THE PITTSBURGH
  SURVEY


  [Illustration]

  A JOURNAL OF CONSTRUCTIVE PHILANTHROPY

  PUBLISHED BY

  THE CHARITY ORGANIZATION SOCIETY OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK

  ROBERT W. DEFOREST, President; OTTO T. BANNARD, Vice-President;
  J. P. MORGAN, Treasurer; EDWARD T. DEVINE, General Secretary

  105 EAST TWENTY-SECOND STREET, NEW YORK
  174 ADAMS STREET, CHICAGO

  THIS ISSUE TWENTY-FIVE CENTS      TWO DOLLARS A YEAR

  ENTERED AT THE POST OFFICE, NEW YORK, AS SECOND CLASS MATTER


Telephones { 1646 } Stuyvesant
           { 1647 }

==Millard & Company

Stationers and Printers

12 East 16th Street==

(Bet. Fifth Ave. & Union Square)

==New York==

  ENGRAVING

  LITHOGRAPHING

  BLANK BOOK MAKING

CATALOG AND PAMPHLET WORK AT REASONABLE PRICES

       *       *       *       *       *


=We can print your Book as easily as though you were in our own city=

=Books and Reports

ARE

OUR SPECIALTY=

¶ Let us have your manuscript or full information and we will send you
an estimate and samples of our work.

=WM. F. FELL CO.

PRINTERS

1220-24 SANSOM STREET

PHILADELPHIA=

       *       *       *       *       *


==The....

Sheltering Arms=

=William R. Peters .... President=

92 WILLIAM STREET

=Herman C. Von Post ... Secretary=

32 WEST 57TH STREET

=Charles W. Maury .... Treasurer=

504 WEST 129TH STREET

       *       *       *       *       *

OBJECTS OF THE ASSOCIATION=

"THE SHELTERING ARMS" was opened October 6th, 1864, and receives
children between six and ten years of age, for whom no other institution
provides.

Children placed at "THE SHELTERING ARMS" are not surrendered to the
Institution, but are held subject to the order of parents or guardians.

The children attend the neighboring public school. The older boys and
girls are trained to household and other work.

       *       *       *       *       *

Application for admission should be addressed to MISS RICHMOND, at "THE
SHELTERING ARMS," 129th Street, corner Amsterdam Avenue.

       *       *       *       *       *


=SPECIAL SALE=

       *       *       *       *       *

During JANUARY and FEBRUARY we offer you your choice of all $19.00,
$20.00, $22.00, $23.00 or $25.00 SUITINGS or OVERCOATINGS

TO ORDER AT $18.00

and all $27.00, $28.00, $30.00, $32.00 or $35.00 SUITINGS or OVERCOATINGS

TO ORDER AT $25.00

All prices marked in plain figures.

=DEVINE & CO.=

Formerly DEVINE & RONAN

=150 Nassau Street=

ROOMS 1611, 1612, 1613.

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention CHARITIES AND THE COMMONS when writing to advertisers.

[Illustration: _Drawn by Joseph Stella._

AS MEN SEE AMERICA. I.

THE FIRST OF THREE FRONTISPIECES.]




THE COMMON WELFARE


EVERY CITY NEEDS A CITY PLAN NOW

The congestion exhibit in New York last spring proved one of the most
effective and startling means of making a contented community sit up
and think about its "other half." It formulated questions half formed
in many minds and demanded answers. Its influence was felt over the
whole country, and its discussions have bobbed up here and there and
everywhere ever since in articles, conferences and addresses.

That the congestion exhibit answered questions as well as asked them,
and that it has a constructive program to offer not only to New York but
to the whole country are amply proved by the decision just reached, and
announced to-day for the first time, to hold an exhibit and conference
of city planning next March. "Every American city needs a city plan
now," is the conclusion of the committee, and the steps by which it
has arrived at this conclusion are interestingly set forth in its
announcement.

While the organization bears the name of the Committee on Congestion
of Population in New York, its scope and purpose are much wider. The
program approved by its executive committee is "to obtain a plan for
the development of Greater New York, and other American cities, along
economic, hygienic and aesthetic lines; and to promote the better
distribution of population throughout city, state and nation."

To establish the need for such a program, the committee offers as
"admitted facts" the following:

     Many American cities with a population of over 50,000 have
     congestion of population, factories and offices; such congestion
     creates problems for which we cannot find solutions; no city
     should use all the land within its boundaries as intensively as
     is necessary in its most congested areas,--to do so perpetuates
     congestion; no American city yet has a legal right to prescribe the
     height and use of buildings in its various sections; no city can
     develop normally without a plan which anticipates its growth for
     twenty-five or fifty years.

As a means of stimulating consideration of the subject and of promoting
farsighted planning for the future, the committee has adopted as its
slogan the statement, "Every American city needs a city plan now." It
will show, it announces, the cost of the lack of a city plan in New
York, the city planning which has been done in some American and foreign
cities, and the pressing need for a city plan in New York to-day. The
conference on city planning in March will include an exhibit of the best
developments from all over the world. Both exhibit and conference will
be keyed up to two major considerations: "the concentration of one-half
the population of a great state in one city makes the problem of
statewide importance; the concentration of one-nineteenth of a nation's
population in one city gives the problem national bearing."

There will be study of the best methods for distribution of population,
for promoting feasible methods of locating factories and industrial
colonies, and an educational campaign to show the advantages of
migration from congested centers.


EMPLOYERS PAY FOR SANATORIUM CARE

Massachusetts, almost invariably a leader in preventive measures, is
developing this year a most unique and promising kind of co-operative
effort in the prevention of tuberculosis. Massachusetts was the first
state to organize a board of health, dating from 1869. It was the first
state to choose its factory inspectors from the medical profession,
this dating from 1906, and out of these two farsighted provisions of the
law has grown during the past two months a plan by which manufacturers
are assuming a part of the financial burden in seeing to it that
operatives in their factories, found to have tuberculosis in the
incipient stage, are sent to the Rutland Sanatorium and given the best
possible opportunity for cure.

The plan originated in Worcester which, with a string of neighboring
towns and villages, forms one of the sixteen inspection districts into
which the state is divided. As a result of the activity of Dr. M. G.
Overlock, the state inspector of health in charge, seventy manufacturing
plants, employing more than 20,000 hands, have followed the example of
David H. Fanning, president of the Royal Worcester Corset Company, in
agreeing to pay a part of the maintenance cost of any of their employes
sent to Rutland. The cost in the sanatorium is nine dollars a week.
Of this the state pays five dollars and the company four dollars. The
term usually agreed upon is three months. At the end of that time, a
large number of the cases have been so far restored that they can be
taken to nearby, supervised boarding houses and farms and make room for
new patients,--a plan hit upon to relieve the great pressure upon this
institution which accepts only incipient cases. The employer continues
his contribution. The boarding houses, conducted along approved lines,
have sprung up all over the surrounding hills much as they have at
Saranac Lake in New York.

The factory inspection has been keyed up to take the greatest possible
advantage of the co-operation of employers. Frequent visits are made to
all plants, but to those in which the work rooms are full of dust, or
where there are other conditions favoring tuberculosis, Dr. Overlock
makes a visit once a month. All minors on the working staff are taken
before him, and required to furnish a full family history. If there has
been tuberculosis in the family, even remote, a medical examination
is at once made. The others are examined more superficially, but the
least trace of suspicious symptoms is at once seized upon as cause
for an examination. In this way, it is believed, incipient cases among
minors will be caught in their earliest stages. The system will later be
extended to adults. An extension of the plan to secure the interest and
help of employers has begun in some other inspection districts, and will
eventually be introduced throughout the state.

But the carefully laid plans to detect and ward off incipient cases
comprise only one part of the Massachusetts plan to fight tuberculosis.
In May three homes for advanced cases will be opened, and the
development of the plan calls for additional homes, scattered through
the state, until it shall have made complete provision for all cases,
early or advanced. In view of the almost unanimously expressed opinion
at the recent International Tuberculosis Congress, that the strategic
point of attack in the campaign is in isolating advanced cases, the
provision of these homes is, perhaps, the most important plank in the
Massachusetts health platform. Governor Guild is much interested in the
whole plan. In a recent letter to Dr. Overlock he wrote: "It has been a
great pleasure for me to inaugurate the new policy of the commonwealth
of provision for all cases of tuberculosis, not merely as at present the
care of the curable, but the care of the incurable as well."


SALARY LOANS IN CINCINNATI

The business of lending money on salaries and wages has received a
practical knockout blow in Cincinnati through the _Commercial Tribune_,
which instituted the crusade, with the co-operation of the officials of
the city and of various private organizations.

Aided by an ordinance which orders the licensing of salary loan offices
and which makes a weekly report to the city auditor necessary, the
campaigners have already been able to put one office out of business
entirely, and to sew up all the others in the courts in such a way that
it now seems very likely that most of these will retire rather than face
the storm which awaits them.

D. H. Tolman is more deeply involved in Cincinnati than he has ever been
before. His son, E. E. Tolman, who is said to be connected with the
business of his father, is under arrest and is now waiting a hearing in
the police court. His manager has been arrested and convicted on three
counts.

Although these cases have been appealed to a higher court, an
application for an order to restrain the further interference with the
Tolman business has thus far been refused.

D. H. Tolman has ordered his manager in Cincinnati to refuse to comply
with the ordinance and unless the courts do issue this order the manager
will be arrested every week.

The _Commercial Tribune_ has secured all of the Tolman forms from a
former manager. These have all been printed together with a letter
from the ex-manager in which the latter makes a complete expose of the
methods pursued behind the doors of one of his offices.

The auditor of Cincinnati has declared his purpose of keeping up the
fight. He has forced ten salary loan offices to pay a license fee and
to comply with the provisions of the local ordinance. Agents have been
permanently employed by the official to watch the loan offices and to
ferret out any new agents who may attempt to operate secretly.

The Legal Aid Society which was recently formed to advise the poor,
has made it its business to impress upon all who seek its meetings
the futility of borrowing money from the salary loan people and has
furnished a list of the companies which are classified as "loan sharks,"
to every man and woman whom it could reach.

In this way people who never read the newspapers are given information
which they otherwise would probably never receive.

The Legal Aid Society is also at work on a code of laws which will be
submitted to the General Assembly at its coming session and which it is
hoped will solve the question of loaning money on salaries and chattels
in Ohio for all time.

The attorneys of the society promise a law which will set a fixed
rate, which will include interest and expenses, on all such loans.
It is said now that this rate will be either three or four per cent.
The contemplated law will also contain a provision which will make the
recovery of usury possible.

It is further planned to have a provision in the law similar to the
Massachusetts statute, requiring the signatures of the wife, when a
borrower is married, and of his employer. Some of the best attorneys in
Cincinnati including former Prosecuting Attorney Benton Oppenheimer, are
at work on these laws.

Another movement now on foot is the founding of a salary loan office on
the same basis as several chattel loan offices which are now operating
in the country, whose stockholders are philanthropists and men of wealth.

Cincinnati has such a chattel loan company and the men who are now
fighting the salary loan business there are urging the stockholders of
this company to take up the other work.

The most gratifying thing of the Cincinnati campaign has been the
falling off of business in the loan offices. The companies admit this
and one broker left for Florida after explaining that his business had
decreased seventy-five per cent during the campaign.


FOR A COURT OF DOMESTIC RELATIONS

One of the interesting bills to be brought before the 1909 session of
the New York Legislature is that drawn by Bernhard Rabbino, relating to
a special domestic relations court. Mr. Rabbino believes that if we have
courts for the purpose of divorce, for separating mothers from children
and children from fathers, we should have a separate tribunal to which
families in discord could appeal.

There are probably from 12,000 to 15,000 domestic trouble cases handled
yearly in Manhattan and the Bronx alone, but as no records are kept of
summons cases,--and these come under that head,--it is not possible to
compute the exact number. Probably it is greater than the number of
cases handled by the children's court, and a domestic relations court
is justified by Mr. Rabbino, additionally, on the ground that it
precedes the children's court, having for its fundamental purpose the
preservation of the family as a unit, with an opportunity for fathers
and mothers to secure the same expert and individual attention that is
given to the children.

Domestic affairs are admittedly out of place in a general police court.
The unfortunate participants are not in any sense criminals, and yet
they are surrounded by thieves, pickpockets, drunkards, disorderly
persons,--the regular rabble of the criminal court,--and an outraged
self-respect is the consequence of such treatment. The present
organization of magistrates' courts contemplates that the magistrate
shall sit one-half of the day on the bench and the other half shall be
in chambers for the settlement of just such cases as Mr. Rabbino would
bring before the domestic relations court. As a matter of practice,
however, so congested are the courts and so pressing their work,
that there is no time for this personal consideration which the law
contemplates. The magistrate does what he can in the face of tremendous
difficulties, but he has not the time to investigate these cases, and
without proper attention there can be no adjustment of them. Divorce and
separation are the natural results.

The idea of such a court would be to prevent litigation as a whole
and particularly to safeguard the homes of the poor, for the poor are
those who are obliged to resort to police courts. The better-off take
their affairs to the Supreme Court. It is very possible that these
lower courts might develop into something higher, and many matrimonial
difficulties which now cause a permanent rupture of relations be
peaceably adjusted with judicial assistance. Such a court might also
have a marked effect on juvenile crime, for any force that makes for
better home conditions is preventive of crime. The bill requires also
that the court of domestic relations have exclusive jurisdiction over
all cases of abandonment, non-support, and the non-support of poor
relatives as provided by law.

The bill as drawn would make this domestic relations court part of the
city magistrates' courts, on the lines of the children's courts now
being generally established throughout the country. The idea, however,
would be to have a special court altogether, and if successful, this
would probably be done.

The introduction of this bill in the Legislature may bring to sharp
discussion the whole question of division of jurisdiction in the city
courts. The present established principle is that such courts should
be divided geographically, covering a certain borough or section of a
borough. The children's court differs radically from this and introduces
a functional division. It is an open question whether, with the police
courts crowded as they are, such a functional division has not become
necessary for more cases than those of delinquent children,--whether
the separation of special kinds of cases into children's courts and
into courts of domestic relations will not prove more effective than a
further division of territory.


THE YEAR IN MUNICIPAL EVENTS

A review of municipal events and tendencies for the past year, which
might be the title of Clinton Rogers Woodruff's report as secretary of
the National Municipal League, centers around efficiency and honesty in
government as a result of clear accounting systems and understandable
statistics; wide-spread efforts at charter revision; a constantly
growing sentiment for nomination reform; and a militant desire, evident
in many sections, to tackle the problems which have grown up around the
saloon in politics.

The Massachusetts Bureau of Municipal Statistics, the first of its kind,
has already resulted, Mr. Woodruff believes, in a number of cities
reconstructing their accounts on a sounder and more substantial basis.
The first year's report shows a confusing lack of system in handling the
receipts and disbursements of towns and cities; a wide variety of dates
for closing the fiscal year; many defects in the treasurers' methods
of accounting; and the need for consolidation of the administration of
trust funds. In many instances, money left to the community for special
purposes has been used by the town trustees for general purposes.

But "the movement for uniform accounting proceeds without interruption."
Originated by the National Municipal League, it was given momentum
by the Census Bureau and by legislation in Ohio and Massachusetts.
Accounting investigations and reforms are being made the basis for
an approach to the solution of important problems in Boston, in New
York by the conspicuous work of the Bureau of Municipal Research,
and in Minneapolis. The point of attack in Minneapolis has been the
administration of the school fund "which seems to have been particularly
inadequate and inefficient." A grand jury found "a startling and
deplorably loose state of affairs." The investigation was made by
trained men from San Francisco and other Pacific Coast cities. In
Wilmington there has been a thoroughgoing examination of municipal
account.

Legislative reference bureaus are being established to help in this
movement, of particular value to Chicago which "is on the threshold of
an era of public improvement which will call for the most intelligent
direction from the city government." Mr. Woodruff predicts that "we may
expect within the next half dozen years to find a series of similar
bureaus established in all the leading cities, gathering for their
respective municipalities information concerning improvement; and,
moreover, we may expect a further development, in that all of these
bureaus and libraries will be so co-ordinated, each with the others, as
to form a strong chain of information that will banish from the halls of
legislation and the offices of administration, the dense ignorance that
all too frequently found a welcome lodgement."

Charter changes are pressed every year more strongly to the front.
It is true now that wherever a good government organization of any
sort is found, there will be accompanying it a campaign either for a
new charter or for amendments to the existing one. Perhaps the most
noticeable tendency of the movement is a demand for a greater degree
of home rule for the cities which have been "subjected to a degree of
legislative buffeting that has well nigh destroyed the cherished ideal
of self-government."

Nomination reform has been much discussed, and a number of laws
providing for direct nominations have become effective during the year.
Mr. Woodruff holds that the results of direct nominations have, on
the whole, "recommended themselves to those who are striving for the
elimination of nomination monopoly and for the inauguration of a simpler
and more direct form of election machinery." Further, he holds that "it
is now generally conceded, except by a very small and diminishing group
of men, that the preparation and distribution of the ballots at the
general election is a proper state function and expense."

The objections to direct nominations are discussed at length and finally
dismissed with the conclusion: "We must realize that we are living in a
democracy, and that the election machinery must be democratic and must
record the wishes of the people and be responsive to their desires.
Direct nominations are a step in advance because they enable the
people directly to express their wishes. No doubt they have made their
mistakes, and will continue to make them; but they have had to bear the
brunt of them in the past, and they must continue to bear them in the
future; and this in the long run will prove to be the most effective way
of building up an enlightened and efficient democracy."

The initiative and referendum are advocated, because "they are
unquestionably proving effective in breaking down some of the privileges
and monopolies that have characterized political organizations for many
years."


TO STIMULATE PARKS AND PLAY

The Council of One Hundred, an auxiliary to the Parks and Playgrounds
Association of New York, has been fully organized by Miss Pauline
Robinson and Seth Thayer Stewart, with a membership of well known
men and women who are interested in playground activities and civic
improvement. At the first meeting of the council at the home of Mrs.
Charles B. Alexander, in December, Richard Watson Gilder presided,
introducing Mrs. George C. Riggs (Kate Douglas Wiggin), who read
a valuable paper. Eugene A. Philbin, president of the Parks and
Playgrounds Association, outlined the development of that organization,
which is the union of the Brooklyn Society for Parks and Playgrounds and
the Metropolitan Parks Association. Howard Bradstreet, the secretary of
the association, gave through lantern slides a synopsis of the active
work in conducting playgrounds and baseball centers during the last
season. Seth Thayer Stewart sketched a possible plan for the extension
of the recreation idea throughout the city, and Dr. Luther H. Gulick
spoke briefly on recreation for girls.

The Council of One Hundred, of which Mr. Gilder is president, Jacob H.
Schiff, George D. Pratt, Mrs. Frederick W. Whitridge and Mrs. Samuel
Bowne Duryea, vice-presidents; and Miss Pauline Robinson, secretary
and treasurer, will meet two or three times a year. Its purpose is to
assist individually and as a body in the active work of the Parks and
Playgrounds Association. While much is being done by the city through
park and school in the way of offering play facilities to children,
nevertheless, so great is their number in New York, that only a small
percentage of the possibilities have as yet been realized. With a
million children of school age or under, occupied only a small part of
the time, the street must be the chief resort for the large majority.

The experience of last summer showed both the feasibility and the good
result of organizing the children of the street by play leaders who
appreciate the value of free play, and are acquainted with child nature.
The plan of work as outlined calls for the placing of such play leaders
in various sections of the city; the encouraging of the establishment
of places for recreation by different organizations and neighborhood
committees, and for the provision and maintenance of various forms of
play throughout the year in sections otherwise neglected. During the
summer the association maintained eight vacant lots as playgrounds,
eleven baseball centers and a camp for boys. The neighbors of several of
these grounds have asked to have them extended during the winter, and
the association will undertake to do so early in the new year.


NEW YORK STATE TRADE SCHOOL PLANS

Much significance is attached to the recent organization of the New York
state branch of the National Society for the Promotion of Industrial
Education. The passage of the industrial education bill last year opened
up to the state possibilities in the way of industrial education which
it has not thus far been able to measure. A volunteer body of some
sort has been needed to awaken interest and stir up the whole state.
Particular opportunity offers among the up-state cities and it was with
this in mind that the officers and advisory board were elected, for as
the list shows, the members are representative of the state as a whole
as well as of many lines of industrial and educational activity. The
officers are:

     President, James P. McElroy, manager of the Consolidated Car
     Heating Company, Albany; vice-president, Dr. Andrew S. Draper,
     state commissioner of education, Albany; secretary-treasurer,
     Arthur L. Williston, Pratt Institute, Brooklyn.

Additional members of the executive committee are:

     V. Everit Macy, chairman of Board of Trustees, Teachers'
     College, New York; Joseph R. Campbell, president Diamond Saw and
     Stamping Works, Buffalo; Thomas D. Fitzgerald, president Allied
     Printing Trades Council of New York State, Albany; Frank L.
     Babbott, manufacturer and member of the School Board, Brooklyn.

At a public meeting following the formation of the branch, considerable
enthusiasm was developed and a number of interesting papers were read.
Of these, perhaps the most substantial contribution to the discussion
of the evening was by Dr. William H. Maxwell, city superintendent of
schools, New York, who presided. Among other things Dr. Maxwell said:

     Certain things may be taken as demonstrated with regard to
     industrial education:

     First, trade schools are needed. They are needed for the sake
     of our industrial wealth and efficiency. They are needed for the
     sake of the boys and girls of this city. The best preparation for
     a trade is the manual training high school where, in connection
     with elements of a liberal education, students receive instruction
     in drawing, in tools, and in applications of art to industry.
     But these schools breed engineers, not journeymen. Hence we need
     schools to give training that will shorten and enrich the period of
     apprenticeship for the journeyman.

     Second, such schools must be a part of the public school
     system and must articulate directly and closely with the elementary
     schools, to the end that boys and girls between fourteen and
     eighteen, or at least sixteen, may obtain that training which will
     enable them to be of use in a shop; because it is in the public
     schools that the boys and girls are found who need such training.

     Third, to carry out this articulation, elementary schools
     should have manual training to discover these boys and girls who
     have an aptitude for mechanical pursuits. Brains are as necessary
     in mechanical pursuits as in law or theology.

     Certain difficulties stand in our way:

     First, apathy of manufacturers who have shown little desire to
     obtain really skilled American workmen, as for example, the firm
     which established a school to train apprentices and found that they
     were taken away by other firms as soon as they had learned a few
     tricks of the trade.

     Second, apathy of the financial authorities of the city who
     have just cut out the amount asked for by the Board of Education
     for shops and kitchens, and given only $22,000 for a trade school.
     It is encouraging, however, to remember that the first annual
     appropriation for manual training in Brooklyn was only $5,000. If
     we make good use of the small appropriation, the demonstration will
     secure larger appropriations in the future.

     Third, the foolish or nebulous arguments of many of those who
     have been advocating trade schools. Arguments have been foolish
     when they became pleas for the elimination of existing high schools
     and the conversion of these institutions into trade schools. Those
     that have not been foolish have been largely nebulous, vapory
     exhortations to establish trade schools, without the substance of
     a well considered plan. Such a well considered plan is now the
     great desideratum. While the advocates of trade schools have been
     talking, the Board of Education has established and maintained five
     prosperous and useful evening trade schools which are patronized
     largely by apprentices. Those evening trade schools confine their
     operations chiefly to the building and machinists' trades. Shall we
     stop there? Will our friends not give us a plan for teaching our
     three largest trades, clothing, beer brewing, and sugar refining?
     What we need farther is a well thought-out plan of co-operation
     between the school and the manufacturer, such as that at Fitchburg,
     Mass.

     For these reasons,--the apathy of manufacturers, the apathy of
     the financial authorities of our city, and the need of definite,
     coherent plans,--the cause of trade schools stands sorely in need
     of the aid of this local branch of the national society. The time
     is surely opportune when the Board of Education has appointed a
     standing committee on this subject and when the state, through the
     industrial education bill, passed last winter by the Legislature,
     has decided to give substantial financial assistance to any
     community that established trade schools.


TO RESTRAIN HOLIDAY BEGGING

The mummery and begging in which the children of New York city so
generally indulge Thanksgiving Day and other holidays have long been
matters of concern and alarm to those who are interested in educational
work with young people. Many articles have appeared denouncing the
custom. On the morning of Thanksgiving, the New York _Times_ contained
an especially well directed effort to protest against this growing evil.

The children of Asacog Social Settlement, 52 Sands street, Brooklyn,
partake very generally in these holiday mummeries, masquerading and
begging. The harmful results have long been realized, but the efforts
heretofore used to modify the custom have been quite ineffective. It
was resolved this year to undertake a different method of modifying the
nuisance.

It was found in all cases that the children had no idea why they should
choose Thanksgiving for begging, beyond the fact that people gave them
money on that day and all their playmates chose this method of "having
fun," so of course it was necessary to be in the game.

So with "having a good time" in mind, parents, young people, children,
were invited to a festival on Thanksgiving eve. It seemed quite
necessary to draw a moral lesson in the attempt to overthrow such a
deeply seated custom, and this was done through a series of tableaus
and dances with connecting narrative.

The probable historical setting of the Thanksgiving custom was presented
through scenes of the Dutch in Holland, during the troublesome times
of William of Orange, when the sea beggars made their famous pledge.
Two tableaus showing the court scene and the banquet of the beggars
were followed by a costume dance by small boys, which was called the
"beggars' march." The English contribution to the celebrations was in
tableaus from the history of the Guy Fawkes plot. The Dutch and English
transferred to America were shown by Peter Stuyvesant and his surrender;
the southern scenes with their harvest ideas through a colored
plantation sketch; the Puritans and Indians by tableaus and Indian squaw
dances. Then followed the times of the Revolution, with the tyranny of
the British, the spirit of '76, and the Evacuation Day celebration on
November 25, 1783.

The tableaus were given in costume by the young people and children,
about seventy-five taking part. The members of the Civic Club, composed
of mothers and neighborhood women did a great deal in preparing the
costumes and dressing the actors.

The settlement had the valuable help of Miss Mari R. Hofer in preparing
Dutch and Indian dances, and of Howard Bradstreet, the narrator of the
evening.

Admission was by tickets given in clubs and classes, and the seating
capacity of three hundred and twenty-five was taxed to over five
hundred. But the carnival spirit was in the midst and no one minded
the necessity of standing on a chair with a friend or two in order to
catch an occasional glimpse of the stage. Several of the star performers
became so interested in the audience that it was necessary to snatch
the nearest boys or girls as the occasion demanded, hustle them to the
improvised "green" room, hastily dress them in remaining fragments of
costumes far removed from the historic time, and with impromptu coaching
from the wings, an attitude was struck worthy of any Dutch patriot or
Puritan dignitary.

The most gratifying results of the performance were that the begging
on the street was greatly diminished. Many of the children did dress up
and beg, for of course we could not expect a complete reformation on
Sands street. But up to eleven o'clock not a begging child had been seen
on Asacog corner. Later in the day little beggars began to appear but
in smaller numbers and at three o'clock in the afternoon, a very lively
hour, all the children on the block were out playing their ordinary
street games, and but one child was in fancy costume. From one tenement
from which twenty children begged last year, but two indulged this year,
one mother having been to the festival, and really beginning to realize
the dangers of street gaieties for the first time, refused to permit
her eight year old girl to parade in fancy dress, at which the child
volunteered to stay in bed, feeling life was too dull for words, and
besides she was tired from the night before, the carnival spirit having
worked itself out. In reality it was the "day after the fun."


FOLK DANCES IN A PUBLIC SCHOOL

The pupils in the Lincoln School, situated in the suburbs of Burlington,
Iowa, feel no restraint from want of room to play, for the school
grounds are as large as a small park, and stretches of prairie land
roll before and behind the building. Beautiful oaks and elms form tiny
forests round about, a brook rushes through the outskirts, and in each
season nature calls so loudly to the boy that it requires all the
ingenuity of teachers and truant officers to keep him in school. Many
nationalities have congregated in this part of the city, for it is a
factory district, and each September there are enrolled little Germans,
Russians, Swiss and Irish who are instinctively antagonistic to one
another.

The teachers of Lincoln School have found it advisable to be present
during the noon hour, as well as during recess, to prevent the playing
of rough games in which many children were injured, or which resulted in
fighting.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

About ten years ago a may-pole was introduced, which revolutionized
the school. A small organ was carried into the yard and as many as
forty children took part in this dance at the same time. About five
years ago, fearing that this dance would become monotonous, other folk
dances were introduced, and now one may see during all intermissions,
groups of boys and girls dancing the _gavotte der kaiserin_, Irish
reel, Highland fling, sword dance, dance of the Alpine peasants and
the minuet. In order that even these should not become uninteresting,
costumes have been provided for each dance, and this is bound to be the
greatest aid in discipline; for what boy will play truant when he can
impersonate Washington in the minuet or some Scottish hero in the sword
dance or Highland fling. To defray the expense of the costumes, a play
was given,--Spyri's Heidi. This met with such success that they now
have a dramatic club, whose members have presented Old-Fashioned Girl,
Eight Cousins and Little Baron to large audiences in the Opera House.
Many unruly boys have become docile, after impersonating some genuinely
honest boy character. The manners and dress of both boys and girls have
been much improved since they have taken part in these plays.

The folk-dances have been used in this school for so many years that all
are prepared to say that they are a success with the boys in as great a
degree as they are with the girls. A boy seldom refuses to join in the
dances. The most enjoyable period during the session is the time of the
rhythmic play. They need no other punishment for disobedience than to
threaten to refuse to play for the folk dances.


THE STANDARD FOR A CITY'S SURVEY

GRAHAM TAYLOR

Social research on a city-wide scale is a contemporary product.
Appropriately old London was the first to have its living conditions
comprehensively investigated. To Charles Booth belongs the credit of
having initiated and set the type of such enquiry. His great work in
seventeen volumes on Life and Labor in London standardized methods
and results in some lines of civic investigation. Its data were
almost entirely derived from secondary documentary sources furnished
by official records and the reports of voluntary agencies, but the
originality with which it is everywhere stamped lies in the handling and
verifying of the material thus acquired. The whole great analysis and
synthesis of the largest city population of the world, thus attempted
for the first time, deserves to be ranked as one of the greatest
achievements of the closing decade of the nineteenth century. That this
brave pioneering was attempted by one of London's great shippers, and
that it was so successfully carried through to completion at a cost
of twenty years of labor and a quarter million of dollars, also sets
a standard of self-exacting citizenship worthy alike of the world's
greatest city and of one of its most modest and personally resourceful
citizens.

The extent to which this survey of London afforded intelligent incentive
and basis for the reconstructive civic spirit and work which attended
and followed it is demonstrated by contemporary history. The voluntary
efforts to improve conditions, and the London County Council's
achievement in increasing open and street spaces and in furnishing
housing and other equipment for city life, were on a scale befitting
the foundation in fact substantially laid by Mr. Booth's monumental
work. Liverpool, Glasgow, Birmingham and many provincial cities received
impetus and direction in their heroic efforts to ascertain and improve
their own conditions.

Seebohm Rowntree followed Mr. Booth's example in his study of poverty in
York, but went beyond his methods in making a first hand investigation
of the facts. Robert W. deForest and Lawrence Veiller set the type for
American enquiry into city conditions by their investigation and reports
of the Tenement House Problem in New York. And now the Pittsburgh Survey
registers the most inclusive standard thus far set in ascertaining
the facts of living conditions in a typical industrial community. In
cooperating to carry through this constructive survey the Russell Sage
Foundation and this magazine achieve the most noteworthy fulfilment of
their common purpose to improve social and living conditions in the
United States.


PREACHING AND PRACTICE

JACOB A. RIIS

[Illustration]

These two Christmas stamps are next of kin. Our Red Cross stamp is the
youngest child of the Danish _Julemarke_ which sprang out of a country
postmaster's brain to take its place among the most effective weapons
in the world-wide fight with the white plague. Of what stout stock the
family are,--it is a big family by this time, with sons and daughters in
many lands,--this year's issue of the Danish stamp tells at a glance.
For the big building pictured in it is the "Christmas Stamp Sanatorium,"
built for tuberculous children out of the half pennies the Danish people
have given these five years as their contribution to the great campaign.

[Illustration]

Denmark is a little country. All in all it has not much more than half
as many people as the Greater New York, if indeed it has so many. Yet
in so short a time it has wrought so great a tangible result. What it
has further wrought in the way of arousing public interest and guiding
public education in this matter is beyond calculation. For the last is
the biggest end of the work of the Christmas stamp, wherever it goes.

In New York city two years ago we raised a great outcry about child
cripples, made so by tuberculosis. We counted five thousand or more
in the tenements of the metropolis and decided that their one chance
of life lay in building a hospital on the seashore, on the lines of
the little one now run on Coney Island by the Association for the
Improvement of the Condition of the Poor. Forthwith money was raised,
a quarter of a million of dollars, to build a much bigger one with,
and architects were set to work to draw plans. The city appropriated
a site in a great seashore park, to be laid out for the people. Then
there happened what so often happens in New York when a great public
enterprise is to be carried out. It ran into a rut, somehow. Money
became tight, the controller could not find the funds, park and hospital
were side-tracked and stayed so.

They are side-tracked yet. The money kind-hearted New Yorkers gave for
the children is in the bank. The little cripples still crawl around
their tenements. The winds blow over the ocean and waste their healing
balm. The park is as far away as ever. And the purses of the charitable
snap with an extra twist of tightness when they think of it all. Next
time we shall plead the children's cause in vain.

That is the way of New York. The picture above tells the way of poor
little Denmark. No doubt there is an excuse, or a string of them, for
the American city. But excuses do not mend aching joints and wasted
frames. How long before New York will catch up with Denmark? Would it
not be fine if this lusty son of a worthy sire, the Red Cross Christmas
stamp, were to help get us started again?


RAILWAY ACCIDENTS

EMORY R. JOHNSON

University of Pennsylvania

The Confessions of a Railroad Signalman by J. O. Fagan is an
exceptionally able book, worthy of the serious attention of every
student of the causes of railroad accidents.[1] The author gives his
qualifications for writing the book by saying that he "has been a
telegraph operator and tower-man for twenty-seven years and part of the
time chief clerk to a railroad superintendent," and he further adds that
"the extent of territory covered by this experience is even wider than
one would suppose. For a telegraph operator is, of necessity, one of the
best posted men in the service." In addition to this experience from
which a knowledge of the subject has been gained, the author possesses
a remarkably well trained mind and has command of exceptionally clean
English.

[1] The Confessions of a Railroad Signalman, J. O. Fagan. Pp. 182.
Price $1.00, Boston: Houghton, Mifflin and Co., 1908. This book may be
obtained at publisher's price through the offices of CHARITIES AND THE
COMMONS.

The main thesis of the book is that accidents are due mainly to
non-observance of rules. "Railroad managers, therefore, sooner or later
will come to understand that the one thing needed in the railroad
service at the present day is to educate employes to appreciate the fact
that successful and safe railroading in the future will have to depend,
not upon the multiplication of safety devices or the reconstruction of
rules, but upon the personal effort and conduct of conscientious, alert,
and careful men." Furthermore, the author has "arrived at the conclusion
that on our railroads the interests of the community have become
secondary to those of the employe and his organization." Mr. Fagan also
maintains that "it is actually a matter of reasonable demonstration
that at least seventy-five per cent of the casualties might be avoided
by increase of interest on the part of the employe, and the earnest
concentration of his best thought on the subject."

[Illustration: FROM CONFESSIONS OF A RAILROAD SIGNALMAN]

The natural remedy for the situation, as stated by Mr. Fagan, would lie
in the observance by employes of the company's rules and regulations,
in the discipline by the management of all employes for each and every
non-observance of any rule, and the enforcement of discipline with
appropriate penalties regardless of the personality of those subjected
to discipline. The enforcement of discipline, moreover, should not be
made to depend upon consequences resulting from non-observance of rules.
Employes should be penalized by loss of pay for their disregard of
the rules or regulations whether their actions do or do not result in
casualties.

Mr. Fagan, however, believes, and brings convincing evidence to show,
that the above remedy is beyond hope. The organizations of which the
railroad employes are members take the position that the member who
violates a rule is to be defended against condemnation by the public
or discipline by the management. Instead of taking the view that the
interests of the public are paramount to those of any individual
railroad employe, the railroad employes' organization seeks invariably
to shield its members against the consequences of their actions.
Furthermore, the managers of most railroads have decided that the strict
enforcement of the rules and the punishment of those who do not observe
the rules result in so many controversies with the labor unions and
are so destructive of harmonious relations between the company and the
unions, that it is better to strive for harmony rather than to enforce
discipline. In other words, discipline and the safety of the public
are made subsidiary to the maintenance of harmonious relations with
the employes. Such being the situation, Mr. Fagan believes that reform
is not to be expected within railway management but must come from the
outside as the result of the exercise of governmental authority. The
government must punish employes for non-observance of rules and penalize
railroad officers for the non-enforcement of their regulations.

The analyses and arguments of the book are convincing. The position
taken by Mr. Fagan is one the accuracy of which will doubtless be
vigorously denied by the organizations of railroad employes and will be
to some extent questioned by the responsible management of railroads.
However, it seems to the author of this review that Mr. Fagan has
established his thesis.


INDUSTRIAL ITALY

ARTHUR P. KELLOGG

The simple Italian peasant, he whose meager village life was so
accurately drawn by Mr. Mangano in earlier issues of this magazine, is
familiar in every city in this country, and we have in America what
is probably a fair appreciation of his poverty, his hardships and the
longing for better things which send great blocks of the population
of rural provinces flocking across the Atlantic. Of industrial Italy
we know less, having few sources of information. If the life of the
factory towns is really as bad as The Forewarners,[2] by Giovanni Cena,
makes it,--if wages are as low, work as hard, housing as squalid and
amusements as few,--then we have in the book a story of remarkable
growth in wretchedness, for the manufacturing towns of northern Italy
are, as Mrs. Humphry Ward points out in the introduction to the English
translation, only forty years old.

[2] The Forewarners, Giovanni Cena, 1908, New York, Doubleday, Page and
Company. Price $1.50. This book may be ordered at publisher's price
through the office of CHARITIES AND THE COMMONS.

The book makes clear the source of the socialist vote in the Italian
Parliament and the human stuff which the railway and other big strikes
are made of. It is, supposedly, the life story of a Turin printer.
Starting as the son of a clay digger, he graduates into the working
world after a childhood spent in an orphanage. Having some little
education more than his fellows, he becomes a proofreader for a house
which is putting on the Italian market the standard works of science
and philosophy in all languages. This gives him stronger meat than a
weak body and an overwrought mind can digest, and he becomes oppressed
with the wrongs of his class, with the grind of the factory and the
squalid life of the house where he has a tiny cell in the garret. There
he piles up, in proof sheets, a library of the greatest books in the
world. Pouring over them by night, half-fed, unsociable, brooding, his
mind slips gradually from its moorings and he throws his life away as
a sacrifice, for this book, the story of his life and the story of his
class, is hidden in his bosom. A tragic death, he believes, will cause
it to be published and set afoot nothing short of a revolution.

The book does not tell the manner of his death, but it implies that he
threw himself in front of the King's automobile, which he often met in
his wanderings outside the city. It typified to him the oppression which
he felt,--"the griefs of others I have such a longing to relieve that
the desire becomes a torment to me, and I cannot shake myself free from
it except by action." Of the automobile drivers he had written: "Whilst
the nobility are trying to draw in their claws so as not to exasperate
us, here come these bourgeoise parvenus to insult us in our own house.
Yes, in our own house, for the highroad belongs to the peasant and
the poor man." His studies, which put him above the other workmen,
were themselves his undoing, for the substance of Tolstoi and Spencer
became so much more to him than the form, that his work grew bad and
worse until he was discharged,--an incident convincing to one who has
attempted to read proof with an eye to things greater than commas and
spelling.

Out of it all he worked a scheme of things as they ought to be, which,
whether it came from the proofreader or from the author who takes a
proofreader's smarting sense of wrong as his theme, makes an interesting
program:

     A king who has a lofty ideal of society wishes to lead his
     subjects up to it by his methods of government, and is willing
     to abdicate when he feels that they are really free. His chief
     instruments in the work of redemption are doctors and school
     teachers. On the one hand freedom, on the other action. Freedom
     from error whilst doing everything to favor and afford sufficient
     light. A tendency to abolish all forms of restraint, from the
     material ones for criminals to the moral ones for all men; from
     handcuffs to laws. The gradual abolition of hereditary rights of
     property; every human being to have the needful, and everything
     to return to a common fund at his death. The legal personality of
     women, and the equality of the sexes, to be recognized as steps
     to the conquest of individuality, liberty, happiness. Each to be
     free to develop to the utmost his own life, his own affections.
     Birth and education to be protected. Rest to be ensured to old age.
     Public hygiene to be watched over till disease be eliminated. Every
     facility to be afforded to manufactures, commerce and science, so
     as to encourage man to conquer himself, the earth, the heavens.
     Faith in progress, as if it were not,--and it is not,--destined to
     die with our earth. The worship of life.

Such a scheme and the style and force of the book are difficult to
associate with the neurasthenic proofreader, skilfully as the author has
drawn the background and made the man's thought develop over his proof
table.

But whether the character be drawn convincingly or not, the book gives
a wonderfully clear and sharp-cut picture of the environment of such a
worker. Some bits of description stand out above the others, one of them
the Turin tenement, where "from the first flights of stairs, carpeted
and warmed by hot air pipes, to the bare flight of our top floor, the
steps grew ever steeper and steeper. Each evening we passed through
all the social zones, hot, temperate and cold; we were lodged in the
arctic regions." There were 142 of these steps to the top floor, where
naught but poverty dwelt,--a penniless poet with a sister who supported
him, a lonely working girl, a woman of the streets, a drunkard and his
screaming, beaten wife and half-witted children, and Cimisin, a cobbler,
who always "was whistling at full speed to the accompaniment of his
hammer. The tears of women, the curses of drunkards, had for so many
years mingled with the merriment of that harmless madman."

His history of the printing shop is complete and modern, even to the
point where the men went back to their cases after a strike, only to
find that long rows of linotypes with women operators had displaced
them. These women, he thought, might have among them one fitted to be
his mate, but he was too shy to seek her out. He could see them only as
workers at the almost human machines, or where "the cylinders revolved
with a loud din, the sheets rained out one on top of the other,
the women in their long overalls kept on repeating their monotonous
movements, feeding the sheets into the press or collecting them into
piles. On two side platforms the women were in constant motion. A
hundred women and a hundred men. It was impossible to imagine that
relations other than those existing between the several parts of a
machine might be formed between these beings created for a mutual
understanding." Still he wonders vaguely if

     perhaps in this uniformity of action, foreign to and apart
     from the monotonous toil which exhausts them, something exists,
     smiles, shines? Have some got a small bird singing in their hearts
     whilst their hands grow grimy at the wheel?... No love of their
     work,--that is to say of their life,--inspired them; each of them
     constantly saw the work of an hour, a mere fragment, leave his
     hands anonymously and forever, and none of them could ever say of
     anything, "That is my work!" What will remain of them at the end of
     their lives to prove that they have lived? In truth, they have not
     lived.

Of the women in his tenement, girls who were not harnessed to a factory,
he found even less of life, though perhaps more of womanhood. Going with
his friend to see the latter's young sister in a maternity hospital, he
reflects that this is the way with many of them,--"love leads to the
hospital." The patients there are mostly unmarried girls. The married
ones have few children now. "How talk of love, of family life, in a
society which deals out the same ration to the single man and to the
father of a family?"

His friend starves, the sister dies, the drunkard's wife, mother of six,
takes her life,--everyone whom he knew, it seems, all the associates
high up in the attic of the "aeropolis," come to grief and misery and
death. He greatly admires the woman, a physician, who visits them.
"She picks up, joins, straightens out innumerable threads; she seems
to be weaving a tapestry of which she will only complete a tiny bit, a
work which she has inherited from one generation and will transmit to
another." She offers him a part in her work, but he feels "incapable
of giving myself in small doses." He is impatient, irritable for
"something ready to hand, swift as lightning," that shall right all
wrongs and ease all pain at a stroke. He cannot work with others, or for
others, and so he tucks his story into his bosom and starts out to meet
the King's car. Almost at the last he confesses, "I have passed beside
life."


SCHOOL REPORTS[3]

Reviewed by ROLAND P. FALKNER

To the great majority of people the school report is the only tangible
evidence of what the school administration is doing. The citizens
generally cannot be expected to know what goes on in the school rooms or
in the meetings of boards of education, nor what is taking shape in the
back of the superintendent's head. Even were they afforded the utmost
opportunity and gifted with such unusual perception, it is not likely
that without convenient summaries and condensed statements they could
form any idea of the public school system as a whole.

[3] School Reports and School Efficiency by David S. Snedden and William
H. Allen for the New York Committee on the Physical Welfare of School
Children. New York, 1908. Pp. 183. This book will be sent by CHARITIES
AND THE COMMONS postpaid for $1.50.

If the school report is at once the evidence and test of the school
administration, it is clear that its ideal is such a marshalling of the
facts regarding the schools of the city as will give the reasonably
intelligent citizen a clear notion of just how well the schools are
performing the duties entrusted to them.

The book before us is a study of the school reports for the purpose of
ascertaining how far and in what manner they seek to embody such ideal.
It is a study in comparative administration.

This study reveals so wide a diversity among school reports as to
preclude the idea of any consensus of opinion as to what they should
contain. While uniformity of scope and treatment is not to be expected,
it might reasonably be anticipated that the similar purposes of the
school administration in different places would give to these reports
a certain family resemblance. In so far as such a resemblance can
be traced, it does not appear to be so much the result of parallel
internal development as the product of external compulsion or
suggestion. State educational departments charged with allotment of
state school funds according to a fixed unit in school work, have led to
an emphasis upon such units. A similar influence has been exerted by the
United States Bureau of Education in its request for information along
certain definite lines.

Apart from these influences tending toward a certain uniformity, there
are other forces working in the same direction though less effectively.
The trend of present discussion in educational affairs is not without
its influence, and when certain facts are needed to point a moral or
adorn a tale the experience of other cities points to investigations
or arrangements of material which are new to the city in question.
Conscious effort to promote uniform treatment of statistical data, a
theme which has been discussed almost to weariness by the National
Education Association and kindred organizations, has been singularly
fruitless.

With these general considerations by way of introduction, the work takes
up its main theme, the scope of educational statistics. In them we find
the condensation of educational experience, and here more than in other
parts of the text we should expect the experience and practice of one
city to be helpful to another. Too often, indeed almost universally, the
tables of facts are isolated from the text of the report, and no effort
is made to explain their meaning or set forth the salient features which
they present. In view of the volume of tabular matter there is a painful
poverty of interpretation.

The method pursued by the author in his record of the facts, is to
furnish a specimen table from the different reports in regard to each
matter touched upon, a selection of the simpler and then the more
detailed statements to be found in them. The following heads are
treated in this way: School plant, expenditure, census, attendance,
age of pupils, promotions, survival, compulsory attendance, high
schools, vacation schools, libraries, medical inspection, teachers
and summaries. The variety of forms exhibited is highly instructive
although, it may be confessed, somewhat bewildering. The author has
confined himself so strictly to a study of methods that he is disposed
to let the tables speak for themselves. There is here, too, an absence
of interpretation. Tables of figures may speak for themselves but to
understand them one must know their language. One cannot help but feel
that in many cases some explanation why the detailed tables are to be
regarded as superior, other than the fact that they are more detailed,
would have been more illuminating and would have relieved somewhat the
monotony of this important chapter for the general reader.

No attempt is made to outline a model report. We have instead in chapter
5 a series of questions which might be answered in a school report. The
list does not pretend to be exhaustive but in reality it constitutes a
somewhat formidable program, if it be assumed that the greater part of
these questions should receive attention.

Conscious of the fact that somewhat staggering demands are made on
the school administration, the discussion of "suggested economies and
improvement" comes as an antidote. This is a brief discussion of short
cuts and methods to get at desired results. It looks to a simplification
of records and such forms and registers as will supply the needed
information, without excessive work. This is a very vital point and the
suggestions as far as they go are admirable.

While the subject presented in these pages is thoroughly technical,
the work may be commended most heartily to school authorities and to
all who are interested in the progress of our schools. It is an appeal
for exact information and should not be passed by without a hearing.
Such information in regard to our schools,--one of the most important
branches of our government,--is painfully lacking. It has too often
been assumed that the management of schools was a matter for experts of
which outsiders could not properly judge. Within certain limits this
is true, but it does not distinguish between the scholastic and the
administrative sides of school work. We undoubtedly need both among
our school authorities, and in the public at large a keener perception
of the requisites of a sound and effective administration. It is not,
perhaps, too much to say that there is no great business enterprise of
the people of which they know so little as they do of their schools. In
private affairs such ignorance on the part of directors and stockholders
would lead to bankruptcy.

The authorship of the several chapters of the book is distinctly stated.
The general considerations herein briefly noted are the work of Dr.
Snedden; the particular application to the city of New York is the work
of Dr. Allen. Those who are familiar with Dr. Allen's work answer that
he can always be relied upon for a readable and spicy statement. But
in view of the predominantly local interest of his discussion and the
inexorable limits of space, it has seemed best in the foregoing notice
to lay the greater emphasis on those large aspects of the subject which
are from the pen of Dr. Snedden.

[Illustration: _Drawn by Joseph Stella._]


HYMN OF PITTSBURGH

BY RICHARD REALF

    My father was mighty Vulcan,
      I am Smith of the land and sea,
    The cunning spirit of Tubal Cain
      Came with my marrow to me;
    I think great thoughts strong-winged with steel,
      I coin vast iron acts,
    And weld the impalpable dream of Seers
      Into utile lyric facts.

    I am monarch of all the forges,
      I have solved the riddle of fire,
    The Amen of Nature to need of Man,
      Echoes at my desire;
    I search with the subtle soul of flame,
      The heart of the rocky earth,
    And out from my anvils the prophecies
      Of the miracle years blaze forth.

    I am swart with the soot of my chimneys,
      I drip with the sweats of toil,
    I quell and scepter the savage wastes
      And charm the curse from the soil;
    I fling the bridges across the gulfs,
      That hold us from the To Be,
    And build the roads for the bannered march
      Of crowned Humanity.

  Published in the _National Labor Tribune_,
  Saturday, February 23, 1878.

[Illustration: _Chautauqua Photographic Co._

PITTSBURGH.

THE POINT, AS SEEN FROM THE HEIGHTS OF THE SOUTH SIDE.]

[Illustration: THE PITTSBURGH ARCH SESQUI-CENTENNIAL WEEK.]




THE PITTSBURGH SURVEY

PAUL U. KELLOGG


Engineers have a simple process by which in half an hour's time they
strike off a "blue print" from a drawing into which has gone the
imagination of a procession of midnights, and the exacting work of a
vast company of days.

God and man and nature,--whosoever you will,--have draughted a mighty
and irregular industrial community at the headwaters of the Ohio; they
have splashed, as Kipling puts it, at a ten league canvas with brushes
of comet's hair. Under the name of the Pittsburgh Survey, Charities
Publication Committee has carried on a group of social investigations
in this great steel district. In a sense, we have been blue-printing
Pittsburgh. Our findings will be published in a series of special
numbers of which this is the first, covering in order:

    I.--The People;
   II.--The Place;
  III.--The Work.

Full reports are to be published later in a series of volumes by the
Russell Sage Foundation and, throughout, the text will be reinforced
with such photographs, pastels, maps, charts, diagrams and tables as
will help give substance and reality to our presentations of fact.

In this sense, then, it is a blue print of Pittsburgh, that we attempt.
At least the analogy of the draughting room may make it clear that the
work, as we conceive it, lies, like the blue print, within modest outlay
and reasonable human compass. Our presentation must frankly lack the
mechanical fidelity and inclusiveness of the engineer's negative; but we
can endeavor to bring out in relief the organic truth of the situation
by giving body and living color, as we see them, to what would otherwise
be but the thin white tracings of a town.

Occasional articles have been published during the year, but the results
of the Survey are put forward for the first time as a consecutive
whole in the pages that follow. Here is the place, then, for a simple
statement of the drive and scope of the work as conceived by those who
have carried it forward:

The Pittsburgh Survey has been a rapid, close range investigation of
living conditions in the Pennsylvania steel district. It has been
carried on by a special staff organized under the national publication
committee which prints this magazine. It has been financed chiefly by
three grants, of moderate amount, from the Russell Sage Foundation for
the Improvement of Living Conditions. It has been made practicable by
co-operation from two quarters,--from a remarkable group of leaders
and organizations in social and sanitary movements in different parts
of the United States, who entered upon the field work as a piece of
national good citizenship; and from men, women and organizations in
Pittsburgh who were large-minded enough to regard their local situation
as not private and peculiar, but a part of the American problem of city
building.

The outcome has been a spirited piece of inter-state co-operation in
getting at the urban fact in a new way. For consider what has already
been done in this field in America. We have counted our city populations
regularly every ten years,--in some states every five. We have known
that the country has grown and spread out stupendously within the
century, and that within that period our cities have spread out and
filled up with even greater resistlessness. How goes it with them? What
more do we know? True, we have profited by incisive analyses of one
factor or another which enters into social well-being,--tuberculosis,
factory legislation, infant mortality, public education, to name
examples; and we have heard the needs of particular neighborhoods
described by those who know them. But there is something further,
synthetic and clarifying, to be gained by a sizing up process that
reckons at once with many factors in the life of a great civic area, not
going deeply into all subjects, but offering a structural exhibit of
the community as a going concern. This is what the examining physician
demands before he accepts us as an insurance risk, what a modern farmer
puts his soils and stock through before he plants his crops, what the
consulting electrician performs as his first work when he is called in
to overhaul a manufacturing plant. And this, in the large, has been the
commission undertaken by the Pittsburgh Survey.

The main work was set under way in September, 1907, when a company
of men and women of established reputation as students of social and
industrial problems, spent the month in Pittsburgh. On the basis of
their diagnosis, a series of specialized investigations was projected
along a few of the lines which promised significant results. The staff
has included not only trained investigators but also representatives
of the different races who make up so large a share of the working
population dealt with. Limitations of time and money set definite bounds
to the work, which will become clear as the findings are presented.
The experimental nature of the undertaking, and the unfavorable trade
conditions which during the past year have reacted upon economic life in
all its phases, have set other limits. Our inquiries have dealt with the
wage-earners of Pittsburgh (a) in their relation to the community as a
whole, and (b) in their relation to industry. Under the former we have
studied the genesis and racial make-up of the population; its physical
setting and its social institutions; under the latter we have studied
the general labor situation; hours, wages, and labor control in the
steel industry; child labor, industrial education, women in industry,
the cost of living, and industrial accidents.

From the first, the work of the investigations has been directed to the
service of local movements for improvement. For, as stated in a mid-year
announcement of the Survey, we have been studying the community at a
time when nascent social forces are asserting themselves. Witness the
election of an independent mayor three years ago, and Mr. Guthrie's
present fight to clear councils of graft. Within the field of the
Survey and within one year, the Pittsburgh Associated Charities has
been organized; the force of tenement inspectors has been doubled
and has carried out a first general housing census, and a scientific
inquiry, under the name of the Pittsburgh Typhoid Commission, has been
instituted into the disease which has been endemic in the district
for over a quarter of a century. A civic improvement commission,
representative in membership and perhaps broader in scope than any
similar body in the country, is now in process of formation.

A display of wall maps, enlarged photographs, housing plans, and
other graphic material was the chief feature of a civic exhibit held
in Carnegie Institute in November and December, following the joint
conventions in Pittsburgh of the American Civic Association and the
National Municipal League. The local civic bearings of the Survey were
the subject of the opening session of these conventions. Its economic
aspects were brought forward at a joint session of the American Economic
Association and the American Sociological Society at Atlantic City in
December.

[Illustration: SCHEME OF THE PITTSBURGH SURVEY.

From Pittsburgh Civic Exhibit, Carnegie Institute, November-December,
1908.]

The present issue is frankly introductory. It deals with the city as
a community of people. Pittsburgh is usually defined in other terms.
First among American cities in the production of iron and steel, we
are told that it ranks fifth as a general manufacturing center. There
are forty-seven furnaces within forty miles of the heart of the city,
with an annual capacity of over seven million tons of pig iron,--more
than twenty-five per cent of the total production in the United States.
Statistics of the American iron trade for 1907 show that Allegheny
county produced a fourth of all Bessemer steel and a third of all open
hearth steel, a fifth of all rails rolled in the United States, a third
of all plates and sheets, and very nearly a half of all structural
shapes. Pittsburgh proper ranked fourth in foundry and machine shop
products, second in brick and tile, pottery and fire clay, and first
in electrical apparatus and supplies. In coal and coke, tin plate,
glass, cork, and sheet metal,--in products as varied as the fifty-seven
varieties of the pickles in which it excels,--its output is a national
asset. Pittsburgh stands tenth in postal receipts and fifth in bank
deposits. Its banking capital exceeds that of the banks of the North Sea
empires and its payroll that of whole groups of American states. Here is
a town, then, big with its works.

[Illustration: BLAST FURNACES AT NIGHT.]

Again, there is a temptation to define Pittsburgh in terms of the matrix
in which the community is set, and the impress of this matrix on the
soul of its people no less than on the senses of the visitor. Pipe lines
that carry oil and gas, waterways that float an acreage of coal barges,
four track rails worn bright with weighty ore cars, wires surcharged
with a ruthless voltage or delicately sensitive to speech and codes,
bind here a district of vast natural resources into one organic whole.
The approaching traveller has ample warning. Hillsides and valleys are
seamed with rows of coke ovens, gaunt tipples bend above mine mouths,
derricks and bull-wheels stand over fuel wells, and low lying mill
buildings, sided with corrugated iron, rear their clusters of stacks
like the pipes of huge swarthy Pans. Then comes the city with its
half-conquered smoke cloud, with its high, bare hills and its hunch of
imposing structures. The place to see Pittsburgh from is a much whittled
little stand on the high bluff of Mt. Washington, where votaries of
the national game assemble on a clear afternoon and spy upon a patch
of green in Allegheny City, hundreds of feet below them, and more than
a mile away across the Ohio River. Their business is with Honus Wagner
and the three-bagger he is going to knock out. But yours can be with the
great Y of the rivers, churned by stern-wheeled steamers and patched
here and there with black fleets of coal barges. Below you to the right
is the South Side; to the left across the rivers, is Allegheny City,
and between them is a little trowel of land piled high with office
buildings. This is the "Point," cut short as it is by the "Hump" and
by higher hills behind; and flanked by narrow river banks that grudge
a foothold to the sounding workshops and lead up and down to the mill
towns. You are looking at commercial Pittsburgh. From the Herron Hill
reservoir, mid-way between the forks of the Y, you get a panorama of the
other side of the community,--Shenley Park to the right of you, with
the Carnegie buildings and the ample residences of the East End, and
to the left, long swales of small, thickly built houses that make up
Lawrenceville and the adjoining home areas.

But it is at night that the red and black of the Pittsburgh flag marks
the town for its own. The lines of coke ovens seen from the car windows
have become huge scythes, saw-edged with fire. The iron-sheathed
mills are crated flame. Great fans of light and shadow wig-wag above
furnaces and converters. From Cliff street, the lamps of Allegheny lie
thick and clustered like a crushed sky, but from the bridges that span
the Monongahela between the mills,--where choleric trains shuttle on
either bank, and the rolls are at thumping war with the sliding, red
billets,--the water welds the sparks and the yellow tumult, and you
feel as if here were the forges of the sunrise, where beam and span and
glowing plate are fabricating into the framework of dawns that shall
"come up like thunder." Here,--if we doubted it before,--is a town that
works; and that works in a big way.

But the people, rather than the product or the setting, concern us. In
December, 1907, Pittsburgh and Allegheny were merged, and the Greater
City entered the class of Baltimore, St. Louis and Boston. This is
the half-million class. Last September, Pittsburgh celebrated its
one hundred and fiftieth anniversary, and a street pageant exhibited
both the industrial vigor of the community, and the variety of its
people. There was a company of Corn Planter Indians, descendants of
the aboriginal Pittsburghers; there were floats representing the early
settlers; there were Scotchmen with kilts and bagpipes; nor were they
all. A wagon load of Italians bore a transparency,--"Romans dig your
sewers," and Polish, Slovak and other racial organizations marched in
the costumes of their native countries. For the life of the city has
become intricate and rich in the picturesque. That old man you passed on
the street was a Morgan raider, and behind him trudged a common soldier
of the Japanese War. Here is an American whose Pittsburgh is the marble
corridors of an office building, and the night desks of the men in shirt
sleeves and green eye shades; and here, one whose Pittsburgh reaches
back to a stately old parlor with gilt-framed mirrors and spindling
Chippendale. Here is "Belle," who exchanges her winter in the workhouse
for a summer in a jon-boat, which she reaches by a plank. Here is the
_gazda_ who ruined himself that his boarders might not starve. And here,
the inventor who works with many men in a great laboratory and scraps a
thousand dollars' worth of experimentation at the turn of a hand. Here
is a gallery of miners pounding their grimy fists at a speech by Haywood
in the old town hall; and here a bunch of half-sobered Slavs in the
Sunday morning police court.

You do not know the Pittsburgh District until you have heard the
Italians twanging their mandolins round a construction campfire, and
seen the mad whirling of a Slovak dance in a mill town lodge hall; until
you have watched the mill hands burst out from the gates at closing
time; or thrown confetti on Fifth avenue on a Halloween. Within a few
blocks of the skyscrapers of the Point, I have seen a company of Syrians
weaving almost unceasingly for four days a desert dance that celebrated
the return of one of them to Jerusalem. (An Irishman thought it a wake.)
A possum swings by the tail at Christmastide in front of that Negro
store in Wylie avenue; long bearded Old Believers play bottle pool in
that Second avenue barroom; a Yiddish father and five children lie sick
on the floor of this tenement; this old Bohemian woman cleaned molds as
a girl in the iron works of Prague; that itinerant cobbler made shoes
last winter for the German children of the South Side, who were too poor
to pay for them, and stuffed the soles with thick cardboard when he was
too poor to buy leather. Here is a Scotch Calvinist, and there a Slavic
free thinker; here a peasant, and there a man who works from a blue
print; engineers, drag outs, and furnace-men from the mill district;
yeggs and floppers and '69ers from the lower reaches of the city;
strippers and core makers and coffin buffers. There a Russian exile
with a price on his head, and here a Shaker of old Pennsylvania stock!
You have heard of Shakespeare's London, of the port of Lisbon in the
days of the Spanish Main, of the mixtures of caste and race and faith
on the trade routes of the East. They are of the ilk of Pittsburgh. How
to get orderly plans of social betterment out of the study of such a
community is at first sight a staggering question. But the clue to its
answer is that same fact that stood out when we looked at Pittsburgh as
a city of tonnage and incandescence. These people are here to work. This
fact once grasped in its bearings and we get a foothold for estimating
Pittsburgh. The wage earners become a fairly well-defined belt in the
population. What the issues of life and labor mean to them will help
us in understanding the trend of conditions in industrial communities
generally.

First, you have the mere fact of aggregation. Pittsburgh has as many
people as the whole state of Pennsylvania had at the opening of the last
century; Allegheny county as many as at that time the commonwealths of
Massachusetts and New York combined. The Greater City has twice as many
as all the future cities of the United States had in 1800; as many as
Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia, St. Louis, combined, in 1850.
Here, then, is a community worthy of as serious statesmanship as that
which has served whole commonwealths at critical periods in our national
advance. Now in all history, cities have never reproduced themselves.
They draw on the country districts to replace the stock that they burn
out. But when one-third of the total population comes to live in cities,
they can no longer do this. It becomes vitally important that city
people live well, else the race lapses. At risk, then, of going over old
ground, let us look at some of the dynamic influences that affect the
life of this particular community.

No American city presents in a more clear-cut way than Pittsburgh the
abrupt change from British and Teutonic immigration. Sociologists
tell us that in the mid-eastern valleys of Europe successive waves of
broad-headed, long-headed, dark and fair peoples gathered force and
swept westward to become Kelt and Saxon and Swiss and Scandinavian and
Teuton. They were the bulwark which obstructed the march of Hun and Goth
and Turk and Tartar, sweeping in from the East. It is from Slavs and
mixed people of this old midland, with racial and religious loves and
hates seared deep, that the new immigration is coming to Pittsburgh to
work out civilization under tense conditions. A vineyard blighted, a
pogrom, torture, persecution, crime, poverty, dislodge them, and they
come.

Further, the sociologists tell us that by mixed peoples the greatest
advances have been made. It was in Amsterdam, Venice, London, and the
Hanse towns, places of mart which brought together the blood and
cultures of distant races,--it was here that democracy gathered head and
the arts flourished. But in Pittsburgh are the elements of a mixture
yet more marvelous. A common fund of Slavic words, almost a Pittsburgh
dialect, is finding currency. The Pole still speaks Polish, but he makes
an adaptation of his words, and the Slovak understands. The Syrian and
Arabian peddlers know these words and use them in selling their wares in
the courts and settlements,--a contrast to the great gulfs that still
separate the Slav and the English-speaking.

Furthermore, the city is the frontier of to-day. We have appropriated
and parcelled out most of our free land. The edge of settlement is
no longer open as a safety valve for foot-loose rebels against the
fixity of things. They come to the cities. They swarm in new hives. To
Pittsburgh especially where men deal with devil-may-care risks and great
stakes, come the adventurous and the unreckoning. A smack of the mining
camp is in the air about the mill yards.

The life to which these people come is different from that known of any
previous generations. We have seen how in Pittsburgh traction lines,
tunnels, inclines, telephone wires, weave a city of a size and on a
site which would have been impossible in the old days. The householder
is far removed from the sources of his food supply. He lives two or
three families deep and many to the acre. The very aggregation of
people breeds disease, a complication which in turn may yet be balanced
by those revolutions in medical science which have brought glad, new
optimism to sanitarian and physician.

[Illustration: SOURCES OF IMMIGRANT LABOR FORCE, CARNEGIE STEEL CO.

Each dot a man.

  AUSTRIA-HUNGARY:          10421
  INCLUDING: SLOVAKS         6477
             POLES            611
             BOHEMIANS         45
             GERMANS          135
             CROATIANS       1239
             HUNGARIANS      1323
             ROUMANIANS       410

  RUSSIA:                    2577
  INCLUDING: POLES           1644
             LITHUANIANS      476

  BRITISH ISLES:             2010
  INCLUDING: ENGLAND         1456
             IRELAND          257
             SCOTLAND         137
             WALES            100

  SWEDEN:                     287

  BULGARIA                     58

  FRANCE                       52

  TURKEY IN EUROPE             26

  ROUMANIA                     24]

The work to which these people come is not the work of their fathers.
The discipline of the mill is not the discipline of the field. Human
nature is put to new and exacting tests. It works unremittingly as it
has not worked before,--eight, ten, twelve hours a day, seven days in
the week, with the chance of twenty-four hours once in the fortnight.
It works by artificial light and at night. It works in great plants and
creates and puts together in fierce new ways. Of that growing share
of the population of Pittsburgh which is continental born, a large
proportion is from the country and small villages. This is no less
true of the influx of southern Negroes,--a north-bound movement here
and in other cities, the final outcome of which we do not know. The
newcomers, it is true, may be groomed in passage. A railroad may open up
a Hungarian back country and the peasant get his first training there;
a Ruthenian may work on the plantations and sugar beet factories of
Bessarabia before coming on; a southern Negro may hire out in the mills
of Alabama before starting north; or a Slovak may work as a slate picker
or miner's helper in the anthracite fields on his way westward. The
drift through it all none the less is from field to mill.

New stock, then, a mixed people, venturesome, country-bred,--so much
the sociologist has pointed out to us; the economist has other things
to tell. He sees about him the potent aftermath of those great changes
from household and domestic forms of production to the factory system.
As each new peasantry leaves the soil, the history of the industrial
revolution is repeated, but processes are accelerated and the experience
of a generation is taken at a jump. With this has occurred a great
lateral stratification of industry. There is no longer the feudal
loyalty to a particular concern, but to the men of a particular trade.
Unions have sprung up, and have grown or broken. The thing above all
others which has tended in Pittsburgh to their undoing in certain great
trades has been the subdivision of labor. The flea on the hair of the
tail of the dog of the wild man of Borneo just come to town, is an
entity large and complete compared with the processes which occupy many
men in the electrical works and car shops. This change has multiplied
product, and set unskilled labor to busy itself at a thousand stints;
but it has fore-shortened trade knowledge and ousted much craftsmanship.
Along with it has come another physical change. The skilled men of the
old time hammers and anvils work with electric cranes and at continuous
processes that reach from the heat of great ovens and the jaws of
soaking pits to the piled and finished product. An intricate dovetailing
of flagmen, brakemen, engineers and train despatchers makes up a train
to carry huge dynamos and steel structural shapes across the continent.
This fact has a new and vital social significance. Its essence is team
play. Its reactions upon the psychology of associated effort have yet to
be explored. Once again, new and unheard of crafts are ushered in, to
engage their quota of the time and strength of the working force, and to
put it to new tests of adaptability. Take the implications of the steel
industry itself, in the building trades. The old time carpenter and
builder gives way to the house-smith and the structural steel worker.

[Illustration: INDUSTRIAL TOWNS OF ALLEGHENY CO. PA.

PERCENTAGE OF NATIVE & FOREIGN BORN WHITES IN CITIES &
BOROUGHS HAVING 2500 INHABITANTS OR MORE

1900]

In Pittsburgh, too, we have a stupendous example of the influence upon
the wage earners' city of a mighty fiscal change in industry, combining
in one corporation all processes from the ore to the completed bridge.
Work is organized nationally. The steel center like the mill town is
not a thing by itself. It is a step in a bigger process managed from
without and owned by a multitude of nonresident stockholders. Pittsburgh
must build up an active, native citizenship or be merely an industrial
department. The community and the workshop are at issue.

Finally,--in our roster of dominating influences,--within the last
twenty-five years, has come the invasion of women into industry. This is
not a simple thing, nor a little one. It can directly affect half the
population. Pittsburgh is not primarily a woman's town, yet 22,000 women
engage in the trades, and each year they invade a new department. These
women workers are affected by all the forces noted and in turn affect
and complicate those forces.

These are some of the dominant influences that affect wage-earners in
cities assembled. One element runs through their complications and
brings us clear-seeing and hope. It is the element of change and flow.
In the Royal Museum at Munich are the miniatures of a group of medieval
towns carved out of wood. The spires of the churches, the walls and
gates of the city, markets, houses, outbuildings and gardens are
reproduced with a fidelity that has stood these centuries. They embody
the old idea of a town, of the fixity of things. A man was his father's
son. He worked as his father worked. He was burgher, or freeman, or
serf as his father was burgher, or freeman, or serf. His looms and his
spinning wheels and vats were as his fathers had contrived them. He
lived in the house of his father as his father had lived and it served
him well. Pittsburgh is the antithesis of such a town. It is all motion.
The modern industrial city is a flow, not a tank. The important thing
is not the capacity of a town, but the volume and currents of its life
and, by gauging these, we can gauge the community. We must gauge at the
intake,--the children, the immigrant, the countrymen who come in; gauge
at the outlets; and gauge at the stages in the course of the working
life. If there be unnecessary death, if strong field hands are crippled
or diseased through their manner of living or working, if the twelve
hour man sees everything gray before his eyes in the morning, if women
work in new ways that cost their strength or the strength of their
young, if school children are drafted off as laborers before they are
fit; if boys grow into manhood without training for the trades of this
generation,--then we have a problem in social hydraulics to deal with.
We must put old social institutions and usages to the test of these
changing tides. Herein lies the essence of constructive philanthropy.
In this light, tenement house legislation is no more than an adaptation
of domestic necessities and customs to the difficulties of living three
stories deep, and factory acts no more than an effort to work out the
law of skull crackers, freight yards, and electrically driven mines. We
have to fashion a city not alone for the hereditary householder, but for
the mobile and transient and half-assimilated, for workers with multiple
tools and above all for people on an upward trend.

Faced with its great task of production, Pittsburgh has not set itself
to the thrift of self-knowledge. When half a thousand people were dying
each year from typhoid fever, the movement to clear the water supply
was blocked and exploited at every turn. Half a thousand workmen are
now killed each year in the industries of Allegheny county, and yet the
public has not taken the trouble to sift the accidents through and see
which can be prevented. Nobody knows how many men are seriously injured
every year; nobody knows how many men and women are beset with trade
diseases. Nobody knows how much the community is paying for such wastes
as these. Nobody knows how far the seeping off of human integers into
hospitals, and jails, insane asylums, brothels, and orphanages, could be
checked; the guesses of the town's best men are that much is needless.
Pittsburgh is a town which does not know the number of its children of
school age, nor, the physical status of the children of its classes; it
is a town which, for five years, did not so much as demand a report from
its health department. In such an arraignment, we must bear in mind that
there are notable exceptions in one phase of social concern or another
to this lack in Pittsburgh's self-knowledge, and that Pittsburgh is not
merely a scapegoat city. It is the capital of a district representative
of untrammeled industrial development, but of a district which, for
richer, for poorer, in sickness and in health, for vigor, waste and
optimism, is rampantly American.

The Pittsburgh Survey has been carried out with such a working
conception of the field it had before it. We have brought to one city
people of special experience in others, to gauge its needs. We have
measured its institutions against standards worked out in this city or
in that, or in other local enterprises; and we have estimated civic
and industrial conditions by their effect on groups of individual
families. In the present issue we put forward the composite situation
as reflected in the lives of two groups--the immigrant and the Negro.
Later issues will go into the social bearings of courts and schools,
hospitals, houses and factories. But such individual problems have no
reality unless seen in their human relations and for this reason, this
issue begins with an interpretation of the genesis of the community by
a native Pittsburgher, who has become one of the civic leaders of New
England. We have an estimate of new immigration by a Welshman from the
Anthracite region, who is representative of the old, and an estimate of
his fellows by one of the Slavs. The outlook of the steel mill worker is
appraised by a man whose eyes have known the broad sweep of prairies of
the American Northwest. A description of the working women whose hours
and wages and conditions of employment will next concern us, and of the
families into whose lives come the tragedies of industrial accidents,
are included. And finally, the issues of life in a representative
mill town are put forth, standing out more isolated and clear cut for
the purposes of analysis than it is possible to find them in the more
intricate operations of the Greater City.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of my earliest recollections of a canvas covered geography is the
prime fact which is Pittsburgh,--that here the Allegheny and Monongahela
rivers unite to form the Ohio. Huge economic foundations buttress this
fact (oil and gas and clay and iron and coal). History in the making
has rolled it into new shapes and a changing significance. The junction
is the great left fist of the Father of Waters. The three rivers give
the town common cause and intercourse with the Atlantic coast ranges to
the east, and the mid-continental bottom lands, north and south, to the
west. Their waters carry the ores and fill the boilers and douse the
hissing billets of the steel makers. They are not easy overlords, this
triumvirate of rivers. They carry fever which scotches one town and
the next. They rise a bit too far and the fires are out, the streets
flooded. But grudgingly and inevitably, they yield mastery. They are
dammed and sluiced and boiled and filtered to suit the demands of
navigation and power and temperature and thirst.

The mastery they yield is to another current--the eddying peoples which
make up the community and all its works--a current more powerful and
mysterious than the bulk of brown waters. The War Department engineers
can tell you the exact number of cubic feet which slide past either
side of the Point every minute. The sanitarians can give you the
number of bacteria, friendly or plague-besetting, which infect any
cubic centimeter. The weather man in a high building can forecast the
exact stage which the water will register hours hence. But what of the
people?--they have largely taken themselves for granted. They have
rarely taken the time to test their own needs or consciously gauge
the destination of the currents that possess them. They are here--the
strong, the weak, the cowed, the ambitious, the well equipped and the
pitiful. They jostle and work and breed. For the most part they run a
splendid course. But they do not keep tally, and their ignorance means
sorrow and death and misunderstanding.

       *       *       *       *       *

To give a little help to those who are trying to understand, and measure
these currents, and deal with them as intelligently as the locks and
channels of the rivers are dealt with, has been the purpose of the
Pittsburgh Survey. Such chartings as we have attempted have been of
these living waters.

[Illustration: COKE OVENS AT NIGHT]




PITTSBURGH

AN INTERPRETATION OF ITS GROWTH

ROBERT A. WOODS

HEAD OF SOUTH END HOUSE, BOSTON


Pittsburgh has always been unique among American towns. Known as the
dingy capital of a "black country," during all but the latest period
of its growth it has attracted few visitors save those whose business
motive brought them. The nucleus of its population is different from
that of any other of our large centers. Its situation at the gateway of
the Middle West was sure to bring it into significance as the center
of the country's population and activity shifted, but the Allegheny
mountains were for a long time a barrier against the easy movement of
population in this direction. It is the varied mineral resources of
western Pennsylvania, and the pertinacity of the chief element among its
inhabitants in developing them, which has created a new metropolitan
district, having virtually a population of a million, to be added to the
seven or eight urban centers which now dominate different sections of
the United States.

Beginning as a little hamlet about the fortifications used first by
the French, then by the English, at the junction where the Allegheny
and Monongahela rivers form the Ohio, the settlement developed from a
trading post to a market town. It would have been limited to the career
of such a place much longer if, in spite of the excellent soil of the
surrounding region, the farmers had not found it difficult to compete in
the matter of the staple crops with the slave-tilled plantations of the
South. It was as a sort of forced alternative that small iron-working
plants began to spring up along the rivers. The ore was brought down
from the Alleghenies. Bituminous coal,--the distinguishing asset of the
coming industrial center,--had already been discovered by the French in
the river valleys.

The "town beyond the mountains" again found itself embarrassed in
marketing its commodities,--not by competition this time, so far as
America was concerned, but by the heights over which its ponderous new
output must be carried. This obstacle was overcome by a system of canals
with inclined cable portage lines up the mountain slopes. Meanwhile the
great trade with the West for the supply of its incipient civilization
was being established through the river traffic as well as by newly dug
canals.

Some of the first citizens of the town after the revolutionary days
were naturally men who had been prominently engaged in the war. Two of
them were Irishmen who had leaped to the opportunity to fight England.
At the close of hostilities they had foresight to discern that large
developments were to come at the juncture of the rivers. The descendants
of these men,--some of whom by a curious irony are English and have
never seen this country,--are at the present moment the greatest holders
of Pittsburgh real estate. The great bulk of the early immigrants
into the town were Scotch-Irish, who began to come in large numbers
early in the nineteenth century, and almost two generations before the
inrush of the southern Irish. Until recent great developments, when
the skyscrapers began to appear, the older part of the city in its
aspect was distinctly suggestive of British towns of the same size
and character. Two of its local sections were very naturally called
Birmingham and Manchester, names which have almost passed out of use
among the American born generations. The manners and customs of the
people showed about equally the traces of pioneer days in the Ohio
valley and the traditions of the old country. Unlike the large cities
that have grown up along the Great Lakes, Pittsburgh owes nothing to
successive waves of migration from New England. It is only in very
recent years, with the varied developments of technical and educational
interests, that there have been enough New Englanders living in the
city to develop any of the organized front which they maintain in all
other northern cities. It is natural therefore that, though Pittsburgh
was strongly loyal for the union during the Civil War, the spirit of the
city should in many respects suggest the South rather than the North.

Around the nucleus of Scotch-Irish, gathered, as time went on, large
numbers of southern Irish, Scotch, Welsh, Germans and German Jews.
But these different types are still to a noticeable degree always
considered as being marked off by themselves as against the dominant
Scotch-Irish. It is only as individuals from among them gain a position
of influence by special achievement that they are considered a part of
the bone and sinew of the city. The Scotch-Irish with their contrasted
traits of sturdiness and ardor, have two great separate interests in
life,--industry and religion. The other nationalities have either had
the same traits in good measure, or by process of selection individuals
have caught the spirit and have come to the front while the rest have
fallen to the rear. Yet those who fell back have in most cases found a
reasonable opportunity in the great material progress of the town.

Pittsburgh is all the more characteristically American for having
been built up from first to last by immigrant stock, not merely by
unsettled natives. It remains to this day a sort of natural selection
of enterprising spirits from out of every European nation and tribe,
Americanized not by any tradition or other educational process than that
of having the typical American experiences in what still remains the
heart of the country.

Pittsburgh has never been a place to emigrate from. It has held its own,
and constantly invites each nationality to bring more of its kind. The
only deserters were those who found it in them to care for a reasonable
measure of cultivated life, difficult to secure in a town where there
was not a library worthy of the name until 1895 and where a whole winter
would sometimes pass without a single lecture on a significant theme
intelligently treated. It was natural that in the formative period there
were some who sought more congenial associations in the seacoast cities.

In religion until comparatively recent days it could be said that
there was not a more Calvinistic atmosphere about Edinburgh, Glasgow
or Belfast. The early Pittsburghers had almost as strong a tradition
of what it means to fight for their faith as the Puritans themselves,
and this sense has not had time yet altogether to fade. The orthodox
spirit of the town has all along palpably affected the religion of
the other racial types. So it is hardly surprising to find that
certain regulations of the Catholic Church seem to be more insistently
promulgated and more rigorously observed in Pittsburgh than in other
places.

There is not a city in the country, and probably not in the world, where
strict Sabbath and liquor legislation is more strenuously put into
effect. Unusually genial people to those who do well, they are summary
and even relentless with those who would lower the moral decorum of the
city. But as is very likely to happen where there is a rigid ethical
creed, there is here a very anomalous double standard. The amount
of Sunday work in the steel mills is appalling. There is a certain
sanctity in the operations of business which enables it in specific
ways to nullify the precepts of religion, as when the over-strain of
seven days' work a week is measured in the gradual destruction of the
religious sense in great sections of the population. Local option
sentiment is easily bewildered by political cross-currents. Though the
Brooks law maintains a severe standard as to the conduct of the saloon
business, applied by the county judges to whom a complaint is _prima
facie_ adverse evidence; yet Pennsylvania remains, in the midst of an
unexampled national temperance movement, among the small and ignoble
company of states marked black on the reformers' map.

Few cities have had a greater degree of political machine control, and
the prime sources of this corruption have been nowhere else than among
the Scotch-Irish. Ever since the days of Simon Cameron a clan-like
political organization has dominated the state of Pennsylvania; and
the city of Pittsburgh has been only a less important headquarters
for its operations than Philadelphia. The condition of politics in
Pennsylvania has led many to think that the people of the state
were characterized by a generally lax moral sense. On the contrary,
and in Pittsburgh particularly, this situation is because of a too
intense and therefore too restricted ethical motive. The passage and
enforcement of certain types of legislation having an immediate and
obvious ethical bearing satisfies this restricted ethical demand, and
sidetracks tendencies which might check the indirect causes of great
underlying demoralization. A long list of charities each year receives
substantial appropriations from the Legislature. The 20,000 earnest and
influential people in Pennsylvania who are members of managing boards
of philanthropic institutions receiving state subsidies, are by the
same token so much less inclined and less able to be alert and watchful
against such matters as the theft of millions from the state treasury
and from banks which carry state accounts.

The difficulty with Pennsylvania, and emphatically with Pittsburgh,
is not degeneracy; it is simply public moral adolescence, and the
confusion that inevitably accompanies it. The materialism of Pittsburgh
is that of the overwrought, not of the over-indulgent. No one can study
the life of the city without feeling a mighty under-current of moral
capacity not yet in any sufficient degree brought to the surface. Its
religion cultivates definite restraints and reassurances, rather than
aspiration and moral enterprise. This is, however, always the case when
a community's moral powers are absorbed in the subduing of nature and
the achieving of a great material destiny. The spirit of adventure in
Pittsburgh has been thus far economic. The moral movement of this people
in any case is slow: but it is unyielding always; and once fully aroused
knows how to be irresistible.

The situation can hardly seem abnormal when one realizes the unsurpassed
material resources of the Pittsburgh district and the pressure which has
been laid upon a single community by the whole world for the products
out of which the foundations of world enlightenment are laid. It is
of particular importance in the case of Pittsburgh, that the social
student should take the full measure of the function of the city as the
almost limitless and tireless creator of the solid means of civilized
existence, for this and other nations. The simple fact that it is the
first city in the country in the tonnage of its product, and the second
city of the country in banking capital, largely on account of its great
wage payments, will suggest both the service which it renders and the
power which it has achieved. It is significant that in this district the
two greatest individual fortunes in history have been amassed and the
two most gigantic concentrations of economic power built up.

Without in the least abating the test of moral and legal standards upon
the policy of industrial leadership in the great activities of western
Pennsylvania, it can hardly be doubted that later generations will
include the leaders in such enterprise among the master builders of
modern civilization. The place of Pittsburgh in the American system of
life is that of the city which in an altogether unparalleled way is made
up of producers, of those whose purposes are focused in bringing to pass
the creation of durable and indispensable utilities. Contrasted with
Pittsburgh, every other city in the country is rather a market-place,
made more refined but in some sense less noble by the dominance of
traders and consumers.

It is one of the curious anomalies of American legislation that it
should have so zealously guarded against foreign competition in price
standards, while withholding all protection against competitors bringing
with them a low wage standard. Pittsburgh, in its larger estate, may be
said to be a monument to this anomaly. Severe restrictive protection
against foreign steel, and unlimited immigration, have enabled
Pittsburgh, well-enough otherwise provided, to throw the reins upon the
neck of her prosperity. And it must be borne in mind that the protective
system, for years tacitly acknowledged by Pittsburgh manufacturers to
be unnecessary, is yet clung to as an exclusive and powerful tribal
fetich, from whose point of view every question as to the welfare of the
nation must first be considered. The fresh constructive moral aspects of
politics and patriotism impress Pittsburgh probably less easily than any
other community in the country.

So great and continuous has been the tide of immigration, that the
insistence of the new immigrants for employment on any terms has made
it comparatively easy for industrial captains to control industrial
administration, to the exclusion of all substantial efforts on the part
of the workmen to organize in their own behalf. Beginning with the
British operatives and coming down through the successive types to the
present southeast Europeans, each type up to the present has gradually
raised its demands, made some headway, organized to reach still higher
ground, lost by attack from both front and rear, and disappeared up
and down the social scale in the general community. This very costly
process has been thought necessary to industrial prosperity. There is,
of course, no doubt that the holding down of the wage standard, like
the artificial maintenance of the price standard, has conduced largely
to the making of some of the great personal fortunes; but it is certain
that the future historian will find this checking of the normal and
typically American aspirations of successive waves of newcomers, to
have been distinctly detrimental to the economic, quite as well as to
the social and political well-being of the Pittsburgh community. This
unthrift in the matter of the prime essential productive force and
economic value is again partly accounted for by the very pressure of
opportunity afforded by unlimited resources and the insatiable demand
of the world market. There has not even been sufficient time for
consideration of many economies in process and administration whose
value to manufactures would be unquestioned.

It is to the point here to remember that the two great fortunes just
mentioned began to be great as individual fortunes through special
privileges gained in railroad rates. The topographical convergence of
the Great Lake region on the one side and the Ohio river valley on the
other to a territory less than a hundred miles wide, brought all the
chief means of transportation between the West and the Atlantic seaboard
through this particular territory. These exceptional facilities for
transportation gave a culminating stimulus to industrial progress.

The intense localization of resources and transportation facilities led
almost inevitably to the phenomenal concentration of industrial capital,
followed by highly centralized industrial administration. This process
has in a sense been its own undoing, so far as Pittsburgh is concerned,
because the financial and even the administrative center of the great
combinations have inevitably gravitated to New York, and the old type of
self-reliant leader of industry is fast disappearing. Yet the lesson of
the large spirit of associated production is constantly being inwrought
into the consciousness of the community. A later article in this series
will show that the statesmanlike initiative, which until recent days had
been inevitably swung into the strategy of business, is beginning to
express itself in many promising forms of public spirited activity.

Physical environment, no less than racial stock and economic factors,
condition the development of public sentiment in a community. The
growth of Pittsburgh as a center of population under the pressure of
business opportunity would have been very greatly hampered if electric
transit had not prepared the way. The ground plan runs up and down
almost impossible foldings of hill and valley. The electric cars make
possible the utilizing of all the slopes and hilltops for homes. This
has weakened the inevitable centripetal force of urban growth, and led
to the building up of suburbs very accessible to the central business
section, and comparing for attractiveness and comfort with those of any
other city in the country. Such a transfer of well-to-do population has
made possible other important shiftings both of poorer population and
of business, by which the business center has gained in area and in the
character and adaptability of its structures.

Pittsburgh has grown into an industrial metropolis with outlying
manufacturing towns reaching along the rivers, and following the course
of all the railroads for a distance of thirty or forty miles. The time
is soon coming when all the large industries will be eliminated from
the city, and Pittsburgh proper will become simply the commercial and
cultural headquarters of its district.

Meanwhile all these methods of expansion and relief have not been
sufficient to give adequate room in the downtown section either for
industry, trade or housing. This area, which is closely hemmed in by
the rivers and the hills, now includes the great central commercial
activities, the railroad terminals, several large industrial plants
and numerous smaller ones, together with the homes of the unskilled
population which finds employment within it.

The congestion within these tight limits brings out, in a peculiarly
acute way, the breakdown of many branches of the social administration
of the city, from the point of view of the welfare of its population
as a whole. Here not only the unfitness of hundreds of houses under
existing conditions for human habitation, but the actual and serious
shortage of roofs under which to shelter the lower grades of the
industrial population, is most strikingly seen. Here typhoid fever,
for which Pittsburgh has these many years held a tragic pre-eminence,
is at its highest rate. Here the actual congestion of machinery within
industrial plants which cannot get land to expand upon, is particularly
conducive to the diseases, and to accidents which are associated with
the different branches of industry.

In this situation appears another of the strange contrasts of Pittsburgh
life. The problem of the downtown district is further complicated by the
fact that great sections of it are held under a landlord system like
that of the old world. Thirty-three million dollars' worth of real
estate located almost wholly in the downtown district is held by five
estates, some of the holders living abroad permanently, others traveling
much of the time. Commercial enterprise is handicapped by the difficulty
of securing an independent title to real estate. Much of the most
objectionable tenement house property is held by two of these estates.
Absentee landlordism thus oddly parallels absentee capitalism. To the
fact that the industrial authorities are remote and, by controlling many
plants, can take the fiscal rather than the close range administrative
view of industry, must be largely traced that stern reprobation of any
equity on the part of the workman in his work, which has on occasion
made, and will again make Pittsburgh the country's chief point of social
unrest and danger.

The anti-trade-union policy tends strongly to fix and standardize the
immigrant rate of wages, and has given strong cumulative force to the
personal profit-reapings of the past two decades. Recognizing clearly
the serious limitations of trade unionism as part of the organization
of a tumultuous industry like that of Pittsburgh, it must still be said
that there is substantial evidence to believe that the community cheats
itself when it keeps up a glutted labor market and a lower than standard
wage. However this may be, the Pittsburgh employers' point of view, more
than that of any other city of the country, is like that of England in
the early days of the factory system,--holding employes guilty of a sort
of impiety, and acting with sudden and sure execution, if they undertake
to enforce their claims in such way as to embarrass the momentum of
great business administration. A sound standard of living for the
workman and his right by organized competition to win it, Pittsburgh
must eventually recognize as fundamental to the country's economic and
political welfare. Should she persist in excluding trade unionism,
European experience shows that her hordes of immigrants will quickly
learn to carry their alien types of unrest to the ballot box.

The backwardness of Pittsburgh in the development of culture and public
spirit, must be traced in part to the negative attitude of a serious
minded people toward the amenities of life, and their distrust of the
process of government. There has been no sufficient tradition in the
city of more balanced and varied human interests. The city's population,
instead of finding an increasing social unity, has been increasingly
sectionalized by the overwhelming influx of every type of immigrant.
There has not been leisure for the consideration and discussion of
public questions. The very ground plan of the city, which scatters
all of its responsible citizens through the suburbs at night, tends
to deprive the city of their disinterested co-operation out of office
hours toward raising its tone and standards. But other American cities
have shown how, when many of their people began to be released from the
treadmill of the purely industrial stage of their growth, it is possible
to take advantage of the experience of older communities and move by
long strides toward a humanized type of urban life.

From the foremost absentee capitalist and the foremost absentee landlord
have come as gifts the two epoch-making improvements toward the finer
public life of the city. Schenley Park and the Carnegie institutions
located at its entrance form a civic center whose possibilities of
civic influence are very great. It may be noted that the coming in of
these improvements was coincident with the work of a city engineer
who, indifferent to the political principles under which the city was
administered, and acting as a kind of despot within his domain, carried
through many great improvements in the layout of the new districts of
the city, and with the first move in the direction of a great hospital,
which is one day to be built with money left for the purpose by the man
who for many years was the political master of the city.

The effect upon the city of benefits wrought out in this undemocratic
fashion will of course be subject to heavy abatements; but it would
be a strange doctrinaire who could not see that these specific steps
represent most substantial net gains in the life of the community.
There is indeed a distinct undertone of feeling that such benefactions
represent simply a return to the city of what the city itself has
produced. One can find comparatively few indications that the park, the
library and the rest have placed the city under the depressing bonds of
patronage. The existence and service of these institutions, in any case,
give a new and strong focus to the rising city sense, and the evidence
goes to show that, rather than weakening the spirit of collective
initiative on the part of the citizens themselves, they have conduced to
give shape and force to it.

There are several instructive ways in which this growth of civic
consciousness is expressing itself. The movement for a greater
Pittsburgh now consummated in the union of Pittsburgh and Allegheny with
a few adjacent towns, arises no doubt in the general effort toward power
and prestige; but the step toward inclusiveness is entirely normal, and
has gathered up into a public movement aggressive impulses which had
never before run in that channel. Happily the expansion was preceded by
the election for the first time in a generation of a reform mayor. The
movement came directly as a result of the impudent interference of the
state machine in unseating a mayor who had been elected by an opposing
local faction. This action, carried out under the forms of legislation,
brought Pittsburgh people into a new feeling of municipal self-respect,
and led to their electing on a democratic ticket George W. Guthrie, who
is in every respect one of Pittsburgh's first citizens and has for many
years been earnestly interested in the cause of municipal reform.

The date 1898 may be taken as marking a kaleidoscopic shifting in
the Pittsburgh ensemble. Then the city emerged into the day of large
things,--into the great concentration of capital, and the incidental
liquidation which gave many families overpowering fortunes of cash
in hand; the assembling of vast heterogeneous multitudes of laborers
to keep up with the demands of a period of unparalleled prosperity;
the ampler civic sense signalized by the Carnegie institutions with
their unusual cultural opportunities, and embodied after a time in
solid municipal reform and progress, in a truly enlightened Chamber of
Commerce, and in excellent forms of social service. On the one hand,
irresponsible individuals have gone forth with boundless power to
represent the city to the world at her worst. On the other, Pittsburgh
is gradually and quietly taking to herself the world's lessons in the
making of the modern city and in the building up of citizenship. The
former phenomenon, in which to many this city is allegorized, is but
the froth and the scum; the latter has the beginnings of a tidal energy
behind it.

[Illustration]




THE NEW PITTSBURGHERS

SLAVS AND KINDRED IMMIGRANTS IN PITTSBURGH

PETER ROBERTS

INDUSTRIAL DEPARTMENT, INTERNATIONAL YOUNG MEN'S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION


The day laborer of a generation ago is gone,--a change which has been
swifter and more complete in Pittsburgh than in many other of our
industrial centers. "Where are your Irish? your Welsh? your Germans?
your Americans?" I asked an old mill hand. "Go to the city hall and the
police station," he said. "Some of them are still in the better paid
jobs in the mills; but mostly you'll have to look for them among the
doctors and lawyers and office holders; among clerks and accountants and
salesmen. You'll find them there."

The day laborer in the mills to-day is a Slav. The foreign-born of the
steel district comprise, it is true, every European nation, but I shall
deal here only with the races from southeastern Europe, which for twenty
years have been steadily displacing the Teutonic and Keltic peoples in
the rough work of the industries. The tendency of the Italians is to go
into construction and railroad work, a few entering the mines, rather
than into the plants and yards; and my group narrows itself down to the
dominant Slav and Lithuanian. What I have to say of them in Pittsburgh
and Allegheny City is in the main representative of the manufacturing
towns of the whole district.

Roughly speaking, one-quarter of the population of Pittsburgh is
foreign-born. The foreigner is nowhere more at home than here, and
nowhere has he been more actively welcomed by employers. The conflict
of customs and habits, varying standards of living, prejudices,
antipathies, all due to the confluence of representatives of different
races of men, may be witnessed here. The most backward of these
foreigners are superstitious and ignorant and are the victims of
cunning knaves and unscrupulous parasites. On the other hand, the
whole territory is thrown into a stern struggle for subsistence and
wage-standards by the displacements due to these resistless accretions
to the ranks of the workers. The moral and religious life of the
city is not less affected by this inflow of peoples. Their religious
training differs widely from that of peoples of Protestant antecedents,
and institutions that were dear to the founders of the city are fast
undermined by the customs of immigrants from southeastern Europe. Yet as
a whole, they bring with them physical and cultural resources which the
English-speaking community fails to elicit or thoughtlessly wastes.

Such an exhaustive study as could be made of the immigrant population of
the steel district is outside the possibilities of this paper. I shall
set down only what a month brought me as I visited the lodging-houses
and the courts and the mills of Greater Pittsburgh; as I talked with
priest and leader, policeman and doctor, banker and labor boss, the
immigrants themselves and those who live close to them; but I shall put
it before you in the light of many years' residence in the anthracite
coal communities, where in another section of Pennsylvania, at Mahanoy
City and Wilkes-Barre and Scranton, I have known the Slav and the Lett
and their efforts to gain a foothold in America. I shall deal with
the situation, not as I have seen it in my visits of the past year,
during which the immigrants have returned home by thousands, but as I
came to know it in the heyday of prosperity, the early fall of 1907,
when conditions were as they are likely to be again when industrial
prosperity returns. This is the situation which we must reckon with in a
permanent way.

In 1880, Slavs, Lithuanians and Italians did not form one per cent of
the population in either Pittsburgh or Allegheny. By 1890, they had
reached four per cent, and out of an army of 90,000 wage earners, one in
every ten was an immigrant from southeastern Europe. By 1900, one-third
of the foreign-born were of this new immigration, and the movement
of the Teutonic and Keltic races had practically ceased. We must wait
until the census enumeration of 1910 before we may definitely know what
proportion these newcomers form to-day, but it may safely be assumed
that the percentage of foreign-born in the greater city will equal that
of 1900, thirty per cent, or roughly, 200,000, half of whom will be from
southeastern Europe.

Poles, Italians and Jewish immigrants lead the list. Lithuanians,
Croatians, Servians, Slovaks and Ruthenians are numbered by the
thousands, and Magyars, Greeks, Bohemians and Roumanians are here in
lesser groups.

The representatives of these nations touch elbows in the streets so
that the languages heard when the people are marketing in the foreign
quarters on Saturday night are as numerous as those of a seaport town.
Twenty dialects are spoken. Yet the polyglot mass that confuses the
visitor and induces pessimistic impressions as to the future of the
city, is each morning marshalled without tumult. The discipline of the
industrial establishments converts this babel of tongues into one of the
chief forces of production. Therein lies an appraisal not only of the
American _entrepreneur_, but also of these men coming from nations of
low efficiency, who are able so quickly to fall into line and keep step
in an industrial army of remarkable discipline and output.

There is no way of knowing the annual inflow of immigrants into
Pittsburgh, for the city is a distributing point. The records of the
ports of entry show that in 1907, 187,618 persons gave Pittsburgh as
their destination, but many of these scattered to the neighboring
Pennsylvania towns and many undoubtedly went to the mills and mines of
Eastern Ohio. Every day brings its quota of immigrants in normal times;
occasionally they come by the carloads. Owing to the shifting of the
newcomers, however, the outflow may often equal the inflow. Conditions
of the local industries determine which of these two currents runs the
swifter. During the first seven years of the century, the city possibly
added 15,000 annually by immigration.

Before taking up the living conditions in Pittsburgh as they especially
affect these immigrant laborers, let us consider for a moment certain
characteristics of these people, and their relation to the general
economic situation. First, it is the wages that bring them here. The
workers in the mills of Galicia, the vine-lands of Italy, and the
factories of Kiev, earn from twenty-five cents to fifty cents in a day
of from twelve to sixteen hours. When the American immigrant writes
home that he works only nine, ten, or twelve hours and earns from $1.50
to $2.00, the able-bodied wage earner in the fatherland who hears
this will not be satisfied until he also stands where the shorter day
and the higher wages govern. It is these home-going letters more than
all else which recruit the labor force. They are efficient promoters
of immigration. "There are no able-bodied men," said Big Sam to me,
"between the ages of sixteen and fifty years left in my native town in
Servia; they have all come to America."

[Illustration: DIRECT FROM THE FIELDS OF MID-EUROPE.]

Up to September, 1907, the men in charge of furnaces, foundries, forges
and mills, in the Pittsburgh district, could not get the help they
needed. The cry everywhere was, "Give us men." A foreman, therefore,
could assure Pietro and Melukas that if their brothers or cousins, or
friends were sent for, they would get work as soon as they arrived. More
than that, the Slav and Italian are no longer dependent on the English
boss in the matter of finding work for their countrymen. The inflow of
immigration from southeastern Europe has assumed such proportions in the
industries of the cities that superintendents have, in some instances,
appointed Italian and Polish and Lithuanian foremen; and with these, as
with German and Irish, blood is thicker than water. They employ their
fellow countrymen. They know the condition of the labor market and can
by suggestion stimulate or retard immigration.

The tonnage industries of Pittsburgh have expanded tremendously in
the last two decades. Such industries need manual laborers as do no
others. The Slavs have brawn for sale. Herein, at bottom, is the drawing
force which accounts for such a moving in of peoples and the readiness
with which they find their places in the specialized industries of
the district. Pittsburgh has clamorous need for these men. Take the
average Lithuanian, Croatian, Ruthenian, or Slovak, and his physique
would compare favorably with that of any people. Most of the immigrants
are from agricultural communities. Their food in the fatherland was
coarse, their habits simple, their cares few. They had an abundance of
vegetable diet, pure water, pure air and sunshine, and they developed
strong physical organisms. Taking them as a whole, we get the best of
the agricultural communities. The day has not yet come when the weak
emigrate and the strong stay at home. No ship agents, however active,
can reverse the natural order of the tide of immigration, and natural
selection added to federal scrutiny gives us a body of men physically
most fit for the development of our industries. Nowhere has this been
better illustrated than in Pittsburgh.

These men come to be "the hewers of wood and carriers of water." There
are representatives of each race far removed from the lowest industrial
stratum, but taking these people as a whole, it is safe to say that
the bulk of the unskilled labor in the city,--the digging and carrying
in the streets, the heavy labor in the mill, the loading and unloading
of raw material on railroad and river, the rough work around forge and
foundry, the coarse work around factories, and the lifting necessary in
machine shops,--all is performed by them.

[Illustration: YOUNG SLOVAK.]

This is the level at which they enter the economic order. What trade
equipment do they bring into the work with them? Their industrial
efficiency is low and I should estimate that ninety-five per cent have
no knowledge of modern machinery or methods of modern production; they
are children in factory training. Further, those who have trades find
themselves in an industrial environment where their previous training
is of little value. They are in ignorance of the English language, and
the few mechanics and tradesmen among them can do no better than join
the ranks of the common laborers. We must bear in mind, however, that
those of them who know how to use tools, once they are put to work that
requires some skill, adapt themselves quickly to the situation. Hence we
meet not a few Slavs and Lithuanians who execute work of a semi-skilled
nature. Sons, also, of men of these nationalities who settled in the
city a generation ago have risen to positions of standing in the
industries. Thus it is not unusual to hear of this man or that who has
become a foreman in the mills or taken a place in business or in the
professions.

But on several counts the average Slav, Lithuanian and Italian are not
as acceptable as day laborers as were the immigrants from northwestern
Europe. The common opinion of American employers is that they are stupid
and that the supervisory force must be much larger than if they had
English speaking help. Many employers would no doubt, prefer the latter;
but they cannot get them for the wages offered; they must take the Slav
or run short handed. The United States commissioner of immigration
in Pittsburgh is constantly besieged by employers of labor who need
help. Many stories are told of one firm stealing a group of laborers
marshalled at the ports of entry and forwarded to another.

[Illustration: YOUNG SERVIAN.]

I have spoken of the influence which letters and money sent home
have in recruiting immigrant workmen. These people make little or no
use of labor agencies unless the saloon and the small bank may be so
denominated. There are men in each nationality, acknowledged leaders,
who play the part of intermediaries between superintendents and their
people. But such investigations as I have made at Ellis Island do not
lead me to believe that the employers of labor in Pittsburgh violate
the contract labor law. Labor agencies in New York city make a specialty
of distributing Slavs, Lithuanians and Italians to firms in need of
hands. The leader who supplies men to a mill or mining concern gets so
much for each man supplied. Whatever contract there may be is executed
this side of the water. For instance, a leading Croatian had a specific
understanding with one of the mills of Pittsburgh that all men he brings
will find employment. No contract was executed and in the opinion of the
local immigration agent, there was in it no violation of the contract
labor law.

[Illustration: YOUNG CROATIAN.]

I have noted the drawbacks to the new day laborer as such. On the other
hand, it is a common opinion in the district that some employers of
labor give the Slavs and Italians preference because of their docility,
their habit of silent submission, their amenability to discipline, and
their willingness to work long hours and over time without a murmur.
Foreigners as a rule earn the lowest wages and work the full stint of
hours. I found them in the machine shops working sixty hours a week;
at the blast furnaces working twelve hours a day for seven days in the
week. The common laborer in and around the mills works seventy-two hours
a week. The unit of wages is an hour rate for day labor and a Slav is
willing to take the longer hours (twelve hours a day for men who work
fourteen and sixteen in the fatherland) with extra work on Sundays,
especially in connection with clearing the yards and repairing.
Possibly sixty to seventy per cent of the laborers in the mills come
out Sundays and the mechanics and other laborers on occasions work
thirty-six hours in order that the plant may start on time. In one mill
I found Russians (Greek Orthodox) in favor for the reason that they
gladly worked on Sundays.

[Illustration: YOUNG SERVIAN.]

My belief is that certain employers of labor have reaped advantage from
racial antipathies. The Pole and the Lithuanian have nothing in common
and each of them despises the Slovak. Foremen know this and use their
knowledge when foreigners are likely to reach a common understanding
upon wages or conditions of labor. All these considerations have helped
make it less difficult for factory operators to keep open or non-union
shop in Pittsburgh. The constant influx of raw material from backward
nations into the industries of the city has had somewhat the same
effect as the flow of water at an estuary when the tide is rising. All
is commotion. It will continue to be so as long as the inflow of Slavs
and Italians continues as it has in the last decade. But when they have
become permanently placed and their average intelligence and grasp of
American conditions rise, racial prejudices will give way to common
interests. When this time comes, Pittsburgh will witness the rise of
stronger labor organizations than were ever effected by Teuton and Kelt.

We have seen, then, the Slavic day laborers coming into the steel
district in vast numbers. Of their strength and lack of skill at
the outset there is no doubt, and we have noted some of the snap
judgments that are current about them; such as, that they are stupid,
and submissive. All this puts us in better position to consider more
in detail my first statement that it is the wages that bring them to
Pittsburgh, and to see what advances they make once they have gained a
foothold. The Slav enters the field at a rate of pay for day labor which
is higher than that which brought the Germans and the Kelts. The lowest
wage I found Slavs working for was thirteen and one-half cents an hour.
The wage of common labor in the average mill is fifteen or sixteen and a
half cents. The day laborer around the furnaces gets from $1.65 to $1.98
a day.

But the newcomers know nothing of a standard wage, and when work is
scarce, they will offer to work for less than is paid for common labor.
Such was the case of a band of Croatians who offered their services to
a firm in Pittsburgh for $1.20 a day. When the superintendent heard it,
he said, "My God, what is the country coming to? How can a man live in
Pittsburgh on $1.20 a day?" The foreman replied, "Give them rye bread,
a herring, and beer, and they are all right." [I have known a coal
operator in the anthracite fields to pay Italians and Slovaks ninety
cents a day, and ask neither what was the country coming to nor how they
could subsist.] More, the Slavs will consciously cut wages in order to
get work. A man who knows something about blacksmithing or carpentering
will work at a trade for $1.65 or $1.75 when the standard wage may be
$2.50. They count their money in the denominations of the fatherland
and estimate its value according to old country standards. I have known
foremen to take advantage of this. Again, those who are skilled will at
the command of the boss render menial services without a murmur. "These
fellows have no pride," said an American craftsman to me, "they are not
ruled by custom. When the foreman demands it they will throw down the
saw or hammer and take the wheelbarrow."

So the Slav gains his foothold in the Pittsburgh industries, and in the
doing of it, he undermines the income of the next higher industrial
groups and gains the enmity of the Americans. Shrewd superintendents
are known not only to take advantage of the influx of unskilled labor
to keep down day wages, but to reduce the pay of skilled men by a
gradually enforced system of promoting the Slavs. In the place of six
men at ten dollars a day, one will be employed at fifteen dollars,
with five others at half, or less than half, the old rate, who will
work under the high-priced man. Inventions, changes in processes, new
machines, a hundred elements tend to complicate the situation and render
it difficult to disentangle the influence of any one element. But this
much is clear, the new immigration is a factor which is influencing the
economic status of the whole wage-earning population in Pittsburgh; it
is bound to be a permanent factor; and its influence will be more and
not less.

My estimate is that possibly twenty per cent of these laborers from
southeastern Europe now work at machines which require a week or two
weeks to acquire the skill needed in their operation. To be sure, they
are machines "so simple that a child could operate them, and so strong
that a fool cannot break them." Many Slovaks work in the Pressed Steel
Car Company in Allegheny, as riveters, punchers, and pressmen, while
others are fitters, carpenters, and blacksmiths. Some Croatians and
Servians are rising and are found in the steel mills as roughers and
catchers. I saw Ruthenians feeding machines with white heated bars
of steel. It was simple, mechanical work, but of a higher grade than
that of scrap-carrier. The Poles who in recent years emigrated from
Russia and Austria-Hungary are as industrially efficient as any group
of immigrants and work in both mills and foundries. A foreigner who
has a chance to become a machine operator generally goes into piece
work and earns from $2 to $2.50 a day. But all men at the machines
are not on piece work. A foreman explained this to me as follows:
"If the machine depends upon the man for speed, we put him on piece
work; if the machine drives the man, we pay him by the day." The man
operating a machine by the day gets from $1.75 to $2. Many boys and
young women of Slavic parentage work in the spike, nut and bolt, and
steel wire factories. They sit before machines and pickling urns for
ten hours for from seventy-five cents to $1 a day. The Slovak riveters,
punchers, shears-men and pressmen in the Pressed Steel Car Company's
plant are paid by the piece, and for the most part make from $35 to
$50 in two weeks. Fitters, carpenters, blacksmiths and painters are
getting from $2 to $2.50 by the day. Mr. Bozic, the banker, told me
of Croatians and Servians who made as high as $70 in two weeks, and
others who made between $3 and $4 a day--many of them in positions
which once paid English-speaking workmen twice those sums. High and
low are relative terms and they signify very different standards to a
Slav and to an American. But it is a mistake to imagine that the Slav
or Lithuanian cannot adapt himself to modern industrial conditions.
There is considerable of prophecy in the thousands of them already
doing efficient work in the mills. The sooner the English-speaking
workers recognize this and make friends of these workers, the better. No
class of work is now monopolized by Teutons and Kelts, and the service
rendered by the Slav and Lithuanian will before many years equal theirs
in market value.

With this rapid statement of the economic position of the Slavs, we can
more intelligently approach the problem of their living conditions. But
first let us bear sharply in mind that their work is often cast among
dangers; is often inimical to health.

Many work in intense heat, the din of machinery and the noise of
escaping steam. The congested condition of most of the plants in
Pittsburgh adds to the physical discomforts for an out-of-doors people;
while their ignorance of the language and of modern machinery increases
the risk. How many of the Slavs, Lithuanians and Italians are injured
in Pittsburgh in one year is not known. No reliable statistics are
compiled. In their absence people guess, and the mischief wrought
by contradictory and biased statements is met on all hands. When I
mentioned a plant that had a bad reputation to a priest, he said, "Oh,
that is the slaughter-house; they kill them there every day." I quote
him not for his accuracy, but to show how the rumors circulate and are
real to the people themselves. It is undoubtedly true, that exaggerated
though the reports may be, the waste in life and limb is great, and if
it all fell upon the native born a cry would long since have gone up
which would have stayed the slaughter.

In the matter of compensation for injuries, the foreign-speaking are
often subjected to hardships and injustice. If the widow of a man killed
in a mine or mill of Pennsylvania lives in Europe, she cannot recover
any damages, although the accident may be entirely due to the neglect
of the company. Because of this ruling, certain strong companies in the
Pittsburgh district seldom pay a cent to the relatives of the deceased
if they dwell beyond the seas. I asked a leader among the Italians,
"Why do you settle the serious cases for a few hundred dollars?" He
replied: "We find it best after much bitter experience. The courts are
against us; a jury will not mulct a corporation to send money to Europe;
the relatives are not here to bewail their loss in court; the average
American cares nothing for the foreigner. Every step of the way we
meet with prejudices and find positive contempt, from those in highest
authority in the courts down to the tip-staff. When I settle for $200, I
can do nothing better."

The influence of the industries reaches still further into the lives of
the immigrants. Each people has a tendency to colonize in one section
of the city and work in some one mill. The Bohemians are strong in
Allegheny City, but few of them are found in Pittsburgh. The Slovaks
predominate in McKees Rocks and Allegheny City, and many of them are
found in the Soho district of Pittsburgh. The Poles are numerous in
many parts of the greater city. The Lithuanians live in large numbers
on the South Side, and near the National Tube Works and the American
Steel and Wire Company. Many Ruthenians work in the Oliver Steel Works,
while the Croatians and Servians have worked for the most part in the
Jones and Laughlin plants. My information is that foremen try to get
one nationality in assigning work to a group of laborers, for they know
that a homogeneous group will give best results. National pride also
enters into selection. In talking to a Lithuanian of the serious loss
of life which occurred when a furnace blew up, I asked, "Were any of
your people killed in that accident?" He answered quickly, "No; catch
our people do such work as that! There you find the Slovak." Of the
grades of unskilled labor, the Slovak, Croatian, Servian and Russian
(Greek Orthodox) may be said to perform the roughest and most risky, and
the most injurious to health. There is, then, a more or less natural
selection of peoples in the neighborhoods of the different great mills.

The geographical contour of the region has also had its influence in
keeping the foreign population within certain limited districts. The two
rivers, the Allegheny and the Monongahela, have cut their beds in the
Allegheny range, leaving a narrow strip of land on either side of their
banks which offers limited sites for dwellings, mills and factories.
The lowlands were preempted long ago, and the contest for parts of them
between the mills and the homes has been intense. There is an advantage
to the employer, however, in having his crude labor force within easy
call, and night work and the cost of carfare help keep the mass of men
employed in common labor near the mills and on the congested lowlands.
The deplorable conditions I found among them I shall describe, but let
me say here that all the houses on the flats are not the same. I visited
homes of Slavs and Lithuanians which were clean, well furnished, and
equal in comfort to those of Americans of the same economic level. These
foreigners have been in the country many years and their children have
risen to the American standard. But our first concern is with the recent
comers, who too often live in lodgings that are filthy; whose peasant
habits seem to us uncouth; and whose practices are fatal to decency and
morality in a thickly settled district.

Yet the foreigner pays a higher rent than does the "white man." In
Bass street, Allegheny City, I found English-speaking tenants paying
fifteen dollars a month for four rooms, where Slavs were charged twenty
dollars. Landlords who received ten dollars and twelve dollars a month
for houses rented to the English-speaking, were getting seventeen and
eighteen dollars from the Slavs. On Penn avenue a Slav paid seventeen
dollars for three rooms, while a family renting eight rooms in the
front of the building paid but thirty-three dollars a month. As nearly
as I could estimate, the average monthly rent paid by the foreigner
in Pittsburgh is more than four dollars a room. I found one family
paying nine dollars and a half for one large room in an old residence
on the South Side; another paid ten dollars for two rooms, another
sixteen dollars for three; and on Brandt street I found a man who paid
twenty-two dollars a month for four. The rent is not always fixed by
the landlord. Where lodgers are taken, it is sometimes regulated by
the number the "boarding-boss" can crowd in, the landlord getting one
dollar a month extra for each boarder. Houses of from eight to twelve
rooms have in them to-day anywhere from three to six families. They were
built for one family, and until the owners are forced by the Bureau
of Health to install sanitary appliances, have equipment for but one.
Too many landlords when they rent to foreigners have apparently one
dominating passion,--rent. They make no repairs, and with the crowded
condition above described the houses soon bear marks of ill usage.
Whenever foreigners invade a neighborhood occupied by English-speaking
tenants, property depreciates. The former occupants get out, the
invaders multiply, and very often the properties pass into the hands of
speculators. Houses once occupied by Slavs can seldom be rented again to
Anglo-Saxons. Foreigners under stress for room use cellars as bed rooms,
and it is against these that the health bureau within the last year has
taken action. I saw one of these beside which a common stable would have
been a parlor.

[Illustration: NIGHT SCENE IN A SLAVIC LODGING HOUSE.

Three men in the far bed, two in the others, twelve in the room. In some
of these lodgings day workers sleep nights in beds occupied by night
workers in the daytime.]

But it is in the immigrant lodging houses that conditions are worst.
These conditions are not always the choice of the men. The Croatians,
Servians, Roumanians and Greeks have only from five to ten per cent of
women among them; hence the men of these nationalities have but few
boarding houses conducted by their own people to go to, and crowding is
inevitable. English-speaking and German families will not open their
doors to them. Single men in groups of from six to twenty go into one
house in charge of a boarding-boss and his wife. Each man pays from
seventy-five cents to a dollar a week for room to sleep in and the
little cooking and washing that are to be done. Food for the company is
bought on one book, and every two weeks the sum total is divided equally
among the boarders, each man paying his _pro rata_ share. The bill for
two weeks will hardly amount to three dollars a man, so that the average
boarder will spend ten dollars a month on room rent and maintenance. The
mania for saving results in many cases in skimping the necessaries of
life. A priest told me of a Lithuanian who lived on ten cents a day, and
by helping the landlady in her house work, the man saved room rent. I
found Russians (Greek Orthodox) on Tustine street who were paying three
dollars a month for room rent. They buy bread made by Russian Jews, get
a herring and a pot of beer, and live,--not always,--in peace. When they
pay three dollars and fifty cents for room rent, soup is included in the
contract. Domestic tragedies sometimes invade these communal households,
such as a case of assault and battery which came up in an alderman's
office. The complainant was a single man who appeared with a ghastly
scalp wound. When this boarding-boss presented his bill at the end of
two weeks, the charges were five dollars more than the man thought
they ought to be. He protested and the boarding-boss took a hatchet
to silence him. The Italians are close livers; but possibly the worst
conditions I saw were among the Armenians in the neighborhood of Basin
alley.

In these boarding establishments as a general rule, the kitchen is
commonly used as a bedroom. When the boarding boss rents two rooms, he
and his wife sleep in the kitchen, and the boarders take the other room.
It is not unusual for a boarding-boss to rent but one room. He and his
wife put their bed in one corner; the stove in another; and the boarders
take the remainder. Sometimes the rooms are so crowded that the boss
and his wife sleep on the floor; and I repeatedly found cases where
beds were being worked double shift,--night and day. The city Bureau of
Health has endeavored to reduce the number of beds in a room, but it
does not follow that the people occupying that room get out,--they sleep
on the floor minus the bed. Here as elsewhere the problem is one of the
hardest for sanitary inspectors to cope with.

[Illustration: SLAVIC LODGING HOUSE ON THE SOUTH SIDE.

Four beds; two in a bed. The young fellow at the table was writing home.
Before him were pictures of his mother and sisters in immaculate peasant
costumes.]

Sometimes four or six men rent a house and run it themselves, doing
their own cooking and washing and occasionally bringing in a woman to
do a little cleaning. They may stand this for about six months and then
get out when the room is past the cleaning stage. Such crowding is very
prevalent in the low lying parts of the South Side, in the neighborhood
of Penn avenue in the city proper, and in sections of Allegheny. Among
the Russians of Tustine street I found thirty-three persons living in
one house in six rooms and an attic. These were distributed among three
families. The Croatians also are bad crowders. A milk dealer told me of
twenty-eight who lived in a house in Carey alley. When I asked, "How
do they live?" his reply was, "I don't know and don't care if I get
my money for my milk." In Pork House row and near Eckert street in
Allegheny, things were no better, and some blocks of houses under the
California avenue bridge were as bad as any thing I saw.

Before we condemn immigrants for the filth of their lodgings, we must
remember that they are largely rural peoples unused to such city
barracks. This fact is illustrated especially in their ignorance
regarding that terror which has waited upon foreigners in the Pittsburgh
district,--typhoid fever. Dr. Leon Sadowski estimated that as high as
fifty per cent of all young foreigners who come to Pittsburgh contract
typhoid fever within two years of their coming. Dr. Maracovick told me
that in four years no less than 100 Croatians in the neighborhood of
Smallman street had come down with the fever, and that most of them
died. "You cannot make the foreigner believe that Pittsburgh water
is unwholesome," said Dr. Welsh of Bellevue. "He comes from rural
communities where contamination of water is unknown." Physicians told
me of men who had been warned, deliberately going to the Allegheny to
quench their thirst.

Where so many single men are huddled together the laws of decency
and morality are hard to observe. The boarding boss seldom has a
family and, in going the round of these houses, the absence of
children is conspicuous. A physician among them told me, "The average
boarding-boss's wife cannot get any,--the moral condition makes it a
physical impossibility." This stands in striking contrast with the
average Slavic woman who in her natural environment, is the mother
of children. These mid-European peoples are not so passionate as the
Italians, but many of the single men, as the case is in all barracks
life, fall into vice. A physician told me that gonorrhea is very
prevalent among the Croatians and Servians. Another physician said of
the Slavs in general, "They frequent cheap houses and come out diseased
and robbed." Many bawdy houses are known in Pittsburgh as "Johnny
Houses," for the reason that they are frequented by foreigners whose
proper names are unpronounceable and who go by the name of "John." The
number entering these on a "wide-awake" (pay) Saturday night is large.
A man who knows this section fairly well, said, "Sometimes these men
have to wait their turn." These are houses of the cheapest kind given
over to prostitutes in the last stage.

The presence of young immigrant women in the immigrant lodging houses
adds to the seriousness of the situation. Here again it is a question
of wages that brings them to this country. They do the drudgery in
the hotels and restaurants which English-speaking girls will not do;
and they are to be found in factories working under conditions their
English-speaking sisters would resent. If any persons need protection,
these young women do. There is no adequate inspection of the labor
employment agencies in Pittsburgh which solicit patronage among them,
often to wrong them. Not only do some of these agencies take their money
but they send girls to places unfit for them. An innocent girl may learn
the character of the house only when it is too late. And even in the
boarding houses their lot is a hard one, especially when the men of the
place are on a carouse.

The Slavs and Lithuanians are fond of drink and spend their money
freely on it. Some spend more money on beer than they do on food. The
evidences of drink in the homes are apparent on all sides; and not only
do national customs and national tastes and usages make for drunkenness,
but the undeniable fact that the liquor interests are the only American
institutions which effectively reach the great mass of the non-English
speaking immigrants. Where else does the stranger find opportunity for
recreation at his very hand? Empty beer kegs and bottles are to be
seen everywhere among the houses of the immigrant lodgers. In Latimore
alley, on a September morning, I counted twenty empty kegs in the yard;
and in another corner there was a pile of empty bottles. It is nothing
unusual for a beer wagon on Saturday to deliver into one of these
boarding houses from eight to twelve cases of beer. When a keg is open
the boarders feel that they must drain it. "It won't keep," they say.
Sunday is the day for drinking. One man often drinks from fifteen to
twenty bottles; while he who drinks from the keg does away with from
two to three gallons. No social gathering is complete without drink.
Marriages, baptisms, social occasions, holidays are all celebrated with
beer and liquor. There is no good time and no friendship without it. The
Slavs usually rent a hall to celebrate their weddings. The scenes of
debauchery with which such festivities sometimes end are discountenanced
by the respectable element among these people. Pool rooms afford loafing
places for the young men of the worst sort. The cheap vaudeville shows,
nickelodeons, and skating rinks are run for profit and not for the sake
of clean recreation such as the community should in some way provide.
But such places cannot be eliminated unless the craving of young people
for amusement is met intelligently and sanely.

[Illustration: SLOVAK GIRL.]

Where the environment of the home is unsanitary and repulsive, and
where opportunities for recreation are limited and sordid, crime is
bound to flourish. Approximately one-fifth of the persons incarcerated
in Allegheny county in recent years have been immigrants from
southeastern Europe. A visit to the police stations of the South Side
on Sunday morning when the police magistrate dispenses justice after a
"wide-awake" Saturday night, is a thing never to be forgotten. In such
a section the foreigners form a majority of the offenders. On one of my
visits to a South Side court, a young Pole was brought up who said he
wanted to be arrested just to find out how it felt. The judge asked him,
"How do you like it?" "All right," he said laughing. He got a full taste
by being sent to jail for ten days. Another young Slav had violated a
city ordinance. He could not speak English. The judge asked him how long
he had been in the country. "Four years," he replied. "And you cannot
talk English?" said the judge. "Don't you know that you ought to learn
English that you may know we have laws and ordinances which must be
obeyed?" In the judge's remark there was more of a commentary on civic
duties unfulfilled than he perhaps realized. But who was to blame? Was
it the Slav boy? Or was it the community which had failed to meet him
halfway?

Here it is well to point out that the public school authorities have not
made any strenuous effort to open evening schools for foreign adults in
the city. The notable exception to this rule has been the work carried
on by Principal Anthony among the Jewish people of the hill district,
which grew out of classes carried on at Columbian Settlement. Another
evening school, in the establishment of which a priest was the prime
mover, met with fair success, but the foreigners dropped out very
quickly. When asked why the school was given up, one of the school
officials said that the pupils did not want it to continue; but their
hours of work and changing shifts are probably still more important
factors. Kingsley House, Woods Run and Columbian Settlement have carried
on successful classes for foreigners, and the Y. M. C. A.'s of the
districts are entering the field of civic and language instruction. The
development of the evening courses of the Carnegie Technical Schools
has been significant, but as yet they do not reach many unskilled
immigrants, who need a nearby elementary help. The camp schools carried
on by the Society for the Protection of Italian Immigrants, at Aspinwall
and Ambridge, have illustrated what could be done, and the response
which comes from the immigrants themselves. More important, they were
the means of securing the passage of legislation enabling local school
authorities to open classes for adults. But in Greater Pittsburgh,
it remains true that the school authorities are not yet awake to the
importance of opening schools for foreign-speaking people and inducing
them to attend. There could be no greater service rendered these young
foreigners (or the city that harbors them) than that of aiding them to
form clubs, and of engaging competent men to teach them English and give
them some idea of the history and laws of the country.

In police station No. 3 on Penn avenue, the cases averaged four hundred
and forty-five a month during the ten months I studied them. Drunkenness
and disorderly conduct formed sixty-eight per cent of these cases, and
the foreigners from southeastern Europe were charged with twenty-seven
per cent of them. Three-quarters of the criminals were single men, and
the large number of single men among the foreigners who lack decent
homes, doubtless partly accounts for the frequency of their arrests.
Similar proportions governed at police station No. 7 on Carson street.

A study of the docket of the Aldermen's Court on the South Side, in
a prescribed area where Slavs and Lithuanians form an essential part
of the population, showed a total of 167, or 39.5 per cent for these
nationalities; but these cases varied greatly from those in the police
stations. 48.3 per cent were cases of assault and battery and 45.6 per
cent of the culprits were foreigners. The cases of fornication and
bastardy, adultery and rape, numbered seventeen, more than half of
which were to be laid at the door of the foreigners. Cases of larceny,
disturbance of the peace, and disorderly conduct were about equally
divided between the English-speaking and the non-English-speaking
of southeastern Europe. Out of thirty-one cases of desertion and
non-support, not a Slav, Lithuanian or Italian was implicated.

[Illustration: SERVIAN GIRL.]

A closer study of this list indicated that aldermen were giving
preference to cases where the returns were sure. Pittsburgh suffers
under a system of petty aldermen's courts such as Chicago only recently
put an end to, and from which Philadelphia is exempted by constitutional
provision. The aldermen are dependent upon their fees and the
immigrants, ofttimes innocent, are the special prey of such as may be
unscrupulous.

Profits are not what they used to be for those who prey upon ignorance,
as I gathered from the constable who told me, "The foreigner knows too
much now; old times are past." In the good old times he had made from
fifteen to twenty dollars a day. But even if the most flagrant abuses
are now infrequent and if some of the aldermen are of unquestionable
character, the system is wrong and the foreigner is its most grievous
sufferer.

[Illustration: LITHUANIAN GIRL.]

But we must not over-estimate the lawlessness among these people. We
have seen the manner of life of the single men, and the dangers that
beset them. In the Pittsburgh situation what encouragement is there to
the immigrant who seriously wants to get ahead in life? I have it from
a priest that one-tenth of the young men of his race who come to this
district go to the bad; the other nine-tenths may drink more or less,
but they manage to save money and in time acquire property. Of the
Lithuanian families of Pittsburgh more than ten per cent own their own
homes. Many Poles and Slovaks also have purchased their own homes. When
an Italian resolves to stay in this country, he buys a house. But as yet
few Croatians, Ruthenians and Servians own real estate in Pittsburgh.
While the wages of the day laborers in the district are high for the
single man who lives on the boarding boss system, the foreigner who
brings his family here and pays American prices for the necessities of
life, faces a different situation. The father of a family cannot hope
to get accommodations for less than twelve or fifteen dollars a month,
and then he has only two or three rooms. The Slav, as we have seen, has
to pay more than the English-speaking man for the same house. The man
who earns thirty-seven dollars a month and has to pay twelve dollars in
rent has not a large fund on which to raise a family. He belongs to one
or two lodges which means an outlay of a dollar to a dollar and a half
each month. He must pay fifty cents a month to his church, and he is
compelled to send his children to the parochial school at, say, another
fifty cents a head, or three for a dollar. He must buy the school books
needed by the child; this may amount yearly to from three to four
dollars. Is it surprising, then, that the children are sent to work at
an early age and that many are raised in cramped and dirty quarters?
But this question of the children, of their health and education, we
must leave to later issues. When the mills are working regularly and the
father is able to work each day, the family manages to get along. But
when sickness comes or work ceases, then the pinch of hunger is felt.
Mrs. Lippincott of the Society for the Improvement of the Poor tells me
that in good times but few Slavs or Lithuanians apply for aid; that only
when the father is killed or injured, is aid needed, and that then it is
for medicine and proper food for the patient.[4]

[4] A study of the records of the charity department of Pittsburgh and
Allegheny indicated that the percentage of foreign born dependents
exceeds by perhaps ten per cent the percentage of foreign born in the
population. I refer to the city home, the city hospital, the poor
houses, the tuberculosis camp and outdoor relief. In the institutions
for the insane as many as forty-nine per cent were foreign born and of
the $311,470 appropriated for their maintenance on a given year, half
was thus bestowed upon the foreign born.

It must be remembered that influential men among the Slavs and
Lithuanians are prosperous and live in residential sections of
Pittsburgh. Some Poles and Italians are in the professions and some
Lithuanians are well to do business men. All these people, however,
do business among their own countrymen, and as yet their influence
is largely restricted to this circle. Sections of the city where
foreigners live are well supplied with banking facilities, which are
generally conducted by men of those nationalities. The leading banks of
Pittsburgh have learned that the immigrants save their money, and many
of them have a foreign exchange department at the head of which is put a
foreign-speaking man who is a leader among his countrymen.

In this connection, it is interesting to examine more closely what might
be called the personal ledger of the Slavic day laborer in Pittsburgh.

[Illustration: A SLAVIC HOUSEHOLD.]

We have seen that more than half the Italians, Croatians, Servians and
Ruthenians are single men, and that a large proportion of the other
races are similarly placed. Many are married but their wives are across
the seas. Their policy is to make all they can and spend as little as
possible. We have also seen that the wages of common labor are from
$1.35 to $1.65 a day and that those who have acquired a little skill
earn from $1.75 to $2.25. The monthly expenditure of single men bent
on saving will not exceed ten dollars a month. Some Russians complain
when their monthly bill amounts to eight dollars. The drinking bill will
not exceed five dollars a month; and the sum spent on clothing will
hardly equal that. Hence a common laborer can save from ten to fifteen
dollars a month; the semi-skilled workers from twenty to twenty-five
dollars; and boarding bosses accumulate what is to them a competence.
A banker doing business among the Servians of the South Side stated
that each pay day he sent back between $20,000 and $25,000 to the old
country on deposit. In September of 1907, one of the banks on the South
Side where the foreigners do business had $600,000 on deposit. Such a
showing has come only after a vigorous campaign on the part of the banks
of Pittsburgh to overcome the mistrust which foreigners feel toward
private institutions. Individual small banks conducted by men of their
own nationality were the rule for many years. The institutions were
ephemeral and the impression prevailed among the laborers that they were
schemes of sinister men to wheedle their money from them. Some men still
secrete their savings, trusting no one.

Through the kindness of one of the Pittsburgh bankers, this table of
twelve representative Slavic depositors is given:

                       _Single Men._                  _Married Men._
  =============================================+=========================
  1906-1907.  1    2    3    4    5    6    7  |   1    2    3    4    5
  ---------------------------------------------+-------------------------
  Sept.-Nov. $95 $103  $45  $35 $110 $100  $60 | $240  $70      $100 $105
  Dec.-Feb.  115   63   25  135   60  100   60 |  150  190             50
  March-May   20   93   25   95   60  100   60 |   50  145  100  200   90
  June-Aug.  207   76  105   73   50        55 |  115  120  200  140   40
            ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- | ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
    Totals  $437 $335 $200 $338 $280 $300 $265 | $555 $525 $300 $440 $285
  =============================================+=========================

[Illustration: UNIFORMED NATIONAL SOCIETIES IN SESQUI-CENTENNIAL
PARADE.]

[Illustration: _Drawn by Joseph Stella._

IN THE CHURCH OF THE DOUBLE CROSS.]

[Illustration: A CHURCH OF THE DOUBLE CROSS.]

The fraternal organizations also among the Slavs, Lithuanians and
Italians provoke an increasing amount of thrift and provide various
forms of insurance. They are the dominant form of social organization
and afford opportunities for leadership to the stronger men. The
National Slovak Society, for instance, has a membership of 50,000, and
the Polish National Alliance one of 75,000. Pittsburgh has some thirty
locals of the latter alone, each with a list of from forty to 300
members. The lodge organizations of these people cannot be discussed in
detail in such a paper as this; here it is sufficient to note that in
case of sickness and death they look after their members; they provide
social centers for the more thrifty of the people, and tend generally to
raise the standard of life.

Outside these lodges, the Slavs, Lithuanians and Italians have their
organizations for enjoyment and amusement. Among the Poles there
are societies for self-culture, such as dramatic clubs and singing
societies.

There is reason to believe that the home governments of these people
foster the formation of organizations along racial lines; the church
also fosters these national societies. In so far as such organizations
perpetuate national customs and habits in America, they tend to make
assimilation difficult. A strong people swayed by racial consciousness
on foreign soil will either thrust its own concepts and ideals into
the social elements around it and modify them; or it will build around
itself a wall which the customs and habits of the country will find
difficulty in penetrating. This is seen going on in Pittsburgh. The
Poles and Italians form a city within a city; their customs and habits
are distinctly Polish and Italian.

When we come to political life, we must accord leadership to other than
the Slavic groups,--to the Italians. A political leader among them in
Pittsburgh claims that four fifths of all Italians who have been in
the country five years are naturalized. He held that the Italians of
Pittsburgh poll about 5,000 votes which are scattered over eleven
wards. Next to the Italians come the Poles. Many of them have been
voters for years, but of the influx that has come to Pittsburgh in the
last ten years not twenty per cent are naturalized. The Polish vote is
set at 4,000 and the Poles have two or three political clubs. Political
clubs are also found among the Lithuanians and Croatians. Too frequently
these racial leaders,--often saloon keepers,--are the satellites of
some English-speaking politician, and through them he controls "the
foreign vote." Some of the more intelligent of the foreign-speaking are
dissatisfied with this manipulation of their people; among these are
rising young men with political aspirations. It will not be long before
the city will feel their presence. If the Polish and Italian votes were
to be crystallized in some fifteen wards, the leaders there would have
the balance of power and control them.

Slavs, Lithuanians and Italians have a strong religious element in their
make-up which plays a never-ending part in such racial communities as
are to be found in the Pittsburgh district. Unless this element is
reckoned with they are not to be understood. The vast majority belong to
the Roman Catholic Church. Some Protestants are found among each of the
races, but they form only a small percentage.[5] Certain of the Southern
Slavs are subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople and the Russians
maintain a Greek Orthodox church. Religious ceremonies and observances
have strong hold upon the Poles and Lithuanians, the Croatians and
Servians.[6] We have seen that the number of males far exceeds that of
females among the immigrants from southeastern Europe. This the church
attendance corroborates. I have seen in Pittsburgh a congregation of one
thousand men, all in the prime of life, so intent upon the religious
exercises that the least movement of the priest at the altar found
immediate response in every member of the audience. The ritual of the
church has a deep hold upon Slav and Lithuanian; often the men go to
confession at six in the morning that they may go to communion the day
following. When men are so employed that they cannot attend mass on
Sundays, they will attend one on Saturdays. The home must be consecrated
once a year, and hundreds take their baskets laden with provisions to
church on Easter morning that the priest may bless the feast they hope
to enjoy that day.

[5] The Protestant denominations in the city are conducting mission work
among the Slavs and Italians. Several missionaries, colporteurs and
Bible readers are employed. There are among the Slovaks, Lithuanians,
Magyars and Italians, adherents of various Protestant churches.

[6] The Roman Catholic Church has not the influence over the Bohemians
and Italians that it has over the above mentioned people. The Bohemians
are many of them free thinkers. The Italians are deeply religious but
for the most part lukewarm in their attitude toward the church, and
their edifices do not compare with those of the Poles.

[Illustration: GREEK ORTHODOX CHURCH.]

[Illustration: A GREEK ORTHODOX PRIEST.]

If we measure the efficiency of the Roman Catholic Church among the
Slavs and Lithuanians in Pittsburgh by money spent on buildings and
maintenance, it cannot be equalled either by American Catholicism or
Protestantism. The people give freely of their hard earnings to erect
costly church edifices and support the priesthood. The Slavs and
Lithuanians have been on the South Side of Pittsburgh only for the
last twenty years, but to-day they possess church property valued at
three-quarters of a million dollars, and most of it is paid for. They
also give toward the erection of parochial schools and maintain them.

The priests have great power over the lives of their people. Some of
them are charged with accumulating riches, but taken as a whole, I view
them as a body of men loyal to their vows and honoring the profession
wherein they serve. With the great numbers constantly coming from
Europe, it is surprising how carefully they keep in touch with the
newcomers. Slav and Lithuanian priests whose parishes are constantly
changing take a census each year. They know the affairs of their people.
They know their housing conditions, their hardships in mine and mill;
are familiar with the wrongs they suffer. In trouble the priests are
their counselors; they sympathize with them in their struggles; they
institute and manage insurance societies against sickness and accident.
Some of the priests found and control building and loan associations.
They at all times stimulate their people to rise to the level of other
people around them. The priests are busy men. A parish of two thousand
or three thousand means endless activities. With the influx of Slavs and
Lithuanians into the country, and the necessity of organizing parishes
where many of them settle, the difficulty has been to secure properly
qualified priests to take charge of the work. Hence, many of the Slav
and Lithuanian clergy are overworked and no assistance can be furnished
them. Their influence lies first with the adults who come from the
fatherland. The children are not as amenable to the discipline of the
church; neither do they give their earnings as freely to its support.
The growing problem of the church is to meet the religious needs of
people of Slavic blood raised in a new country.

       *       *       *       *       *

This sketch,--brief though it is,--of the foreign-speaking peoples of
Pittsburgh shows clearly how dependent the industries are upon a supply
of able bodied men from Europe. The enterprising from agricultural
communities freely bring their strength to the expansion of American
industries, and never was there an army more docile and willing than
these newcomers. They believe in mutual protection and organize and
conduct various societies for this purpose. They find their pleasure in
many crude ways. They are loyal to their church, and the many churches
owned by them represent offerings made by men who literally earn their
bread by the sweat of their brow. Many of them save money and the number
of those who own their homes is annually increasing.

There are imperative needs of this element of the city's population
which must be met if the cause of civilization is to be served. The
fatal and non-fatal injuries of the mills fall heavily upon these
peoples. Each week a tale of wrong and suffering, agony and death, is
sent across the water, which seriously reflects upon the industrial life
of America. The value placed on human life here will not bear comparison
with that of older countries whose civilization we say is lower than
ours. The great need of the hour is a current and detailed record of the
serious accidents of the district, that the public may know exactly at
what cost of life and limb industry is carried on, and may exhaust every
means for lessening the sacrifice.

[Illustration: A SLAVIC LABORER.]

We saw that the housing conditions of many of these peoples are a
disgrace to civilization. The insufficiency of houses, the greed of
landlords, the exigencies of some foreigners and the penury of others,
bring about this condition. There should be stricter regulation of
immigrant boarding houses. Men who coin money in shacks and those
foreign born who are too greedy to pay for decent quarters, should feel
the firm hand of the law. Crowding, dirt and filth are not American and
should not be tolerated in any American city.

But negative work is not enough; positive and aggressive work must
be done if the foreign-speaking are to rise to the measure of their
opportunity. Every nationality has its aesthetic side, and Pittsburgh
has done nothing to bring this to the fore. Other cities have fostered
the national dance, have encouraged works of art, and have induced
the foreigner to show the artistic side of his nature. Cannot this
be done in Pittsburgh? Give these people a chance to bring out their
needle-work, to show their artistic skill, to sing their national songs,
and to dance their native dances, and the life of the city will be
richer and stronger.

Then why should the people who gave Lafayette a welcome that has become
historical, and who championed the cause of Kossuth, not go forth
in sympathy to these people of Slav and Iberic extraction? They are
left in ignorance of our language, our laws, our government, and our
history. This rich inheritance we cherish, and we believe it is more
excellent than any of which the older countries of Europe can boast. If
this be so, is it not our privilege and duty to train these peoples of
southeastern Europe in the principles of democracy? Thousands of these
peoples yearn for a knowledge of our language and an insight into that
form of government that has made America great among the nations of the
earth, and we should be willing to go half way and meet the need.

The public school can take up this work with greater zeal; the social
agencies of all sorts can stretch the cords of their tents and take in
the men who are anxious to learn.

[Illustration: _Drawn by Joseph Stella._

PITTSBURGH TYPES.

IN THE LIGHT OF A FIVE-TON INGOT.]




SOME PITTSBURGH STEEL WORKERS[7]

JOHN ANDREWS FITCH

FELLOW, UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN


It is estimated that between 70,000 and 80,000 men are employed
in the manufacture of steel in Allegheny county. Their homes are
clustered about the mills along the rivers, they are clinging to
the bluffs of the South Side, and they are scattered over Greater
Pittsburgh, from Woods Run to the East End. Up the Monongahela valley
are the mill-towns,--Homestead of Pinkerton fame, Braddock with its
record-breaking mills and furnaces, Duquesne where the unit of weight
is a hundred tons, and McKeesport, home of the "biggest tube works on
earth." Here are countrymen of Kossuth and Kosciusko, still seeking
the blessings of liberty, but through a different channel,--high wages
and steady employment. Here are English, German and Scandinavian
workmen, full of faith in the new world democracy; and here are
Americans,--great-grandsons of Washington's troopers, and sons of men
who fought at Gettysburg.

[7] This is a description of leading types of steel workers. A
discussion of the labor problem in the steel industry is reserved for a
later number.

Fully sixty-five per cent of these men are unskilled, but the remaining
thirty-five per cent, the skilled and semi-skilled, are the men who
give character to the industry. This is the class from which foremen
and superintendents and even the steel presidents have been recruited,
and it is the class that furnishes the brains of the working force. It
is of them that I write. To know these men you must see them at work;
you must stand beside the open-hearth helper as he taps fifty tons of
molten steel from his furnace, you must feel the heat of the Bessemer
converters as you watch the vessel-men and the steel pourer, and above
the crash and roar of the blooming mills you must talk with rollers
and hookers, while five-and ten-ton steel ingots plunge madly back and
forth between the rolls. You must see the men working in hoop mills and
guide mills, where the heat is intense and the work laborious; you must
see them amid ladles of molten steel, among piles of red hot bars, or
bending over the straightening presses at the rail mills.

But to know them best you should see them at home. There the muscular
feats of the heater's helper and the rough orders of the furnace boss
are alike forgotten, and you find a kindly, open-hearted, human sort of
men. You grow into an understanding of them as they tell of hopes and
plans or mistakes and failures, and understanding becomes sympathy as it
comes home to you how close some half-spoken disappointment presses in
upon them. It was in this way that for nine or ten months I lived among
the steel workers, and came to number some of them as friends.

The skilled workers are generally of Anglo-Saxon, German or Keltic
origin, the largest proportion being American born. They are not
educated, so far as school and university training are concerned, but
they are post graduates in the school of experience.

The visitor in a steel mill sees only faces reddened by the glare of
fire and hot steel, muscles standing out in knots and bands on bare
arms, clothing frayed with usage and begrimed by machinery. The men do
not differ materially from other workmen, and the visitor passes on
and forgets them. The world is full of men in greasy overalls. But a
workman is not merely a workman, any more than a business man is merely
a business man. He is also a man, whether he works in a mill or sits at
a desk. So I shall introduce some of these men and let them talk to you,
as they talked to me. Bear in mind that the things they talk about could
be taken up from another point of view. In the following interviews I am
making no interpretation of the workers from the employer's standpoint.
These are the issues of life as seen by the men themselves.

[Illustration: _Courtesy Carnegie Steel Co._

POURING MOLTEN IRON, JUST TAPPED FROM BLAST FURNACE, INTO BESSEMER
CONVERTER.]

Jack Griswold is a Scotch-Irish furnace boss who came to America and
got a laborer's position at a Pittsburgh blast furnace, when the common
labor force was largely Irish. Those were the days before the advent
of the "furriners." I sat in Griswold's sitting room in his four-room
cottage one evening and he told me about the men who work at the
furnaces, and about the "long turn."

"Mighty few men have stood what I have, I can tell you. I've been twenty
years at the furnaces and been workin' a twelve-hour day all that time,
seven days in the week. We go to work at seven in the mornin' and we
get through at night at six. We work that way for two weeks and then we
work the long turn and change to the night shift. The long turn is when
we go on at seven Sunday mornin' and work through the whole twenty-four
hours up to Monday mornin'. That puts us onto the night turn for the
next two weeks, and the other crew onto the day. The next time they get
the long turn and we get twenty-four hours off, but it don't do us much
good. I get home at about half past seven Sunday mornin' and go to bed
as soon as I've had breakfast. I get up about noon so as to get a bit
o' Sunday to enjoy, but I'm tired and sleepy all the afternoon. Now,
if we had eight hours it would be different. I'd start to work, say,
at six and I'd be done at two and I'd come home, and after dinner me
and the missus could go to the park if we wanted to, or I could take
the childer to the country where there ain't any saloons. That's the
danger,--the childer runnin' on the streets and me with no time to take
them any place else. That's what's driven the Irish out of the industry.
It ain't the Hunkies,--they couldn't do it,--but the Irish don't have to
work this way. There was fifty of them here with me sixteen years ago
and now where are they? I meet 'em sometimes around the city, ridin'
in carriages and all of them wearin' white shirts, and here I am with
these Hunkies. They don't seem like men to me hardly. They can't talk
United States. You tell them something and they just look and say 'Me
no fustay, me no fustay.' That's all you can get out of 'em. And I'm
here with them all the time, twelve hours a day and every day and I'm
all alone,--not a mother's son of 'em that I can talk to. Everybody says
I'm a fool to stay here,--I dunno, mebbe I am. It don't make so much
difference though. I'm gettin' along, but I don't want the kids ever
to work this way. I'm goin' to educate them so they won't have to work
twelve hours."

There is a considerable difference between a blast furnace foreman and a
Bessemer steel pourer. The furnace man gets rather low wages, while the
steel pourer is well paid and works eight hours a day for six days in
the week. It was Jerry Flinn who told me how he had worked up from his
first job as laborer, to a position as steel pourer. I met him just as
he got home from the mill one day, and I asked how he managed to work
only an eight-hour shift when other men had to work twelve. He told
me that attempts have been made to introduce a twelve-hour day in the
converting department but without success. Two Pittsburgh mills have
tried it and both went back to eight hours because the heat is so great
as to make it impossible for the men to work that long.

"It must be hard," said Flinn, "for the twelve-hour men to have to work
alongside of us eight-hour men. During the twelve hours of their day
they work with all three crews of the eight-hour men. One crew gets
through and goes home soon after the twelve-hour men come out, the next
crew works its eight hours and goes home, and the third crew comes out
before those twelve-hour fellows can quit. The eight-hour men get a lot
more pleasure out of life than the twelve-hour men do. We can go to
entertainments and social affairs as we couldn't if we had to get up
next morning and go to work at six o'clock."

Flinn is fifty-two years old, and tells you his strength is not up to
what it was, say fifteen years ago. The men who went to work with him as
young men are nearly all dead, and to-day he is one of the oldest men in
his mill. He speaks lightly of the danger of accidents, and says that
he has encountered only the minor ones. Once when they were changing
stoppers, the crane dropped the old one just as it swung clear of the
edge of the ladle. It fell on him, burning him and breaking his leg.
At another time he failed to lower the stopper in time, and the stream
of molten steel struck the edge of a mold as the train was shifted; it
splashed onto the platform, burning his legs so severely that, for six
weeks afterwards, he was unable to turn over in bed. It is a common
thing for metal to fly that way; the sparks strike his face, they lodge
in his nose or his ears, and once he nearly lost the sight of an eye. He
refers to these things as trifles.

What I said of the half concealed disappointments which are real and
tragic in the life of a steel worker, would have been clear to you had
you heard the story of Robert Smith, as he told it himself. As a boy
he went to work in the coal mines of eastern Pennsylvania and did not
get into the mills until he was about thirty years old. Then he came
to Pittsburgh, took a laborer's position, and began to work up slowly
year after year until he occupied a place of some importance, though
not in the first class of skilled men. After he had been there a few
years, there was a labor difficulty in this mill and he left and went
to another plant where he took a position similar to his last one. As a
new man he could not advance as rapidly as he might have done in the old
mill, and before he could get into the best of standing, he was thrown
out of work by further labor troubles. He secured a position in another
mill where he remained for two years till forced out by a strike to seek
work in a fourth mill. Here he remained for ten years in a subordinate
position. At the end of that time, he was promoted and became for the
first time in his life, the first man in the crew. Then, in some way, he
incurred the dislike of the superintendent, and the man on the opposite
shift worked against him because he wanted Smith's job for a friend.

So, after working for three years in a position for which, as he said,
he had served a ten years' apprenticeship, Smith again lost his place
and was obliged to apply for work in still another mill. He had been
a leader in the union, and it was a feeling almost religious in its
devotion that bound him to it. To get into this new mill he had to agree
to give up his union card. To-day he says that he is a strong union man
at heart, but his connection with it is over. Now, at nearly sixty years
of age, he is working in a semi-skilled position, although fitted to
take his place among the men of the best skill and to handle a crew.

Smith is a man of more than ordinary intelligence. He is a man of
religious inclinations and a church member. He regrets the twelve-hour
day now chiefly on the ground that it keeps the young men away from
church. If he had not become a church-member when he had an eight-hour
day, he doesn't see how he ever could have become interested in
religious matters. He lives in a comfortable home which he owns and
where he spends most of his time when not in the mill. After supper he
sits down to read for a short time before going to bed, but he told
me with considerable regret that he was unable to do any systematic
reading. A few years ago he read several of Shakespeare's plays, but
he had to force himself to do it, he gets sleepy so soon after supper.
Since that time he has not attempted anything more serious than the
daily paper.

Of course, the question of organized labor suggests a number of other
considerations. The old union attitude towards employers is not of
consequence now in Pittsburgh, for most of the steel mills of the
district have been non-union for ten or fifteen years. This fact,
however, makes it all the more worth while to consider the present
attitude of the men as individuals.

Jim Barr is a man thirty-five years old who came from England when he
was a small boy. It has been only during the last ten years or so that
Barr has worked in a steel mill, but he has lived in the steel district
longer than that. He occupies a skilled position in one of the mills
where he works every day but Sundays from seven in the morning until
six in the evening, and on alternate Sundays he has the long turn of
twenty-four hours. This Sunday work, he told me, came in after the union
had been driven out, and the twelve-hour day is more general now than it
was under unionism.

[Illustration: _Drawn by Joseph Stella._

PITTSBURGH TYPES.

OF THE OLD TIME IRISH IMMIGRATION.]

"Tell me, how can a man get any pleasure out of life working that way?"
Barr asked me almost with a challenge. We were sitting before the grate
in his comfortable and tastefully furnished parlor. There were pictures
on the wall, a carpet on the floor, and the piano in the corner spoke
of other things than endless drudgery. He seemed to interpret my swift
glance about the room, for he went on, "I've got as good a home here as
a man could want. It's comfortable and I enjoy my family. But I only
have these things to think about, not to enjoy. I'm at work most of the
day, and I'm so tired at night that I just go to bed as soon as I've
eaten supper. I have ideas of what a home ought to be, all right, but
the way things are now I just eat and sleep here."

Barr works in a position where he encounters considerable heat, and
he says that alone is very exhausting even when a man does not do
hard physical labor. There is great danger, too, in the sweat that
keeps a man's clothing wet all of the time. If he gets into a draught
he is likely to contract a cold or pneumonia. Working under such
conditions shortens a man's life, to Barr's mind, and although he is but
thirty-five years old he tells you he feels a decline in his strength.
The men find that it costs more to live, too, when working in the mills,
for they need the best of food and the warmest clothing in order to
keep going. The little chance for recreation leads them to the saloons
as the natural place for relaxation. They go there much oftener, in his
opinion, than they would if they had more time for social enjoyment;
and of course there is a good deal of money spent there that is needed
for other things. He says that men frequently spend twenty dollars in a
single night after payday. But the thing on which Barr seems to have the
strongest convictions is the plan of the United States Steel Corporation
of issuing stock to employes.

"The men have been fooled by this proposition," he declared, "and they
really believe that the corporation wants to do big things for them in
offering such liberal dividends. But let me tell you something that
maybe you haven't noticed. The first stock issued in 1903 was followed
by a slashing cut in wages in 1904, and it amounted to a lot more than
the extra dividends. It's only a scheme to fool the men. They take away
in wages more than what they give in dividends and they will do that
every time, so that the corporation is always ahead of the game. But
that isn't the only thing; it ties the employes down to the corporation.
They've got to stay in its employ at least five years from the time
of getting the stock in order to enjoy all of the benefits, and even
then they won't get the extra dividends unless they have shown what the
corporation calls a 'proper interest' in its affairs. It's a fine scheme
for keeping out unionism and keeping the men from protesting against bad
conditions."

Now, just by way of contrast, listen to the story of George Hudson, who
occupies a position similar to that of Barr, and has been in mill work
about the same length of time. After having tried another line and found
it unsatisfactory, Hudson came to the mills at about thirty years of
age. He did what American young men dislike very much to do,--he took
a common laborer's position along with the "Hunkies." Being a man of
perseverance and some education, he worked up very rapidly until he now
occupies a skilled position.

"The Steel Corporation is a fine one to work for," said Hudson to me
with enthusiasm. "It gives every man a chance for promotion, and listens
to every workman who has a plan for improvement. All the intelligent men
are satisfied. If you can find any dissatisfied men, you will find that
they are men who would be discontented anywhere you put them. Take the
way they loan money to men who want to build homes. A good many men have
their own cottages now just because the company helped them. The company
has a savings department too, and it pays five per cent on all deposits,
and that is more than the savings banks pay. Then, on the other hand,
it charges only five per cent interest on the money that is loaned, and
that is a lower rate than you can get anywhere else. The company owns
houses which it rents to employes at thirty per cent or more below what
other people charge. I pay twenty-five dollars rent, and I've got a
friend in a company house which is better than mine, and he only pays
eighteen." Hudson is ambitious and he was very proud that his department
during recent months had succeeded in beating all previous records known.

To turn to the second question raised by Smith in our talk before his
fire,--if number of organizations is any criterion the churches in the
mill towns must be strong. I found a considerable number of loyal church
members among the steel workers. Those of them who have to work on
Sunday chafe under the necessity that drives them to such a disregarding
of the Sabbath.

Especially does this bear heavily on the wife who must attend church
alone, while her husband is in the mill or at the furnaces. A Scotch
Presbyterian mother at a home where I called one afternoon just as the
man was preparing to go to the mill for the night, spoke regretfully
of having left Scotland. They might not have been able to live so well
there, but "Oh, man, we could have brought up the children in the fear
o' God and in a land where men reverence the Sabbath." There are men
like Smith, too, who fear the effect of twelve-hour work on the lives of
the boys.

In spite of this religious sentiment that exists among the workers there
is, on the other hand, a good deal of feeling that the churches do not
understand the needs of the workingmen. Frank Robinson, for instance,
believes that the churches are not interested in some problems that are
to him very real.

"There are a good many churches in this borough," he said to me one day,
"and they are supported generally by the women. The preachers don't have
any influence in securing better conditions for the men,--they don't
try to have. They never visit the mills, and they don't know anything
about the conditions the men have to face. They think the men ought to
go to church after working twelve hours Saturday night. The preachers
could accomplish a lot if they would try to use their influence in
the right direction; let them quit temperance reform until they get
better conditions for the men. It's no time to preach to a man when
he's hungry; feed him first, then preach to him. The same thing with a
workingman; get a decent working day with decent conditions, then ask
him to stop drinking. Let the preachers go into the mills and see the
men at work in the heat, and outside the mills let them notice the men
with crushed hands or broken arms or with a leg missing. If they would
stop their preaching long enough to look around a little they could do
something for us, if they wanted to try."

There seems to be some reason for such a feeling. I talked with
ministers in some of the mill towns who knew very little of the problems
of the workingmen or of the conditions under which they work. Some of
them said that they had never been inside the mills, and, of course,
such men cannot be entirely sympathetic. Of a different sort was another
minister whom I met who had been a mill-man himself. He had gone into
mill work as a boy and had worked up through a common laborer's position
to a skilled job before he left the mill to go to college. I have met
few men with more understanding and sympathy for the working-men's
problems.

Unionism is not entirely dead in the mill towns; at least the spirit
of it is to be found among the men, though the form is absent. Some of
them expect to see an organization in the mills again. Others have given
up hope of gaining shorter hours or higher wages through collective
bargaining, and are looking for government interference and a legal
eight-hour day. There is considerable variety of opinion as to how this
is to be brought about. Pittsburgh steel workers are traditionally
republican in politics; Speaker Cannon himself does not fear "tinkering"
with the tariff more than they. The majority of them have been hoping
that their representatives would get time after a while to consider and
pass the labor legislation that the workingmen desire. However, there
has been much loss of faith in the last few years.

A good many men in the mills are socialists at heart, and though they
still vote the republican ticket, they would vote with the socialists
if that party were to manifest strength enough to give it a chance at
carrying an election. A considerable number of others have gone the
whole way and are active working socialists. One of these is Ed. Jones,
a skilled steel worker. He was left an orphan, came to Pittsburgh from
New York as a boy of eighteen years, and worked for a short time as a
laborer in one of the mills. After trying his hand at several unskilled
trades he went back to a small mill in New York, where his wages were
$1.25 a day. He was determined to work up in the industry, and after
a year or so as a laborer he found himself in a semi-skilled position
with wages correspondingly better. A year or two later he returned to
Pittsburgh and became a full fledged skilled man at $5 a day. Since
then, in spite of reverses, he has worked up slowly until now he holds
one of the most important positions in his mill. Jones has never been a
union man. He says he does not believe in unions because they accomplish
things only in prosperous times, and go to pieces in a panic. "It is no
use for them to try to regulate wages, anyhow," he says, "for labor is a
commodity and its price is regulated by supply and demand. The only way
out for the laboring men is to get together in a labor party,"--and this
to him means the socialist party.

"We must go back to the condition when workmen owned their own tools,"
declares Jones. "We must own the instruments of production. Labor is
now the helpless victim of capital, and capital must be overthrown. The
workman is given enough to buy food and clothes for himself, and no more
if the capitalist can help himself. They keep these workmen employed
twelve hours a day at some work, while if every man in the country
would work two hours a day, all the labor that would be necessary to
support the population of the country could be performed. Now all of
this excess, these ten hours over the necessary amount, goes to the
employer in profits, and many people throughout the country are living
in idleness because other people are working overtime for them."
Jones is in comfortable circumstances himself; he owns his house and
he owns some United States Steel stock, but he says he is one out of
thirty-eight men in his whole plant who could have done as well.

One of the near-socialists who hopes for both unionism and for
governmental relief, gave me a statement of his belief one Sunday
afternoon as I sat in a comfortable chair in his little parlor. "I think
there will be a labor organization in the mills again," he said. "It may
not come in our day, but it is bound to come; the men will be driven to
it. There would be a union now but for the foolishness of the men. They
begin to talk as soon as a movement is started, and of course the news
reaches the ears of the bosses before the organization is really on its
feet. Then the men, who are not in a position to resist, are threatened
with discharge. That has happened in this very mill. It may be that
political action will be necessary before a union will be possible.
There are two things that we've got to have: an eight-hour day and
restriction of immigration. I think that we will have to get together
in a labor party. I'm not a socialist, myself, though quite a good many
of the mill men are, and there are a good many things about socialism
that I like, all right. I would vote with them if I thought they were
going to win and there are others who feel the same way. I used to vote
the republican ticket, but I'm tired of it. They haven't done much for
the workingmen when you consider the length of time they've been in
power. I'm disgusted with the whole thing and I haven't voted at all for
several years."

Several of the men had said to me: "Go to see Joe Reed; he can tell you
more about the mills than anyone else." So one day I climbed the hill
to his home, and found him. I had been led to expect a good deal and was
not disappointed, though he was just recovering from an illness and was
unable to talk as much as I had hoped. Reed is just the man that one
would pick as a leader,--six feet tall, broad shouldered, with strong
intellectual features,--and he was in truth a leader of the Amalgamated
Association years ago, before the steel mills became non-union. He took
a prominent part in a strike that was of considerable importance in the
steel district. He is a skilled man and if he had cast his lot with
the company in the dispute, it is quite likely that he would have best
served his own interests. But he stayed by the men and when the strike
was lost, Reed left the steel district. He might have had his former
position again, but he was too proud to ask for it, and lived away from
Pittsburgh until the bitterness engendered by the struggle had begun
to die out. After several years he came back and got a job again in a
Pittsburgh steel mill. It is a non-union mill and of course Reed is a
non-union man.

Reed told me some of his experiences and how during the strike he had
received letters of encouragement from all over the country, from men
prominent in many walks of life. I asked him what he had done with them.
He shook his head. "I burned them," he said, "when I came back to the
mills. I have nothing in my possession now which would suggest in any
way that I ever had connection with the union. When I came back here,
I knew I was coming to a non-union mill and I took a job in good faith
as a non-union man. That is a chapter in the history of my life that is
ended. The whole matter of unionism is a thing of the past and as an
employe in this mill, I have no part in it." This fine sense of honor in
conforming to the new regime is not so unusual among this class as one
might expect.

So these are the steel workers. I have not chosen extreme cases;
on the contrary, it has been my aim to select men who are typical
of a class,--the serious, clear-headed men, rather than the
irresponsibles,--and with one exception, each case is fairly
representative of a large group. The exception is the man whom I called
Hudson. Not over three men out of the hundred and more with whom I
talked at length indicated like sentiments, and he is the only one who
gave them such full expression. It should be understood that these
are the skilled men,--it is only among the skilled that opinion is so
intelligently put forth.

The number of positions requiring skill is not large, relatively
speaking, and competition for them is keen. The consequence is that
the skilled workers are a picked body of men. Through a course of
natural selection the unfit have been eliminated and the survivors
are exceptionally capable and alert of mind, their wits sharpened by
meeting and solving difficulties. Such a disciplinary process has
developed men like John Jarrett, consul at Birmingham during Harrison's
administration; Miles Humphreys, for two terms chief of the Pennsylvania
Bureau of Industrial Statistics, one-time nominee of the Republican
party for mayor of Pittsburgh, and now chief of the fire department of
the Smoky City; M. M. Garland, collector of customs for Pittsburgh,
under both McKinley and Roosevelt; A. R. Hunt, general superintendent
at Homestead; and Taylor Alderdice, vice-president of the National Tube
Company.

In telling about their fellows who are numbered to-day among the rank
and file, I have tried to introduce the leading types,--the twelve-hour
man with the eight-hour man, the embittered man and the contented man,
the man who is at outs with the church, the union man and the socialist.
There are many others who talk and think like Flinn and Smith and
Robinson, and I could furnish examples of much more radical thought and
speech. These are typical cases representing different degrees of skill
and different shades of opinion. It is highly significant that there
are such men as these in the Pittsburgh mills. In a discussion of the
labor problem in the steel industry, it must be borne in mind that these
men are more than workers; they are thinkers, too, and must be reckoned
with.

[Illustration: _Drawn by Joseph Stella._

PITTSBURGH TYPES.

BRITISH BORN.]




THE TEMPER OF THE WORKERS UNDER TRIAL

CRYSTAL EASTMAN

MEMBER STAFF PITTSBURGH SURVEY


To study industrial accidents from the "home" side has been my business
for a year. To acquaint myself daily with households doubly disabled
by sickness and loss of income, to see strong men, just learning to
face life maimed, to visit home after home, where sudden death has
visited,--a dreadful business, you might say. Yet it has left with me
impressions of personality, character, and spirit, which make the year's
work a precious experience.

The first thing brought home to me was that working people do not have
"the luxury of grief." The daily tyranny of hard work in their lives,
leaves little time for pondering the unanswerable "Why?" of sorrow.

For instance, Mrs. Dennison, the widow of a brakeman who was killed on
the Pennsylvania Railroad, spent no quiet days of solitary mourning. She
was left with six children, the oldest eleven. All the money she had was
$500 from the Railroad Relief Association,[8] to which her husband had
belonged, $450 which the men on her husband's division raised, and $30
which his own crew gave. The company gave her $20 toward the funeral.

[8] The company pays the running expenses of this association.

With some of this money she rented and stocked up a little candy and
notion store, using the three rooms in the back to live in. Here she
tended store, and cooked, and sewed, and ironed, for herself and the
six. She would have done her own washing too, she told me, but she
couldn't leave the store long enough to hang her clothes up in the yard.
She made a reasonable success of the enterprise, enough to pay for rent
and food, until the hard times came. After that she steadily lost money.
So now she has put in her application for a chance to clean cars for the
railroad at $1.21 a day. For this privilege she must wait her turn among
the other widows; and when she gets it she must leave her children in
one another's care from six in the morning till six at night. They are
now two, four, six, eight, ten, and twelve, respectively. Mrs. Dennison
will not have time to sit down and grieve over the death of her husband
for many years to come.

One mother, whose thin face haunts me, has been able to endure her
tragedy only through this necessity of work. She had a daughter, just
seventeen, who was employed in the dressmaking department of one of the
big stores in Pittsburgh. This girl, Ella, was eager and gay, with a
heart full of kindness. She was everybody's favorite in the workroom; at
home she meant laughter and good will for them all. To her mother, Ella
was joy and gladness,--life itself. One morning this little dressmaker,
after leaving her wraps on the eleventh floor, found that she was a few
moments late. She ran for the elevator to go to her workroom above. The
elevator was just starting up, with the door half closed. Ella tried to
make it, slipped, and fell down the shaft.

This tragedy demoralized the working force of the store for two days.
In the hunted, suffering eyes of the mother one reads that she cannot
forget, night or day. She feels that Ella's employers were generous
in giving her $500, but it would make no difference "if they gave
her the whole store." In the back of her mind are always two visions
alternating,--the merry girl who sat eating her breakfast at a corner
of the kitchen table that morning, laughing and teasing her mother,
and then, as she ran out to take the car, looked back to smile and say
goodbye,--this is one. The other,--that unthinkable fall down eleven
stories and the crash at the bottom of the shaft. I felt that nothing
but the daily insistence of work,--cooking and washing for her husband
and two grown sons, and caring for the two younger children,--had saved
this mother's reason.

Another striking instance of the pressure of work in poor people's lives
was in the family of Harry Nelson. They lived on the South Side, near
the Jones and Laughlin Steel Works, where the father and two grown sons
and Harry, who was nineteen, were employed. Two younger boys were in
school. One Sunday night, on the way home after his twelve hours' work,
Harry said to his father that he'd "give a lot" not to go back to the
mill that night. (There was another twelve hours' work to come before he
could sleep, for this was Harry's "double shift.") He didn't tell his
mother he was tired, because he knew she would beg him not to go back
to work. Harry was ambitious; he was an electrician's helper, getting
fifteen dollars a week, and he did not want to lose his job. At 7:30 he
was back in the mill, and at 8:00 he was up on an electric crane, making
some repairs. When he was through he started along the narrow run-way
of the crane to a place where he could climb down. The air was full of
steam; some say that he was blinded by this; others, that he must have
been a little dizzy. At any rate, to steady himself, he reached for an
electric wire that was strung along there. He happened to touch a part
that was not insulated, got a slight shock, and fell thirty-five feet to
the floor of the mill.

After Harry was killed, the two older boys left the mill and looked for
work in another city. But the father had no choice; he was too old to
find new work. His fifteen a week was all the more indispensable now
because Harry had given all his money to his mother, and the two older
boys had paid generously for board. In three days the father was back
in his old place at the cold saw, within sight of the place where Harry
fell.

Thus work may be a cruelty as well as a blessing. But in any case it
leaves the workers little time to dwell upon their misfortunes. When
they do speak of them, it is almost always in a "matter-of-course" way.
This is not, I think, because they lack feeling, but because they are so
used to trouble that the thought of it has ceased to rouse them.

That poor people are used to trouble is a commonplace. I mean by
"trouble," the less subtle disappointments of life, those which come
with disease, injury and premature death. Of all these rougher blows
of fortune, the poor family gets more than an even share. This stands
to reason, if experience has not already convinced one of it. To the
ordinary causes of sickness,--unsanitary dwellings, overcrowding, undue
exposure, overwork, lack of necessary vacation, work under poisonous
conditions,--to all these poor people are much more constantly exposed
than others. To injury and death caused by accident they are also more
exposed. Poor people's children play in dangerous places, on the street,
near railroad tracks. The poor man's dwelling is not often fire-proof.
Poor people do most of the hazardous work in the world, and the
accidents connected with work form the majority of all accidents.

Moreover, the poor family is, in a material way, less able to meet these
disasters when they come, than the well-to-do family. This is in some
degree due to ignorance, for ignorance, whether as cause or result,
almost always goes with poverty. In a very large degree, however, it
is due to poverty itself. It is because they have no reserve fund to
fall back on in emergencies. Suppose a young steel worker with a family
gets a long, sharp chip of steel in his eye. He cannot go to the best
specialist, to the man who knows all that anybody knows about saving
eyes. Through ignorance or lack of interest on the part of the doctor
who treats him, he loses his eye. Thus an injury which might mean but a
few weeks of fearful anxiety to a well-to-do man, may result in lasting
misery to a poor man. In the same way, too, what might often be in a
well-to-do family a short struggle with disease, crowned with success,
is more likely to be in a poor family an unrelieved tragedy.

Thus are the poor, by reason of their very poverty, not only more open
to attack from these bodily foes, but also, and again by reason of their
poverty, less equipped to fight and conquer them. "St. George killed the
dragon; St. George wore the finest armor of his day and his sword was
tested steel."

With these workers whom I met,--poor people, not as the charity
visitor knows them, but poor, as the rank and file of wage earners are
poor,--misfortune is almost part of the regular course of things. They
are used to hard knocks, if not yet in their own lives, then in the
lives of their relatives, friends, and neighbors. Consequently, there
is often in their attitude toward trouble a certain matter-of-fact
calmness, which looks like indifference. Thus, I have had a mother tell
me about her sixteen-year-old son's losing two fingers in the mill. She
couldn't remember exactly how or when it happened; she thought he had
lost only a week's work; and she had no comment upon it but that it
might have been worse. An old steel worker whom I questioned about his
injuries answered, "I never got hurt any to speak of." After persistent
inquiry, however, he recalled that he had once fractured his skull, that
a few years later he had lost half of a finger, and that only three
years ago he was laid up for nine weeks with a crushed foot. Troubles
like these are the common lot; they are not treasured up and remembered
against fate.

Often I have found in young women a surprisingly "middle-aged" way
of looking at trouble. I remember, for instance, Mrs. Coleman, whose
husband was a freight conductor. They had been married nine years,
and had made out pretty well up to the last two years, although the
wife, as she somewhat proudly explained, had had three children,
two miscarriages, and an operation, during this time. On Christmas
night, 1903, Coleman had his arm crushed in a railroad accident. He
was disabled for three months, and went back to work with a partially
crippled arm. Three weeks later, as he was numbering cars, an iron bar
rolled off the load and broke his nose. This laid him up again for five
weeks, and left his face permanently disfigured. He has been troubled
ever since with nose-bleeding, so that he has to lay off every little
while, and the doctor says he must have an operation before he can be
cured. Since this second injury, a fourth child has come. When I saw
her, Mrs. Coleman was just recovering from a bad attack of grip, which
had increased their expenses. To help along in this hard luck time they
took two railroad men to lodge and board in their three room flat; one
of these men had been killed on the road the week before I called. Here
are troubles enough, and yet this young woman had no special complaint
against fortune.

"Yes," she said, as she rose to open the door for me, the last baby
dangling over one arm,--"we've had a bad time these last two years, and
now with him only working two or three days a week, I guess it'll be
worse. But then,"--with a smile, "what can you do about it?"

On the same day I talked with a much older woman. She was too worn out
to smile at her troubles, but she had the same "everyday" attitude
toward them. Ten months ago they had been doing well. Her husband was
earning ten dollars a week at odd jobs; two sons, twenty and seventeen,
were getting fifteen dollars a week each as lead buffers in a coffin
works; she and her daughter kept house and did a little sewing; and they
all lived happily together. Then one day her husband was brought home
with a smashed foot and a leg broken in two places, as a result of a bad
fall. He had been on a ladder, painting, when the cornice gave way and
he jumped to save himself. For five months they kept him at the hospital
free of charge, and for four months more he went back on crutches for
treatment. Finally they told him to come back for an operation, but on
the day after the operation they sent him away again with a bill of
three dollars for the time he had been there. His wife had to help him
home, and he was in bed when I called. The doctor had said it would be
better for him to stay at the hospital, but the superintendent decided
that they could not treat him in the ward for nothing any longer. The
wife laughed a little grimly when she told me this.

"Why," she said, "I can't pay a dollar and a half a day to that
hospital. Ever since he got hurt I've been cleaning offices. All I can
make is six dollars a week and I have to pay car fares out of that."

"Well," I said, "how about your sons? They are making good wages."

"Oh, they were," she answered, "but Harry, the oldest one, has been home
for five months. He's got gastritis, and the doctor says it's from lead
poisoning. You know he's a lead buffer on coffins. He don't seem to get
much better."

"And the other boy," I said, "does he go right on doing the same work?"

"Yes, Charlie,--I don't know what we'd do if he lost his job. He's been
on half time now for three months, and that means only $7.50 a week."

To add to the general desolation in this home, the flood had been in and
covered the lower floor, leaving everything smeared with a dry, muddy
paste. In the midst of it all sat this tired woman of fifty, who had
just come home from her five early morning hours of office scrubbing;
and she was less concerned with the bitterness of her struggle with life
than she was with the immediate problem of how to get her maimed old man
up to the hospital every other day for treatment.

This unquestioning acceptance of misfortune does not often amount to
either a commendable cheerfulness or a deplorable apathy. Occasionally,
however, it approaches heroism. I think the most courageous person I met
during the year was Mrs. Herman Baum, a German woman of forty-five or
thereabouts, who, after nine years of disappointment and defeat, still
meets the days as they come with an unbroken spirit. She came to America
as a girl of nineteen and went out to service. At twenty-three she
married. Her "man" turned out ugly; he drank and was always mean to her.
His parents, who thought he had married beneath him, took a dislike to
her and joined him in making her unhappy. They lived along in this way
for fifteen years, during which time she bore him seven children. One
day, in his work as a moulder, he received a slight injury, from which
blood poisoning set in. After this his mind was affected; he became
silent, morose, and uglier than ever, giving his wife hardly a moment,
day or night, when she was not in fear of him. After a year or so
during which he grew steadily worse, he shot himself one night, leaving
her with the seven children, another one coming, and no resources except
a heavily mortgaged house and $800 insurance. She had no relatives; her
father had been run over by a train, soon after coming to America, and
her only brother had been drowned in river work a few years before.

It was in August, 1906, that Mrs. Baum's husband killed himself. In
September a baby was born, only to die before winter. The two older
children got work and brought in ten dollars a week between them, while
Mrs. Baum took in washing and made two or three dollars a week. Thus
things went pretty well until June, 1907, when the second boy, Harry,
the jolly one, who "kept all their spirits up with his jokes," was all
but killed in an elevator accident at the box factory where he worked.
When, after four months at the hospital, he came home with a permanent
lameness, and strict orders never again to do heavy work, he turned
to selling papers, and is now making about $1.40 a week. After half
their small income was cut off by this accident, Mrs. Baum tried to
run a grocery store in the front part of her house, but she lost money
at it and was forced to give it up. When I saw her, she was hanging
somebody's washing up in the yard. She took me into her spotless kitchen
and told me this story, not eagerly, as if pouring out her troubles,
but only after many questions, rather reluctantly, and with sometimes
an apologetic smile. Here, I thought, is a heroine of modern realistic
tragedy; the dramatist would have her lost in bitter retrospect. But she
was not; she sat there smiling a bit ruefully, and wondered whether she
must put aside her sturdy German pride next week, and go to the Poor
Board for help.

Some people, especially the Irish, even get amusement out of the number
and variety of their troubles. This is true of the Learys, whose six
years of married life have been crowded with disasters. To begin with,
Andy, the husband, who is a brakeman, has had nine accidents on the
road in five years, so many that his wife could not distinguish in her
memory the one of a year ago which I had come to inquire about. Twice
he has been near death. Once the priest performed the last offices, but
Andy pulled through after all. Besides all these injuries, none of them
less severe than a broken bone, he accidentally shot himself one day and
nearly died from that. "And look at him now!" said Mrs. Leary. (Andy
is a handsome Irishman, and the picture of health.) In addition to all
this, they have lost two children by diphtheria. Mrs. Leary's outlook
on life seems to be a mingling of humor and superstition. She told me,
with incongruous awesomeness in her Irish brogue, how she had heard
the "death whistle" outside the door three times on the night that her
little boy died. And one night, when Andy had to stay at home to take
care of her, the brakeman sent in his place was killed. She thinks this
is a "sign," and has no doubt of Andy's ultimate fate.

"Oh yis," said she, "the docthers say ye can't kill Andy,--but I know
betther. He'll be a-comin' home dead soon. Ivery time I hear a knock at
the dhoor, I thinks to mesilf, 'There now,--it's thim, comin' to tell
me Andy's kil't.' Andy, he jokes about it. Ony this marnin' afther I'd
been givin' him his breakfast, he starts to go to work out the back
dhoor, an' I says, 'Andy, why don't you niver go out the front dhoor?'
'Oh, Leary;' says he,--(that's what he calls me--Leary) 'Leary,' says
he, 'the back dhoor's good enough for me. I'll be a-comin' by the front
dhoor soon enough, an' I won't be walkin'."

With so many misfortunes the Learys have not been able to save anything.
Four times Andy tried to join the Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen,
but each time after his papers were made out and he had paid down his
dollar, and the day had come to join, he couldn't get together the
necessary nine dollars for the first payment. With all this, there
is an unfailing humor and philosophy in the Leary household which is
irresistible.

Among railroad men generally there is a certain laughing, soldier
spirit. It is part of the faith; no true "railroader" is without it.
Perhaps this spirit leans to recklessness with some of the younger
ones, but I believe it is just as essential to the running of a railroad
as is the executive skill of the Hills and Harrimans. This spirit stands
by the men in danger and makes them meet death bravely. It stands often
a harder test; you will not break the spirit of a railroader by cutting
off his arm or giving him a wooden leg. Out of fifteen railroad men I
visited, who had received permanent injuries, all but four have gone
back to the road. Two of the four are totally unable to do work of any
kind. Another has gone home for a few weeks until he can "get used
to his wooden leg," when he will be ready for any job the road will
give him. The other, a twenty-year-old boy who lost his right arm at
the shoulder, has learned to write with his left hand and is studying
telegraphy as hard as he can, in order to stick by the railroad.

Of the eleven who are back on the road, nine were able to go into the
same work and pay, but two had to take lower jobs on account of partial
disability. This meant in each case five or six dollars a week less, but
neither man complained; he took it as part of the day's work. What the
railroader dreads is having to quit the road altogether. A watchman's
job will be accepted with a good deal of cheer. Notice the spirit of
the one-legged watchman at your crossing, who is very likely a man
dropped from an active, exciting occupation at eighty dollars a month
to flagging a crossing for forty. He is still in the game. But try to
retire a railroader on a pension while he is able to work, and you will
break his heart.

To a large extent, the railroaders' wives reflect this spirit. They are
quite resigned to the risks and dangers of the "mister's" trade. But
with the mothers, especially those whose husbands have followed more
quiet callings, it is different. They lead an anxious life.

In every dangerous occupation there is not this sustaining common
courage to help a man endure gaily a lifelong deprivation. A certain
degree of independence and fraternity in a group is necessary to bring
it about. Many go forth from the steel mills maimed for life, who have
no such spirit to uphold them. I remember one night in Homestead seeing
a boy on crutches, with one leg gone. He was about nineteen, with blue
eyes and a shock of yellow hair falling down low on his forehead. In
his face was that desperate look of defiance which comes with a recent
deformity. He was trying with all his young will to be indifferent to
the stares of the crowd, while in every nerve he felt them. All this and
a weary hopelessness were written in his sullen child-face.

I have shown how grief is crowded out of the lives of working people,
and how their frequent experience of trouble gives them an ordinary
manner in speaking of it. These things largely account for the opinion
held by many, that working people do not feel their sorrows as keenly as
others do.

Furthermore, I found among working people almost no pretence of feeling
where none exists. This too, might give rise to such an opinion. Where
the death of a husband has meant merely a loss of income, with the
attending problems of struggle and adjustment, there is no effort
to have it appear otherwise. Where it has aroused only a feeling of
bitterness toward the employer, this is not concealed either. But
where the death of the bread-winner, has meant not merely an economic
problem, not merely a legal battle, but heartache and emptiness,--that
is written, real and unmistakable, in the faces of those left. And in
the case of sons, where there may be no question of income, it is often
possible to tell in the first glance at the mother whether this boy who
was killed was "one of her children," or the child of her heart. There
is an outspoken genuineness about these people which allows them neither
to make a show of grief where there is none, nor to hide real suffering,
even from a stranger.

Mrs. Leary took the accidents of "Andy" lightly. If he should happen to
be killed some day her heart would not be broken. She spoke of the death
of her baby three months before without feeling, mentioning the doctor's
bills. But when I asked her to tell me about her oldest boy who died
two years ago of diphtheria, I could see at once that I was on different
ground. Her eyes filled with tears, and there was grief and longing in
her voice as she talked about him. You see he was only five, but they
understood each other. When she was unhappy he knew it. He would climb
up in her lap, she said, and put his arms around her neck and say,
"Don't cry, Mommy; I love you."

Mrs. Burns, a pretty Irish widow, whose husband was crushed while
coupling cars, is obviously well satisfied with the $4,000 insurance he
left. She takes boarders and is carefully saving the insurance money for
her little girl's education. Her affections are set on this child. She
has a tender memory of her Tom as he started off to work whistling that
last morning, but she makes no pretence to mourn for him. She frankly
admits that her marriage was not successful enough to make her risk it
again.

Thus it is with Mrs. Andrews, a woman whose husband was killed in the
mill. I found her smiling and contented a year later. Her man had been
good and faithful while he lived, but after he died, her brother came to
live with her and help her raise her two boys. He earned just as much,
and she was perfectly satisfied with the situation.

On the other hand, I knew of a six months' bride who shot herself three
weeks after her husband was killed. And a young German woman, whose
father had been run over by a dinky engine in the mill, said to me in a
choking voice, "Oh, when it comes to tellin' how he died, it breaks my
heart." I have seen mothers and fathers in middle life who had become
broken and old in a year after the death of a son, and a few women whom
I visited eighteen months after such a tragedy, were literally unable to
speak of it.

There was one wild-eyed little Scotch woman, Mrs. MacGregor, who refused
to talk with me at all. I learned from a neighbor that she had twice
been insane. Some years ago, when they had lived near the railroad, a
little three-year-old girl of hers, who was playing before the house,
ran in front of a train. The mother reached the child just in time to
touch her dress as the engine tore her away. The mother lost her reason
and was sent to an asylum. After six or eight months she recovered and
came home. Then, one morning two years later, she got word to come at
once to the hospital, that her son was dying. He was a lineman at Edgar
Thompson, and had left home to go to work as usual two hours before. In
some way,--no one ever knew how,--he had fallen from a ladder and broken
his skull. After this second blow the mother was again insane.

Then there was an old father, Macdougal, who had had three sons. One
died of smallpox, and one was killed in a steel mill. The third was a
railroad engineer. On the night of March 13, 1907, he was taking a heavy
freight across a bridge at Deer Creek, Harmarsville. The creek was high
and the pier gave way; the engine and first cars went crashing into the
water below, carrying three men to death. The bodies of the fireman and
conductor were recovered next day, but young Macdougal, the engineer,
was never found. They say the old man's hair turned white in twenty-four
hours, and that he can still be found on fair days walking along the
banks of the creek, looking for his son. But for the most part mothers
and fathers do not lose their hold on things. Their lives go on as
before. You can know perhaps only from a weary sadness in the mother's
eyes that the light of their lives has gone out.

Death does not always mean sorrow, and these working people, it seems to
me, feel no pressure of convention upon them to appear sorrowful when
they are not. But where affection is strong and love is deep, tragedies
are as real with them as with any people I have known.

Wherever love is found there is the chance of grief; there is potential
tragedy. And it is in poor families, I think, that one finds the most
close and lasting affection.

So often, in looking up a fatal accident case, I would come upon
an intimate and devoted family group. The case of Will Gordon, for
instance,--there was a holiday drama I shall not soon forget. The
Gordon family was a large one. Father and mother were living, and three
working sons lived at home, besides four younger children. Then there
were two married daughters, who lived near by and kept in close touch
with the family. Will, the oldest son, although he was twenty-eight, was
the greatest "home boy" of them all. He still handed every pay envelope
over to his mother, unopened, as he had done when a child. His working
life had been varied. First he tried the railroad, but he was slight,
and the work was too much for him. Then for a while he did river work
with one of his younger brothers who was on a government job. But in
this he soon developed a chronic cough, and his mother was afraid of
consumption. So finally he got a job with the Pressed Steel Car Company,
as a pipe fitter's helper. Here the work was lighter and seemed to agree
with him. Every two weeks he brought home twenty-five dollars and handed
it over to his mother. Meanwhile his father, who was fifty, had taken a
job at the Oil Refinery, firing boilers at night.

The boys considered this a dangerous job for the old man, and almost
every night one of them would go with him. Will felt most strongly
about it and was always begging his father to give it up. On Christmas
evening, 1906, the son's arguments prevailed and his father promised
to give up the job. This made them all especially happy on the next
day, when the two married daughters came home with their families to
celebrate Christmas. During the day they planned that the whole family
should gather at the oldest daughter's house for New Year's. All the
boys were to have a holiday except Will, and he promised to get off at
noon, if he could, to eat the New Year's dinner with them. The day came,
the family was gathered and the dinner was ready. With much joking and
laughter and good-humored impatience, they were waiting for Will. In
the midst of it came a boy with a scared face to say that Will had been
killed at the works. He had been sent to repair a leak in a pipe. The
steam was left on; the pipe burst; and he and Wilson, the pipe fitter,
were scalded to death. The father put on his coat and hurried down to
the mill to keep them from sending his boy's body to the morgue.

This family affection shows its true nature in times of trouble.
Barring what seemed to me an unusual number of deserting husbands, I
was impressed with the faithfulness of these people to one another
in struggle and distress. There was Mrs. Frederick, for instance, a
Swiss woman whose husband was killed in a runaway, while driving for a
wholesale liquor dealer. Just a week before the accident they had bought
a small house with a $600 mortgage on it, and Mr. Frederick said to
his wife, as they were looking over the deed: "Now we can begin to get
along, and lift up our heads, and stop worrying."

Since her husband's death, even with the $1,000 insurance, it has been
hard to keep things going and continue payments on the house. There are
four children and only one is old enough to work. Just in this troublous
time, too, the family burdens have increased. Mrs. Frederick's mother
has come from Switzerland, old, feeble and without income; and her
step-daughter, who had been away from home and independent for years,
after lying in a hospital six weeks with a fever, has now come home,
weak and helpless, to stay until she is able to work. Mrs. Frederick
does not for a moment question the rightfulness of these burdens. The
old grandmother and the convalescent daughter help her around the house;
she takes in washing; the boy's wages are good. On the whole she is
cheerful. The last thing she said to me, as she stood in the open door,
was, "Oh, we'll get on somehow. We'll all work together, and if we have
to, we'll starve together."

Another pathetic and almost humorous instance of family loyalty is the
case of a man named Benson. I was hunting for the wife of a brakeman,
who had been killed in the same wreck with the engineer Macdougal of
whom I have spoken. I was told that I could learn about her at this
Benson's house. I went there and found it a tumble-down, three-room
shanty with a small shed for a kitchen, crowded in between brick
tenements. There was no carpet on the floor and only a bare table and
two kitchen chairs in the living room. The man's wife was unspeakably
slovenly and, I think, half-witted.

When Benson came in, however, I could see that he was different. He was
only twenty-six. His father had been a river-man, and he himself was
born in a "shanty-boat." Owing to his mother's early carelessness he had
lost one eye. When he grew up, he left the river and became a teamster,
and in good times he made a living. At the time I saw him, however, he
had had only one or two days' work a week for four months. The hard
times, and the wife, I am sure,--not any natural shiftlessness in the
man,--accounted for the desolation of his home. There was something fine
in Benson's face, a certain modest look of steadfastness and pride,--the
pride of the "family protector." This protector-ship extended even to
the remote connections by marriage of the miserable creature who was
his wife, for I found that the brakeman's widow, whom he had taken in
and cared for after her husband's death, was his wife's sister-in-law.
Further questioning revealed that this widow had an old mother who had
also been dependent on the earnings of the brakeman.

"And what has become of the mother?" I asked.

"Oh," he said, "she lives here, too. She makes her home with me."

There he sat, this one-eyed teamster, in his barren, rented, three-room
castle, and told me in a simple, serious way, as though it were to be
expected in good families, that his wife's sister-in-law's mother "made
her home with him."

It is not uncommon to find a loyalty like this in relations where one
would least expect it. I have quite lost faith in the unkind stepmother
of fairy-tale tradition. It is a step-daughter whom Mrs. Frederick, the
Swiss woman, is caring for in the midst of her struggle. Three or four
times I found a woman utterly uncomforted after the loss of a stepson.
There was Conley, for instance, a car inspector who was killed in a
wreck. A stepmother had brought him up since he was ten years old,
loving him as few mothers love their own sons. And he gave her back a
real devotion. When his friends would ask him why he didn't have some
fun with his money instead of giving it all to his folks, he used to say,

"Well, fellows, home ain't a boarding house."

It is not unusual to find young men giving up their own prospects, to
take up the burden of the family at the sudden death of the father. But
the most memorable instance I remember of self-sacrifice on the part
of a son was that of James Brennan, a switchman, who was killed on the
Baltimore and Ohio in November, 1906. He, too, was only stepson and
stepbrother to the family he fathered. Thomas Brennan, an Englishman,
had married in the seventies and come to America, where his wife bore
him two sons and then died. Soon after, he went back to England and
married a sister of his first wife and brought her here to take care of
his children. He soon proved worthless as a provider. He lived off and
on with his family, but contributed less and less to their support, and
finally left them entirely. The second wife was not strong, and after
the birth of her last child, became an invalid. The burden of the family
thus fell upon the shoulders of the two boys, her nephews and stepsons.
They went to work at eleven and twelve. Arthur, the younger, was drowned
at eighteen, leaving James, the older son, as the only support.

This young man never deserted his post. During the later years his
burden increased. His stepsister made a runaway marriage at eighteen and
in two years was deserted by her husband and came home with a child.
A feeble old grandmother of eighty-eight came over from England to be
taken care of. His stepmother became crippled with rheumatism and lay in
bed for two years. In June of the year he was killed, he sent her away
to a sanatorium to get well. She had been there for five months, had
gained twelve pounds and was doing well when the telegram came to tell
her of his death. She came home to face the struggle of life without
him,--an aged mother on her hands, a boy of ten, and an in-consequent
daughter with a baby,--and she herself an invalid, suffering constantly.
One would say that the mere problem of existence would be all absorbing
for that woman. Yet, when I found her a year later, it was the emptiness
of her life without this son rather than the loss of his income that was
her tragedy.

There are all kinds of people everywhere. This is the only final
conclusion. It is not easy therefore, to describe the spirit in which
the working people meet trouble. They meet it in all the ways there are.
But most of those I met, had an "everyday" attitude toward misfortune.
This seems to support the opinion many hold, that poor people do not
feel their tragedies deeply. But I think it is to be explained rather
by the fact that they are too busy to entertain grief, that trouble is
too common among them to arouse exclamation, and that they make no show
of feeling where there is none. That they know the deepest sorrow, is
obvious to one who has seen the loyalties and lasting affections which
make up so much of their lives. I found usual in families, a generous
affection which could rise to self-sacrifice and devotion in time of
trial; and sometimes between two members of a family, a rare love,
exclusive and complete, so that the death of one left the other in an
empty world.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tales of trouble like these are worth listening to, chiefly as they
reveal the spirit of the people who suffered. It is with this thought
that I have told them. But if by revealing a dreary recurrence of
the same kind of misfortune in home after home, these stories have
roused in the reader's mind a question, perhaps a protest, this too,
is worth while. In a later issue, by a study of these work accidents
in their happening, by a counting of the cost to the worker and his
family, to the employer, and to society,--as at present the cost is
distributed,--we hope to answer that question. Possibly we shall justify
that protest.




THE WORKING WOMEN OF PITTSBURGH

ELIZABETH BEARDSLEY BUTLER

FORMER SECRETARY NEW JERSEY STATE CONSUMERS LEAGUE


It requires a moment's readjustment of our angle of vision to see
Pittsburgh as a city of working women. To dig crude ores, to fuse and
forge them, are not among the lighter handicrafts at which women can
readily be employed. The old cry of the dwarfs under the earth, the
first metal smiths, rings out in Pittsburgh in the tap of the miner's
tools and in the shouts of gangs of furnace-men and engine crews in the
winding recesses of the mill.

Yet even in a city whose prosperity is founded in steel and iron and
coal, there has come into being beside the men a group of co-laborers.
If we listen again, we hear the cry of the dwarfs (the productive
forces of earth) not only in the shouts of gangs of furnace-men, but
from the mobile group of workers at the screw and bolt works, and
among the strong-armed women who make sand-cores in rooms planned like
Alberich's smithy in the underworld. Listen still more closely, and
we hear the dwarf voices in the hum of machines in a garment factory,
in the steady turn of metal rolls in a laundry, and even in the clip
of the stogy roller's knife in the tiny workroom of a tenement loft.
Side by side with the men, the women workers have found a place in
the industry of the steel district in the Alleghenies. In a district
that calls pre-eminently for strength in its workmen, and if not for
strength, for a high degree of training and skill, there is yet place
in the congregate activity of factories and shops for women. Individual
and group necessities have forced them out into an increasing number of
occupational ways and byways, winding net-like over the city.

[Illustration: STOGY SWEATSHOP WORKERS ON "THE HILL."]

To understand fully the place that women have taken in the industries
of Pittsburgh, we should need to know the history of the "forks of
the Ohio," from trading post, frontier settlement, mill-town, to the
growing, complex city of to-day. We should need to follow the women's
share in the life of the district from the time of the woman pioneer,
who was herself a producer of goods and of values, on through the
active days of life in a small and struggling town, and later, into the
ramifications of the industrial city, when the days came that English
speaking labor did not suffice and a new immigrant population was
brought in.

We know a little of the life of the frontier women and the work that
they did. We have hints here and there, of the home industries of
intermediate decades, of the weaving and the stogy making[9] especially,
of production for the use of the individual home, that helped to make
the lives of women in miners' households active and significant. There
are gaps in our recorded knowledge of the process of change, of the
forces that little by little have been a call to the high-strung girl of
American birth, to the unconquerable exiled Russian, to the field worker
from Austria, and to the fair-haired Pole,--a call away from the four
walls that sheltered the industries of the home, and toward factory and
shop, toward division of labor and specialization of work at a machine.
The census in the first half of the nineteenth century is small help to
us. Even in later years, we can learn from it comparatively little about
the industrial life in individual cities.

[9] See Jour. Pol. Econ. 5: 1-25.

One fact significant of the situation in Pittsburgh to-day is that
according to the last census, the excess of male over female population
is a trifle less than 10,000. When the industries of the district grew
to a magnitude that drew on foreign labor forces, it was the men of
Ireland and Germany, of Italy, Austria and Poland who came. Later, in
smaller numbers, the women followed. They came because their husbands
and brothers were here; not often for the purpose of forging out a life
of their own. The women of the later immigrant races, the Slavs and the
southern Europeans, are lagging behind. Giuseppina is still keeping
the little Italian cottage with the thought that Pietro will return or
will have made his way more surely before he sends for her. Life in
America for her is not a settled destiny. It is a probability of growing
importance for those populations whose need exceeds the productive power
of the soil; but even to the strong it is something of an experiment,
something for which women,--not industrially adjusted,--must await the
issue before they too follow in numbers equal to the men.

In the different districts of the city, one can trace something of the
effect of this varying feeling of permanence on the ways of life among
earlier and later immigrants. Irish and German, in fact, we no longer
think of as immigrants. They are as much wrought into the fabric of
the nation as those whom we are pleased to call American. The Jewish
immigrants from Austria, Germany, and Russia, while their coming has
been hastened by religious persecution, have yet been part of the life
of the city for so long, that among them there is a distinct family
grouping; and there is a normal proportion between men and women. This
is in part due to race tradition as well as to length of settlement,
but the latter has unquestionably served to diminish the proportion of
single men, who from this race as from others, have come to make a place
for themselves in the new country.

In the congested Italian neighborhoods, on the other hand, women are
but an unimportant factor in the industrial life of the city. In the
midst of the city itself, there are to be sure streets of Italian
families; streets where the women still honor the custom of life in
their households. A scattered few roll paste-smeared tobacco leaves into
tobies after the Italian fashion, or follow with painstaking docility
the signs of the forewoman in a garment workshop. But there are not
many of these pioneers of congregate activity. The ties of tradition
that keep the girl to her house and early marriage are still too strong
for more than the very few to break. There is small opportunity in this
smoke-filled city among the hills for the Italian girl to preserve her
self-respect by staying at home, and at the same time to increase her
income by sewing or making flowers. Flowers of delicate tints and fine
embroidered fabrics, belong rather to the trade of eastern cities.
The garment industry here is of a different sort from that which has
nourished and given employment to its thousands of out-workers in New
York city. Such outwork as there is dates to a time before the Italian
women were here in numbers, or had grouped themselves into particular
districts, and it fell naturally into the hands of Irish and Germans
whose homes were, and still remain, in the early settled regions in the
coal filled hills.

[Illustration: A CANNERY GIRL--BOTTLING PICKLES WITH A GROOVED STICK.]

Leave "the hill," and go down toward the mills and to some of the
outlying sections, and you will find still fewer women in the colonies
of young Italian laborers, advance guards from their native towns. Some
of these men are workers on the railroads, others are day-laborers in
the mills. They bring up the numbers of the Italian population and
contribute to the excess male population of the entire city. Among still
later immigrants, this situation is intensified. Near the Pressed Steel
Car Works, there are streets of low unpainted houses, each exactly
like the other, each filled with its family of "boarders,"--single men
who club together and rent a house or hire a bed by turns in order to
make their pay serve both for their own support and for the help of
those at home in the old country. They are Slavs,--"Hunkies." They are
the under-workmen in mill and mine and machine shop, who have helped
push the earlier comers a step higher and push themselves into the
subordinate jobs. Some of the first comers have since brought their
families. Some few sisters and friends with the desire to try new
fortune have come, too, leaving their families behind. But the bulk of
the "boarding house" population is made up of single men, immigrants of
this race. Where families and single women have come, they have tended
to settle in the glass-making district, or near the manufactories of
iron and steel products that can use quick fingers as well as strong
untrained arms.

[Illustration: ONE OF THE SOUTH SIDE GLASS-WORKERS.]

The Polish women have not the conservatism which keeps the Italian
girl at home. They have not the same standard of close-knit family
relationship. There is a flexibility in their attitude toward life and
toward their part in it. In numbers and in kind of work, they are an
element of industrial importance.

Altogether, 22,185 women wage earners outside of agricultural,
professional, and domestic service, are employed in Pittsburgh. These
figures are based on a careful census of the women-employing trades made
during the winter of 1907-8. This working force is distributed in 448
factories and shops, and can be arranged according to the numerical
importance of the different trade groups as shown in the accompanying
table.

TABLE SHOWING DISTRIBUTION IN TRADE GROUPS.


   1 MERCANTILE HOUSES            7540

   2 FOOD PRODUCTION:
        CANNERIES
        CONFECTIONERY
        CRACKERS
        MOLASSES
                                  2726

   3 CLEANING INDUSTRIES:
        DYEING AND CLEANING
        LAUNDRIES
                                  2685

   4 STOGY INDUSTRY               2611

   5 METAL TRADES                 1954

   6 MISCELLANEOUS:
        CORK
        PAPER BOXES
        SOAP
        CASKETS
        PAINT
        BROOMS AND BRUSHES
        TRUNKS AND SUIT-CASES
                                  1137

   7 NEEDLE TRADES:
        GARMENTS
        AWNINGS
        MATTRESS AND BEDDING
        GLOVES
                                  1088

   8 LAMPS AND GLASS               864

   9 TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH       777

  10 MILLINERY (WHOLESALE)         406

  11 PRINTING TRADES               397
                                ------
      TOTAL WOMEN WORKERS        22185

In the U. S. census of 1900, women's work is grouped under the headings:
Agricultural Pursuits, Domestic and Personal Service, Professional
Service, Trade and Transportation, Manufacturing and Mechanical
Pursuits. In the accompanying table, agricultural pursuits, and
professional service are excluded. Under domestic and personal service
come only the cleaning industries, with 2,685 women, 12.10 per cent of
the number under consideration. Under trade and transportation, come
saleswomen and telephone and telegraph operators to the number of 8,317
(37.48 per cent). The remainder, 11,183 women (50.4 per cent), are
included in manufacturing and mechanical pursuits.

It is worth while to consider not only the broad groupings and the
characteristics of the several trades, but the women whom they have
called to them, old and young, native born, or from the fields and towns
of another country. Each trade has its characteristic racial group,
and in some cases a secondary racial group; and on the other hand one
racial group may be found in several trades. When the work room is a
mercantile house, there is small need to describe it. We know something
of the work and of its demands; we know, too, that no other occupation
seems so desirable as "clerking" to the girl with some personal ambition
but without the training necessary for an office position. A majority
of the girls are native-born of Irish or German parents, but there is a
scattering of bright Jewish girls who have a characteristic dislike for
the noise of machines.

The mercantile houses, the stogy factories and the garment factories
are employers of Jewish girls. In all three industries many Americans
are to be found, but they are in the more desirable positions, in shops
of the better class, with provision for light and air. These girls
have the nervous readiness to learn new ways, the adaptability, the
measure of skill, which tend to bring them the best work, the better
workplaces. But where the cheap, hustling business is done, the Jewish
girls predominate. They endure the drive in the rarely cleaned upper
room, where between narrow walls, faint daylight finds its way toward
the machines and where drifting lint and ten hours' stooping over a
power-driven needle, have their effect in time on a girl even with the
strength of rugged generations behind her.

Newcomers cannot choose either workshop or wages. With the subordination
of the industrially unadjusted, they crave a chance to learn, whether it
be by the whirr of the needle or by team work at cheap mold stogies to
supply the workingman's demand. In one or two of the small box factories
on "the hill," one finds occasionally a Jewish girl. Box makers paste
the bright colored strips of paper along the box edges. They stay the
corners by the clamp of a machine. For heavier boxes they glue into
place the wooden supports. Such work for a Jewish girl is exceptional,
however, and in violence to tradition. The three industries mentioned
above make up her circle of possible choices.

[Illustration: TOBACCO STRIPPERS IN A HILL SWEATSHOP. WORKERS OF THE
LOWEST INDUSTRIAL GRADE.]

Yet each industry, notably stogy making and the needle trades, has
drawn upon a second racial element in response to a specific industrial
demand. When the garment makers, spurred to production by the presence
of an army of laborers in mills and mines, began to increase and cheapen
their output, they gave the jeans and railroad jumpers to Irish and
German women who would make them at home. The sweating system, as old
and older than the ready-made trade, has adapted itself to the city, and
has taken a form scarcely recognizable to one familiar with the contract
shops on New York's East Side. There is no contract system here. Outwork
entrenched itself in individual homes before Italians and immigrant
Russians had settled into districts, and the only available out-workers
were the wives of Irish and German workingmen in Carrick and Lower St.
Clair. Even to-day, it takes a rambling journey along muddy foot-paths,
across brooks and fields and along the edges of the barren hills to
bring you to the sweated district. The workroom here is not a crowded
tenement, but a small wooden house with six machines someway placed in
the living room, and there is occupation for the whole family, from
father to baby. The family has to pay the driver a percentage on every
dozen garments that he brings, according to the distance from town. As
the driver knows the people and often gives them the chance to work,
his position is in some respects that of a middleman. The workers are
obliged to meet his terms or to turn to some other means of livelihood.
A seemingly inaccessible hill country within city limits, wooden shacks
swarming with chickens and children, a whirr of machines audible from
the field below,--these contradictions characterize the sweating system
of Pittsburgh.

[Illustration: STOGY WORKERS TRANSPLANTED TO AMERICA.]

We have seen that Jewish and American girls are in the garment
factories, while Irish and German women, the hill-dwelling wives of the
miners, hold the subordinate place in the trade. In the stogy industry,
the Polish women, some of them married and others immigrant girls,
have the inferior and unpleasant work. The least desirable occupation
for women in stogy factories is tobacco stripping, pulling the stems
out of the moist leaves and weighing and tying them in pounds for the
rollers. In tenement shops, one may find the strippers in a cellar,
their backs against a damp wall, working by the light of a flaring gas
jet. In a large factory, one will see them sitting in their low stalls,
row behind row, stemming and weighing and throwing the waste to one
side. "They would work all night," one foreman said, "if I would give
them the chance. We never have any trouble with them; we can't give
them enough work to do." They were married women in this case; but the
rule holds good and there is seldom trouble with the Polish hands in a
stogy factory. They are there too much on sufferance for grievances to
be worth their while. They have entrenched themselves in the stripping
rooms and are found now and then at a bunching machine or rolling
stogies at the suction table, but this more skilled work is still
largely in the hands of American and Jewish girls.

[Illustration: A LAUNDRY WORKER AT A BODY IRONING MACHINE. ONE OF THE
SKILLED HANDS.]

The Polish women have pushed their way into a wider circle of industries
than have the Jewish girls. They are limited by lack of training and
by trade indifference, as well as by the stolid physical poise that
cannot be speeded at the high pressure to which an American girl will
respond. They have not an industrial standard that would tend to react
progressively upon the character of their work and the arrangement of
the workrooms. They accept factory positions that girls of other races
regard as socially inferior. They consent to do the rough and unpleasant
work, the work that leads and can lead to nothing except coarsening
of fiber and a final break in strength. They change from one place to
another with an irresponsibility, an independence, born perhaps of
long-slumbering memories of revolution in their own land.

In canneries and cracker factories, we find Polish girls who are
lighter-handed, fairer, more delicately built than those of the metal
trades and the glass houses. These girls have rapid work to do. They
have the nervous energy to pack or to fill cans at high speed. They
stand beside the travelling conveyor which carries cans of beans, and
slip a bit of pork into each can as it passes. Without turning their
heads or changing their position, working with high concentration and
intensity, they can keep pace with the chains. While they do much of the
mechanical work, the hulling and stemming of berries, the preparing
of fruit, the filling and labeling of cans, they are found too among
the bottling girls on whom responsibility for the appearance of the
finished product largely rests. These latter place each pickle or piece
of preserved fruit after the model design taught them in the beginning.
They use a grooved stick to slip the pickles into place, and are obliged
to be accurate as well as quick, for they work under inspection on a
piece basis. A piece of onion misplaced in a bottle of mixed pickles is
held sufficient ground for requiring the bottler to do the work over at
the expense of her own time. The odor of vinegar and of preserves, an
odor that seems to have saturated the air in nearby streets, has made
the cannery unpopular among Americans who have acquired fastidiousness
in the choice of a trade.

It is possible that between the Polish women in this latter industrial
group and those in the metal trades, there is the difference between the
child of the city and the child whose life and the life of whose parents
has been near the earth. At any rate, there is the general difference
between the small, slight, fair-haired girl, and the rough-skinned
stolid women, whom even a piece-rate scarcely avails to keep up to the
pace of the machine. These latter are the women who with knee and hand
and metal-centered glove, open the sheets of tin still warm from the
furnaces of the sheet and tin plate mill; these are the women who screw
nuts on bolts by a fish-oil process, and these are the women who carry
trays of sand-cores in the foundries where they have displaced men.
They are the packers in glass factories, the riveters and foot-press
operators in lamp works. They have a hundred miscellaneous things to
do, no one of which is a trade, or can be a trade so long as a shifting
group of women, women with muscular strength and the readiness to do
disagreeable things, is at hand for the odd jobs about a factory. They
learn to operate one machine, but they are not among the hands who know
the ways of the shop, and work up to better occupations. Either through
the barrier of language, or in part through their own indifference,
they are used for the least desirable work in those occupations which in
a measure they have made their own.

Polish girls of both types are to be found in laundries, but in most
cases they are employed in the mangle room only. Their work is to feed
in sheets under the metal rolls, to shake them out before feeding, or to
receive and fold them at the other end while steam rises from the hot
metal and from the huge washing cylinders below.

There remain unaccounted for the workers in the candy industry, in many
of the miscellaneous trades, in telephone and telegraph offices, in the
wholesale millinery houses, and in press rooms and bookbinderies. Here
there is variation as the individual and the location rather than as
the trade group. In large measure, the employes are of American birth.
Telephone and telegraph work share with mercantile houses the advantage
of social esteem, and by reason of this, claim the American girl. The
same is true of the millinery workroom, in spite of its irregular
hours and short seasons. Perhaps a reflected "odor of sanctity," an
association by proxy with clerical work, has made press rooms and
binderies favored above more obviously manufacturing pursuits. Perhaps,
too, the location of the binderies in the business section of the city
has given them a force of American employes, for the Polish girl, like
her Jewish co-worker, is limited in her imaginings to factories and
shops within the few streets that make up the sum of her experience. Yet
to an extent press rooms and binderies employ girls of foreign birth,
and in the cork factory, many of the sorters are Poles. For some reason,
the candy trade is largely in the hands of Americans, and is in high
esteem among women workers.

[Illustration: SEMI-SKILLED AMERICAN GIRLS IN A GLASS DECORATING
FACTORY.]

Surveying the city, then, we see American and German girls holding the
positions for which a few months' training is needed, a knowledge of
English, or of reading and writing. We see them yielding the inferior
and unpleasant work to newcomers from Poland and Russia and we see
these same newcomers, sometimes by sheer physical strength, sometimes
by personal indifference and a low standard, competing on the basis of
lower wages with men. Work that otherwise would never have been given
to girls to do has come into the hands of Polish women. Workrooms that
would not long be tolerated by Americans,--they have been regarded with
indifference, perhaps because of inability to share the sensations of a
foreigner. The place of the Polish women, scrubbing floors and sorting
onions in a cannery, packing crackers, stripping tobacco for the stogy
makers, or making sand-cores in a machine shop,--this place is lowest
industrially among the women workers of Pittsburgh. It is the place of
the woman who is fighting her way but has not yet thought whither she is
going. A determination to work and to earn is uppermost. Marriage is not
suffered to act as a hindrance. There is notable absence of standard as
to conditions of work and rate of wages. With light foothold here and
there, the Italian girl scarcely figures, but within a limited circle
of industries immigrant Jewesses hold positions beside girls of native
birth.

From trading post and frontier settlement, from ambitious mill-town,
Pittsburgh has come to be a city whose workrooms number a force of
over 22,000 women. From home industry and from household work, the
younger generation of girls has entered the field of collective
service. From doing the whole of a thing and from knowing the user, the
younger generation has gradually found its work more and more minutely
subdivided; the individual worker makes not even a whole hinge but a
tenth part of it, and knows neither the use nor the destination of
the finished product. She does not know the relation of her fraction
of the work to the other fractions or to the interwoven threads of
industry that make up the plant. These younger women have pushed past
the traditional activities of cleaning and cooking and sewing; even the
congregate form of these industries engages but a few of them. They have
not only gone into press rooms and binderies, into cork factories, and
into workrooms where candies are made and where fruit is preserved, but
they help finish the glass tumblers that the men in the next room blow,
they make the cores for the foundry-men, and they are among the shapers
of metal for lamps and for hinges and bolts and screws. In a city that
is preeminent for the making of steel and iron and the products of steel
and iron, women have taken to-day a place in industries that seemed
wholly in the province of men.

[Illustration]

It means readjusting our angle of vision, but it is not a difficult
readjustment, to see Pittsburgh as a city of working women. From river
to river, women have their share in its industrial life. More than a
theory, more than a reform movement, is needed to turn back a tide that
is twenty-two thousand strong, that has its roots deep in commercial
methods and commercial success. Change in industrial method, when such
change makes for cheapness or for efficiency or for the utilization
of a hitherto only partially utilized labor force, cannot be stayed
by any theory as to its inappropriateness. Industrial forces, in that
they are the forces of production, are still dominant in America. There
is nothing in the Pittsburgh situation that looks toward undoing the
change that has come about in the industrial position of women; but we
can find out more exactly in this steel city how the work of women is
related to that of men, how far women have reached the point of being
self-supporting and independent, and what the social effect of labor
under these new conditions seems to be. Through change in some of these
conditions, much that seems evil in the nature of women's work may be
undone and the real value of it released as a permanent and useful
factor in industrial life.




IMMIGRANT TYPES IN THE STEEL DISTRICT

PHOTOGRAPHS BY LEWIS W. HINE


[Illustration: GOING HOME FROM WORK.]

[Illustration: CROATIAN.]

[Illustration: LITHUANIAN.]

[Illustration: _Photograph by Lewis W. Hine._

ITALIAN.]

[Illustration: RUSSIAN.]

[Illustration: SERVIAN.]

[Illustration: SLOVAK.]

[Illustration: A YOUNG SLAV.]




THE SLAV'S A MAN FOR A' THAT

ALOIS B. KOUKOL

SECRETARY SLAVONIC IMMIGRANT SOCIETY


Above one of the busiest corners in Pittsburgh, an immense advertisement
in Croatian solicits patronage for an American bank. In the railroad
stations and on the principal thoroughfares you can see groups of
people who bear unmistakably the Slavic physiognomy. But the Slav is
reserved; even the Southern Slav lacks the unrestrained animation so
characteristic of the Italian. He is slow in making an impress on the
imagination of the community. Though the Slavs are one of the three
largest racial elements that immigration is adding to our population,
though in the Pittsburgh district they constitute over one-half of the
workers in the steel mills, yet in spite of their large numbers and
their importance as an industrial and business factor, there is, I
believe, little actual understanding and appreciation of them on the
part of Americans. The bosses know them chiefly as sturdy, patient,
and submissive workmen; their American fellow-workmen hate and despise
them largely because of this patience and submissiveness to the bosses
and their willingness at the outset to work at any wages and under any
conditions; the public at large knows the Slavs by their most obtrusive
and objectionable traits,--especially by the newspaper stories of their
rows and fights when they get drunk on payday or when celebrating
a wedding or a christening. Few people realize that the "Hunkie"
in spite of his proclaimed "stolidity" is capable of all the finer
emotions,--that his aspirations are the same in character, though as yet
not so ambitious nor so definitely formulated as those of his neighbor
Americans.

It is my design in this article to present the immigrant Slavs as they
have not yet been generally seen,--as human beings even if crude, with
some virtues along with their widely recognized vices,--to present
something of their spirit, their character, their attitude toward
America, and the effect on them of the conditions under which as in
Pittsburgh and the neighboring mill towns they live and work. For
this design I feel I have at least the qualification of knowledge; in
preparation for this immediate task I visited some two hundred families;
moreover, I am a Slav by birth, and all my life I have lived and worked
among the Slavic people.

[Illustration]

The natural question rising in one's mind is, Why did these great
hordes come to America and to Pittsburgh? Let me answer in terms of
men. The main cause is of course economic. On the one side there is the
old world surplus of labor accompanied by low wages, the barrenness of
the land which every year becomes more insufficient to support growing
populations, and economic disasters affecting sometimes individuals
and sometimes whole communities; on the other side, the stories of
the wealth of some bolder pioneers and of the great opportunities
in this country, confirmed and exaggerated by the crafty agents of
transportation companies. An illustration of this economic impetus is
the simple story of Grigory Leshkoff. Grigory comes from a Russian
peasant family in which there were seven sons and twenty poor acres
of land. "What were we to do at home?" Grigory demanded of me with a
shrug. "Just look at one another,--hey?" One by one these sons left the
crowded farm and sought work in the few mines and factories located near
them. Grigory's younger brother was the first from the village to seek
America, coming here in 1902. But soon others followed him, "and now,"
said Grigory, "there are in Homestead at least fifty young men from our
village."

Grigory, by the way, is a veteran of the Japanese war, having come to
America immediately after its close. But he has little to say about
this one of the great conflicts of modern times; in fact, he looks upon
his experience upon battle fields as quite commonplace compared with
his experience in the steel mills. From the first he emerged without
a scratch; in the second he lost a leg. When I saw him he was deeply
concerned with what a strong man of twenty-seven with only one leg was
going to do with his future,--and the simple peasant was not seeing much
hope ahead.

Grigory came from Chernigov. From this government, and from Minsk
and Grodno, where the soil is exhausted and where the shares of the
villagers in the communes grow less with each redistribution of the
land, the Russians are setting out in increasing numbers. Not altogether
dissimilar causes operate in certain districts of Austria-Hungary.
Pribich used to be one of the richest wine growing regions in Croatia,
but some fifteen years ago the vines were devastated by a blight,
necessitating replanting with American stock. In this way hundreds of
once prosperous farmers were reduced to poverty. Many of them came to
the United States in the hope of earning enough money to pay for the
necessary replanting of their vineyards. Lazo Milutich, who gave me this
information, was himself one of those affected by the calamity. He came
to Allegheny about twelve years ago, where he tried different jobs, and
after two years wandering landed at Wilmerding. Here he has worked for
the last ten years in the same foundry.

Other causes than economic pressure have of course played their part
in this great migration. Political oppression is one. I have met a
number of political refugees among the older Slavs, many now persons
of importance. And another is the blandishment and trickery of the
steamship agent. John Godus, a Slovak living in Braddock, is one of a
group of twelve young men brought here in 1901, by the last influence.
To their village came a man dressed as a common workingman. We can
imagine him in high boots, wearing an embroidered shirt, and smoking a
long-stemmed pipe. He was a steamship agent, thus disguised to escape
the attention of the gendarmerie. He quietly found out what young men
were at the age when one has to present himself for conscription in the
army,--for such youths he had discovered, were the easiest induced to
be customers; secretly argued with them that it would be foolishness to
give three of their best years to the army, where they would be slapped,
kicked and cursed; and in the end sold them all tickets.

[Illustration: _Drawn by Joseph Stella._

PITTSBURGH TYPES.

LAD FROM HERZEGOVINA.]

It is perhaps but natural that Pittsburghers should believe that
the fame of their industries should draw these Slavs straight from
their villages to Pittsburgh. Yet this is rarely true,--true only in
exceptional cases, such as that of Joseph Sabata, a Bohemian. He was an
iron-worker at home and was employed in a large rolling mill in Moravia.
Their machinery was imported mostly from the United States and he,
noticing the name of an Allegheny firm on some of the pieces, thought
that in that city he could learn more about his business; and so five
years ago decided to come over. After being landed at Ellis Island, he
discovered while in line waiting to be questioned, that everybody was
asked to show an address. Such an address he did not have, but he does
have quick wits; he hastily scribbled on a piece of paper "Allegheny,"
and the name of a cousin still in the old country who had probably never
even heard the name of that city. He was readily admitted, went straight
to Allegheny, and when I saw him was earning $2.75 a day in a machine
shop.

In another case I met with, the coming straight to Pittsburgh was quite
accidental. Vaclav Malek, a Bohemian, who came here with his parents
eighteen years ago when a lad of sixteen, had intended to settle with
the rest of the family on a farm in Wisconsin. But on the way across
the ocean they became acquainted with another Bohemian family, bound
for Pittsburgh, who had been robbed of their money, and to these people
Malek's father loaned eighty dollars. In order not to lose the money
they decided to keep near their debtors and they too came to Pittsburgh.
John even to this day is sorry they didn't go on a farm,--and for a
double reason: first, he has a natural preference for farm labor which
is never to be gratified; second, in the course of his work for an
Allegheny company, an accident crippled him for life.

In the vast majority of cases the Slavs in Pittsburgh had not the
slightest intention of settling there when they first came to America.
Usually their location there has been preceded by a period of a year or
two or even longer during which they have wandered hither and thither,
from one factory to another, from town to town, looking for the right
place to settle.

Large numbers of the Slovaks come to Pittsburgh by way of the anthracite
fields. At the time of the strike,--and for several years before when
conditions were bad in hard coal mining, half-time, and the like of
that, the Slavic mineworkers drifted west,--across the state to the
steel mill district.

The experience of a Ruthenian named Koval is typical of a great
number of men. He came to America three years ago, and was sent by an
immigrant home in New York to work in the forests of West Virginia as a
woodcutter. The wages there were only fifty cents a day, and in other
ways the conditions were so bad that he and three other men ran away.
They wandered through the woods until they came to a little settlement
with a saw mill, where they were offered work and stayed for about two
months, earning $1.50 a day. Then a surveyor came to the village, who
spoke Polish, and told them that in Allegheny they could earn a good
deal more money than in the woods, so to Allegheny they decided to go.
There they obtained work as laborers in the locomotive works at $1.50
for a day of ten hours.

Such a wanderer also, was Smulkstis, a Lithuanian who started life as a
messenger boy in the telegraph service in St. Petersburg. He came to a
friend in Wilmerding four years ago, but, unable to get the kind of work
he wanted, he sought out another friend in Worcester, Mass., where he
got a job in a woolen mill. The next spring found him back in Pittsburgh
as a machine operator in an electrical plant. To-day,--he is still only
twenty-two,--he is a crane man in the Homestead steel mills. Similarly,
a Croatian who was spending the winter in Duquesne, was a type of the
migratory railroad laborer, who drifts from one contractor's gang to
another. He had been all over Indiana, Ohio and the Middle West and
had taken his wife and children with him. They made shift in cars and
shanties and construction camps of all sorts.

One fact that was continually striking me in Pittsburgh was the number
of ordinary men, earning low wages, who seem to be fitting themselves
permanently to their new environment. John Gerza, an engine cleaner in
the Fort Wayne yards, and his family impressed me as having, in their
five years in this country, adapted themselves very readily to the
atmosphere and to the life of Pittsburgh. There are no regrets nor
looking backward, nothing to draw him away from the present life. The
explanation for this adaptation is the explanation in so many other
cases that it is worth setting down. Gerza lived in a Moravian village
where till sixteen years ago there had been no impulse to move away from
the soil. The villagers were rooted to their ancient homes; they thought
only of the land, and they tilled it in the same old, primitive manner
of their forefathers. Then a railroad was built through the country, and
factories sprang up. These drew agricultural laborers from the villages,
and thereby unsettled the population; unsettled the old conditions of
life, and practically destroyed that love for, that almost physical
kinship with, the soil and the old home which I found so strong among
the Slavs in general. Gerza's wife used to work in a sugar factory at
home; he himself used to be a brakeman on a freight train. With them it
was not the severe and wrenching change from farm to factory, with the
involved breaking away from loved surroundings; it was the comparatively
simple change from one industrial pursuit to a comparatively similar
industrial pursuit.

Palinski, a Russian Pole of forty-five who has been in America eighteen
years, is another example of that really considerable class of ordinary,
low-paid workmen who have made a small success,--if owning a home and
having a happy family and being content is termed success. The highest
pay Palinski has ever received was $1.65 a day, and yet, though he has
five children, he managed five years ago to buy in conjunction with
his brother the house in which they live. They paid $1,600 for the
property, and now Jones and Laughlin want to buy it and Palinski expects
to sell for at least $3,000. The oldest child, a girl of fifteen, is
kept in public school, and the three other children of school age are
sent to the parochial school where tuition must be paid. The house is
strikingly clean and well arranged. Palinski seems to be well satisfied
with himself, his family and his work.

It was a marvel to me how a man with Palinski's wages could own such a
pleasant home, raise so large a family of children, educate them, and
keep them well-dressed and healthy. The explanation lies in a great
measure outside Palinski. He is a good man, but, as in so many of the
cases where the Slavs have wrought pleasant homes out of little wages,
the credit is largely due to the wife. Mrs. Palinski must have been a
wonderful manager; even to the casual eye, she was neat, bright and
energetic. In estimating the worth to America of this pair, one must
not consider alone the hardworking husband and the able wife; one must
consider their contribution of healthy, educated children.

These men are fixtures; in a generation or two their children and
children's children are likely to be an indistinguishable part of that
conglomerate product, the American citizen. In contrast to these men
are the great numbers who are not content, who are not fixtures,--whose
great dream it is some day to get back to their native village, live
out their years there and, what is no small consideration with many, be
laid at rest in friendly soil. Why these men, even though successful
here, have this yearning and take this action, presents a rather tough
question to most persons. That question, I think, I can best answer by
reciting the case of Mike Hudak.

Hudak is a Slovak who came to this country seventeen years ago when a
youth of nineteen. He is a fine type of a man in every way; physically
he could almost be classed as a giant, for he stands six feet two, is
deep of chest and broad of shoulders. He works in the Pennsylvania
repair shops at Oliver, earning eighty dollars a month, which is good
pay for a Slav when one considers that the work is regular and not
dangerous. He seems to be quite a figure in his neighborhood, for when
I walked home with him one day he was addressed from all sides in tones
that showed liking and respect. He dresses neatly and has a fluent
command of English. If there is any type of immigrant that we need above
all others it struck me that Mike Hudak is that type.

[Illustration: _Drawn by Joseph Stella._

PITTSBURGH TYPES.

OLD WORLDS IN NEW.]

I first discovered his yearning by asking him why he was not a citizen.
"Why should I forswear myself," said he.

I did not understand and asked for an explanation. "As I am going back
to my old country, it would not be right to give up my allegiance there
and make myself a citizen here." I pressed him for his reasons for going
back, and he gave them to me,--reasons that fit thousands and thousands
of cases. With him that preliminary process of being separated from the
soil had not taken place, as with John Gerza. He was a farmer by age-old
instinct; his love for the land was a part of his being, was a yearning
which would leave him only with death. Now, since over here he had been
plunged straight into industry, the only land he had ever known in a
way to become attached to it was the land in which he was born, and
when the time came when he was able to gratify his longing for land his
thoughts went only to the land in his old country. So, though socially
as well off as he would be there, and economically much better off, he
was going back. Undoubtedly he, too, would be a fixture in America could
he have gone on a farm immediately upon his arrival here,--for then his
instinctive land-love would have been weaned from the old country and
fixed upon America. Few Slavs who settle upon the land ever change back
to Europe.

The Slavs are strong, willing workers, and are generally considered
by the steel mill officials the best laborers they get,--but now and
then there is a man who is too slow for America. One of these was John
Kroupa, a Bohemian who has been here twenty-two years. Faithful, strong,
willing, it wasn't in him to keep up the race. He was in his earlier
years here employed in a steel mill, but he was dropped. As he frankly
said to me, "You have to be pretty quick in those mills, and it isn't a
job for a man like me." Later he got a job as watchman on a Pennsylvania
Railroad crossing in Woods Run, and there he worked for sixteen years,
his wages forty dollars a month for a twelve hour day and a seven day
week. (In the last two years, forty-four dollars.) All this while he
hoped for promotion, but it did not come and this non-recognition
rankled within him. "Other men, who were all sore from sitting down so
much, were promoted," exclaimed he, "but I, who was always hustling, was
never thought of, and I can tell you it wasn't an easy job to watch that
no accident happened, as more than 300 trains passed that way every day
and very often at full speed, disregarding the city ordinances,--thirty
or forty miles an hour." Three years ago the crossing was abolished,
the tracks having been elevated. The superintendent came to him at that
time. "Well, John, I am sorry for you; going to lose your happy home.
But you'll get another just as good." This was too much for John; his
long smoldering disappointment burst out. "Go to hell!" said he, "A
happy home! I could just as well have been in the penitentiary over
there; I would have been much better off, without the responsibility and
worry I have here. During sixteen years I didn't have a single day off.
Sundays and weekdays both I have to be here for twelve hours. Do you
call that a happy home?"

He refused the new-old job. He now keeps a little store in Woods Run,
which he has established out of his savings and with the help of his
children,--a store which might have served Dickens for one of his
grotesque backgrounds, for here are on sale hardware, candy, crackers,
bacon, eggs, molasses. Kroupa cannot be classed as a failure, for he has
managed to buy a home and raise and educate a good sized family, but
he has not made the success that his qualities of constancy, honesty
and sobriety should have won him. His inborn slowness was too great a
handicap.

Among the Slavs the Slovaks strike me as the most ambitious and pushing.
This is all the more surprising when one remembers that the conditions
out of which they come are as bad as the conditions surrounding any of
the Slavs, and worse than most. The Slovaks when they come here, are
poor, illiterate, have no training, are inured to oppression; yet they
have pluck, perseverance, enterprise and courage. From their ranks are
recruited many of the foremen in the mills and an ever increasing number
of merchants. In the Woods Run district, with which I happen to be best
acquainted,--a low-lying mill neighborhood along the Ohio in Allegheny
City, probably one-half of the stores and saloons are in the hands of
Slovaks, or their close neighbors, the Hungarian Rusnaks. They were
all common laborers at one time. Most of the stores are well kept and,
in general, prosperous-looking, and among their customers are not only
Slavs, but Americans as well.

A type of this class of men, the men who succeed, is John Mlinek. When
I first saw him I had not the least thought that he was a Slav, so
well-dressed and thoroughly Americanized did he seem, and such good
English did he speak. He came to America thirteen years ago when only
fifteen years old. He worked successively as a breaker-boy and driver
in the mines at Mahanoy City, then in the iron-works at Elizabeth,
New Jersey, then as a riveter in the Pressed Steel Car Company at
Allegheny, where he was soon making three to four dollars a day. As
he neither drank nor indulged in any other form of dissipation he
saved considerable money. In 1905, he married a Slovak girl born and
brought up in this country who for several years before her marriage,
had clerked in a store where they had foreign customers. She is a
little more refined than the average English-speaking girl of the
working class, and holds a high position in her own circle. She is
quite ambitious and induced her husband to start a store in Woods Run.
He sells cigars and candy and is doing very well; from what I could
gather, they already must have several thousand dollars saved. These
young people seem to be much liked in the community; they are prominent
both in their social circle and in their church, and Mlinek is an
influential man among the Slovak societies, though he does not at all
push himself to the front. Mlinek, I would say, is at the beginning
of a considerable success; his prospects and his personality favor his
achieving it; only some untoward set of circumstances can keep him down.

A few paragraphs back, in the case of Hudak, I spoke of the powerful
call their native bit of earth makes upon so many of the immigrants.
But frequently when men go back, intending to stay, in response to this
call, the old country is not strong enough to hold them. Such was the
case with this same John Mlinek. It was his ambition to be a well-to-do
farmer in Hungary in a few years, and recently he and his wife made a
preliminary visit to his old home and bought a farm. They remained a
few weeks,--but those few weeks were quite enough. He came back quite
cured. "Every little clerk in the village looked down on me, because
I didn't speak the official language, Magyar," Mlinek said to me. "He
was an official while I was just a peasant. He didn't earn a quarter of
what I do, yet I had to bow to him. That made me sore. In America I'm a
free man. Besides, I've got a better chance to do well than in the old
country. Yes, America is good enough for me."

Mike Mamaj is another successful man; he also returned to Hungary,
expecting to live there, and he also turned his back on his native
country and came again to America, this time to stay. He has learned to
speak, read and write English, and he is full of energy, though rather
rude and domineering in his manner. During the early part of his career
in America (he came here twenty years ago) he had a hard time, but for
the last seven years he has been a foreman in the car shops at Woods
Run. He has seventy men working under him, and part of the time he has
earned $100 a month. He owns the house in which he lives, worth about
$2,500, has property in the old country to the value of $1,500, and has
money in the bank.

Mamaj is proud of his success, of his home, of his children. So proud
that, on the occasion of our first meeting, though the bed-time hour of
nine had come, he dragged me off to show me the evidence of what he had
done in America.

[Illustration: _Drawn by Joseph Stella._

PITTSBURGH TYPES.

IMMIGRANT OUT OF WORK.]

First I had to inspect his home, which was neat and well-furnished. Then
he ordered his children (three daughters, eight, ten and thirteen) who
were going to bed, to dress and recite their lessons for the stranger.
While the girls rather sleepily displayed some of their English
learning, Mamaj stood by, hands in his pockets, and nodded proudly.

A quality that I have noted again and again among the Slavs is their
readiness to help their countrymen,--already instanced by the case of
Malek's father loaning money to a robbed fellow immigrant. Sometimes
this generosity shows itself amid the most adverse circumstances, as
it did with Koval. Koval (the same man that I mentioned as having
wandered about before settling in Pittsburgh) has himself had enough
misfortune during his three years in America to drive all unselfish
feeling for others out of a man's heart. Two years ago he sent for his
family and his younger brother. Immediately upon their arrival his three
children and his brother fell sick with typhoid fever. They were no
sooner well than Koval himself went down with the fever. This illness,
since it drained their resources, forced them to fill their home with
boarders,--which was a hardship on the slight wife, all the more keenly
felt because keeping boarders had been no part of their original plan.
Then all three of the children were taken ill with the croup. The usual
price for a doctor's call is one dollar, but the doctor charged three
dollars each visit inasmuch as he had three patients; Koval protested,
but had to pay. Two of the children died, and Koval, by this time
financially exhausted, had to go in debt to the undertaker for the
funerals. And then amid these last disasters came the financial crash,
with its misery of unemployment.

Certainly enough to sour the milk of human kindness in any man. But the
penniless Koval did not drive out his penniless boarders, now only a
burden. Instead, he gave them a sleeping place, divided with them the
food he could get on credit from the grocery, for since he was a steady
man and a householder Koval still had some credit; and for the rest of
the food, he and his boarders would go and stand in the bread line,
which had been established in Woods Run. Not only did Koval not throw
out the penniless boarders, who already encumbered him, but he took in
seven additional people who were in distress. Two of these latter were
young men from his native village who had landed in Pittsburgh in the
midst of the depression; two were Russians who had been found wandering
through the streets, nearly frozen, by a policeman, who brought them to
Koval; the others were a countryman, his wife and child of six, and to
accommodate these Koval had to give up his own bed. During the period of
my acquaintance with him Koval was supporting twelve boarders, only one
of whom was paying him a cent.

What he was doing seemed quite the natural thing to Koval; he hardly
seemed conscious of his generosity. "Why do you keep all these people?"
I asked him. "Why, what else could I do?" he returned. "They have no
work and no other place to go. I cannot throw a man into the street.
They will go themselves when they can."

Frequently circumstances throw the burden of the home upon the child. In
looking into an accident case I called at a home in Saw Mill alley,--a
cheerless, dingy neighborhood that is flooded every year by the high
water. I was received in the kitchen by a slight Polish girl of fifteen,
and soon discovered that she was the real head of the home. Annie had
just finished the wash, and at such a time even the best of houses are
apt to be in disorder, but here everything was neat and clean. She told
me her story willingly enough. Her father, who had been a laborer in one
of the mills, had been killed by an engine while working in the yard
at night. Her mother had remarried, and soon had herself been killed
by the explosion of a kerosene lamp. Annie was now keeping house for a
brother and her stepfather. As the seventeen-year-old brother was rather
shy, and as the stepfather was a night-watchman, naturally a man of no
authority and allowed by his work little opportunity to exercise it
even had he possessed it, the main control of the household has passed
into Annie's hands. That authority she was using well, as was shown not
only by the tidiness of the house, but by the fact that it is chiefly
through her influence that her brother is attending night school.
She has energy, determination and character. She reads and writes
both English and Polish. She said she liked to read books, history
especially, but that she hadn't the time.

Annie's stepfather is soon to marry a widow, but this further
complication of her already complicated family relations does not seem
to trouble her in the least. In fact she was quite enthusiastic over her
future stepmother. "She came to see me the other day," she said, "and
she was awful nice. Oh, she's fine all right, and she's rich!"

"Rich? How rich?" I asked.

"Oh, she's got a lot o' money! It's a benefit she got from a society
when her first man died. She's got $1,200!"

One deplorable trait I frequently met with among the Slavs was contempt
for American law. The existence of this trait is largely due to the
teaching of experience,--and experience of one particular sort. The
story of Vilchinsky, a Ruthenian boarding-boss, is such a common one, it
illustrates so well a wide-spread condition in the administration of law
by the petty aldermen's courts of the Pennsylvania industrial districts,
that it is worth repeating for the sake of its general significance.
October 14, 1907, one of the boarders was celebrating his patron saint's
day. This meant a lot of drinking by all, and during the festivities
they got more or less under the influence of liquor, but they were in
their own home, there was no public disturbance, and toward midnight
they all went to bed. About two o'clock in the morning, however, when
they were all asleep, policemen came to the house, wakened everybody
and loaded them into patrol wagons and buggies and took them to a
police station. The boarding-boss, four girls and three men were all
taken before the magistrate, charged with disorderly conduct. Without
any regular hearing,--none of them could speak English and there was
no interpreter,--the squire asked for twenty dollars apiece for the
boarders and fifty dollars for the boarding-boss. All but two girls paid
the fine immediately, and these two were then sentenced to the county
jail. During the following day, their friends succeeded in collecting
enough money to pay their fines and the $1.50 extra for board in the
jail.

Abuses such as this are generated by the fact that aldermen and
constables obtain fees out of the fines, which makes it to the financial
interest of these officials to get as many cases into court as possible.
Many men I have talked with have stated that the constables often
provoke disorder when none exists for the sake of the profit in the
arrests. The Slavs know that they are victimized, and at the same time
they realize their helplessness; the natural result is a bitter contempt
for law.

"Huh!" sneered Vilchinsky, "the police are busy enough all right
stopping disorder when the men have got money. But when there's hard
times, like there is now, a man can make all the noise he pleases and
the police won't arrest him. They know he hasn't money to pay a heavy
fine and costs. It ain't law they think about. It's money."

There are plenty of Slavs who are quarrelsome, just as there are among
other races; and when you have a combination of Slavic ill-temper and
the above-mentioned judicial practice, then there is basis for trouble
indeed. Zavatsky and Yeremin, Russians, and neighbors in a steel town,
drank more than was good for them one Saturday afternoon in a saloon,
and at last Zavatsky spoke his mind about Yeremin's wife, whom he did
not consider as good-looking as she should be, and indulged in drunken
threats against her if she did not stop throwing ashes on his side of
the yard. Yeremin repeated to his wife these threats and remarks and
Mrs. Yeremin, being a choleric woman, went to the squire in spite of
the fact that it was very late in the evening. But as it was payday, he
was in his office ready for business.

[Illustration: _Drawn by Joseph Stella._

PITTSBURGH TYPES.

RUSSIAN.]

A constable was sent to Zavatsky's house to arrest him. The constable
went into the kitchen and, finding nobody there or in the next room,
went upstairs. Here there were a number of boarders talking, but they
were not drunk. The constable, seeing these men, thought it would be
wisest to have assistance, so he brought two policemen and then went
for Zavatsky. They broke open the door of the room where Zavatsky was
sleeping, dragged him out of bed and told him to get up. He was in a
drunken stupor and claims that he did not resist the constable, in fact,
scarcely knew what was going on; but the constable felled him with so
heavy a blow that it made a scalp wound and the blood rushed out and
blinded him. While on the floor, Zavatsky remembered a revolver under
his pillow, and raised his hand and got it. The constable wrested it
from him and according to Mrs. Zavatsky's version, he exclaimed, "I'll
give you a revolver, you son of a gun," and shot Zavatsky in the chest.
Mrs. Zavatsky, catching up a hammer, rushed at the constable, but he
knocked her unconscious by a blow on the head and she fell down in a
swoon. Before that, she had screamed to the men, "Come down, boys,
come down, they're killing the gazda!" One of the first to come to
Zavatsky's assistance was his kum, (the kum is one who is godfather
to one's children, or one to whose children one is godfather; a very
close relationship,--generally the dearest friend). As the kum tried to
rush into the room, the two officers gave him several violent blows on
the head. The other men rushed down, but they were all seized by the
officers, with the exception of one whose flight was suddenly stopped by
a shot in the leg.

As a result of the melee, the whole household of ten men and one woman
was taken in patrol wagons to the squire's court and committed to jail,
charged with disorderly conduct, felonious assault and interference with
an officer in performance of his duty. Zavatsky and the boarder who
was shot in the leg were sent to the hospital for treatment. At first
it looked as if Zavatsky were not going to live. After a hearing four
days later they were all committed to the grand jury, and my reports say
that they were all sentenced to jail for varying periods. None of the
policemen or the constable had even a scratch to show, although they
charged these ten men with felonious assault. The house, when I saw it
just following the affair, looked like the day after a battle.

Not even so brief a sketch as this would be complete without an instance
or two of the men who have been handicapped by industrial accident.
Such men are met everywhere in Pittsburgh,--they are so common as to
excite no comment. In proportion to their numbers, the Slavs are the
greatest sufferers from accident in the Pittsburgh region, for to their
lot falls the heaviest and most dangerous work. The report for 1905-1906
of the National Croatian Society, to give a general example of what
industrial accident means to the Slav, shows that out of its membership
which averaged about 17,000 for that period ninety-five men were killed
by accident [almost a third of the deaths from all causes] and that
ninety-seven died from consumption, the inception of which is often
traceable to the character of their work. In addition, eighty-five other
men were permanently disabled.

Andrew Jurik's job was to run a "skull-cracker" in the Homestead mill.
This is a contrivance to break up scrap so that it can be easier melted,
and its main feature is a heavy steel ball which is hoisted into the air
and then allowed to drop upon the scrap which has been heaped beneath
it. This crash of the ball throws pieces of the scrap in all directions.
The work is very dangerous, especially at night when it is hard to see
and dodge the flying scrap. One Monday night [the day before he had
worked on a twenty-four hour shift] Jurik failed to see and dodge. A
chunk of scrap weighing four or five hundred pounds struck his leg and
so crushed it that it had to be amputated.

Almost a year after the accident I went to visit Jurik, and found a
mild-faced, kindly-looking, not very intelligent man of forty, sitting
in his landlady's kitchen rocking his landlady's baby. That was Jurik's
job now, to take care of his landlady's children in part payment for his
board; and that was all he was good for yet, for he had only a leg and a
stump. He had been paid $150 by the Carnegie Relief Fund; of this he had
sent fifty dollars to his wife in Hungary and had used the balance to
pay his board. The company had promised him an artificial leg and light
work as soon as he was able to get around, but as his stump was not
yet entirely healed, as he had not a cent, as his wife was writing him
letters begging for money for the children, Jurik seemed worried.

Jurik looks at the future blankly, helplessly. He had at first planned
to bring his family here, but now he can never get the money for that.
Nor can he go back to them. He would be more useless, more helpless,
on a farm than here. The only solution Jurik can see to the lifelong
problem suddenly thrust upon him by that flying piece of scrap, is for
him and his family to remain indefinitely apart: he working at whatever
poor job and at whatever low wage he can get, and sending a little to
Hungary to help out,--his wife to continue working as a laborer on a
farm at twelve or fifteen cents a day.

Often the handicapped man's problem is thrust directly upon the wife
for solution, as it has been upon the wife of John Hyrka. Hyrka is a
Ruthenian of thirty; his wife is twenty-eight. He was making fair wages
in the Duquesne mills; they were both healthy and strong, and they had
high hopes for the future as is natural with the young. But May 26,
1907, John, who was working on a platform directly over a limestone
mill, stepped on a rotten plank and both his legs shot down into the
mill. Before he could be extricated the flesh had been torn from the
soles of both his feet.

Since then (or at least up to the time of my last report) Hyrka had
been in the McKeesport hospital, where attempts were made to graft
flesh upon his soles. When I last heard about him his feet were still
not healed, and it was practically certain that the grafting would be a
failure and that he would be a cripple for life.

When this tragedy descended upon Mrs. Hyrka she was within a month of
confinement. Into this grim situation entered the baby, adding its
cares. Until months after the accident she was in no condition to work,
and when she did regain her strength the demands of the infant would
not permit her to take up regular employment. For six months she lived
upon thirty dollars a month the company paid her, then the company
cut off this allowance, and after she had felt the pinch of want for
a time, she demanded a final settlement. They offered her $600, she
to pay all further hospital bills, which up to then had been paid by
the company. She talked the matter over with John, and between them
they decided that to have the flesh scraped from your feet and to be a
lifelong cripple ought to be worth as much as $1,000. But this seemed an
exorbitant estimate to the company, and as Mrs. Hyrka held firm to her
own figures, the matter was still unsettled when I left Pittsburgh. She
was then living on what she could borrow; the high hopes of twenty-eight
were all blasted; she knew she had a cripple on her hands for all his
life, thirty or forty years perhaps, and she was wondering, desperately
wondering, how she was going to be able to support him.

       *       *       *       *       *

In citing these various types I have not tried to make out the Slavs as
better than they are. I have, to repeat my opening statement, merely
tried to show that these generally unknown people are above all human
beings,--that they have not alone vices and undesirable qualities, but
virtues,--that though crude, they have their possibilities.

[Illustration: _Drawn by Joseph Stella._

PITTSBURGH TYPES.

THE STRENGTH OF THE NEW STOCK.]




THE NEGROES OF PITTSBURGH

HELEN A. TUCKER

FORMER MEMBER TEACHING STAFF OF HAMPTON INSTITUTE


To-day it is the young north-bound Negro with whom we reckon in
Pittsburgh. Seldom is a white-headed Negro seen on the street; but
rather the man on the sand cart hard at work. That with every year
there is an increasing migration from the South to our northern cities
is known in a general way; but if our estimate of these newcomers is
to be worth anything, it should be based upon something more than
impressions gained from those we notice on the street-cars (the best are
too well-behaved to be conspicuous), from loafers at saloon doors, and
from newspaper accounts of Negro crime. Here, too often, the knowledge
of white people ends. Of the industrious, ambitious Negroes, they know
little; and of the home life of those who are refined, nothing at all.
As a man who officially comes into daily contact with the criminal
Negro said to me, "All must bear the reproach for the doings of this
police-court ten per cent." Anyone who is sufficiently interested to
desire more accurate information as to Pittsburgh's Negroes than may be
gained by a walk down Wylie avenue will readily find signs enough of
the differentiation that is rapidly taking place among the members of
this race. While with the increasing influx a class of idle, shiftless
Negroes is coming, who create problems and increase prejudice, a far
larger number are taking advantage of the abundance of work and of
the good wages, and are rapidly bettering themselves. There is here a
chance, such as perhaps few northern cities give, for the industrious
Negro to succeed, and he is improving his opportunity.

There was a considerable Negro population in Allegheny county before
the Civil War. Both Pittsburgh and Allegheny were important stations of
the "underground railroad" and many a man and woman sought refuge here
from the nearby slave states. In Allegheny a school was founded for them
before the end of the half century. The growth of the Negro population
is shown by the following chart:

  YEAR | NUMBER
  -----+-------
  1850 | 3431   ====
  1860 | 2725   ===
  1870 | 4459   =====
  1880 | 7876   ========
  1890 | 13501  ==============
  1900 | 27853  ============================

These figures show a steady increase except from 1850 to 1860, gradually
reaching the point where the Negro population doubles in a decade. The
marked increases from 1870 to 1880 and 1890 to 1900 are probably due to
the fact that in those periods more Negroes were able to get work in the
steel mills. The percentage of Negroes in the total population of the
county was 2.2 per cent in 1880, 2.4 per cent in 1890, and 3.6 per cent
in 1900. Three-quarters of the Negroes in the county live in Pittsburgh
and Allegheny City. Since 1900, the migration of Negroes to Pittsburgh
has been greater than before. It is estimated that there are not less
than 50,000 in Allegheny county and at least 35,000 of these are in
Pittsburgh and Allegheny. In 1900 considerably more than half of these
were males, and Pittsburgh was one of three cities in the United States
(the others were Chicago and Boston) with a population of 10,000 or more
Negroes, to have an excess of males.

In general this migration has been from the middle southern states.
The greater number, fully one-half, has come from Virginia and West
Virginia; others have come from Georgia, Alabama and Tennessee, with a
few from Ohio and states further west. Some of those from Alabama and
Tennessee have already been "broken in" in the new mill districts of
those states.

As in the migration to other northern cities most of these people, when
they come north, are in their best working years,--between eighteen
and forty. According to the census of 1900, over seventy per cent of
the Pittsburgh Negroes were between fifteen and fifty-four years of
age; less than five per cent were over fifty years, while but fourteen
per cent, about 2,400, were children of school age, between five and
fourteen. Many of the children remain in the South, and many of the old
people go back there, so that the city of Pittsburgh is under little
expense for educating the children and less for caring for the aged.

       *       *       *       *       *

The principal Negro street is Wylie avenue. This leads up to the "Hill
District" which, forty years ago, was a well-conditioned section. Now it
is given over largely to Negroes and European immigrants. Forty-eight
per cent of the Negroes in Pittsburgh live in wards seven, eight, eleven
and thirteen. In 1900, sixteen per cent were in the thirteenth ward, and
the number has increased since then. They constituted fourteen per cent
of the total population of the ward in that year. How fast this movement
into the thirteenth ward is taking place is indicated by what a colored
woman told me who keeps a grocery store on Wylie avenue near Francis
street. When she opened there three years ago, there was scarcely a
colored family in the district. Now there is another grocery store, a
shoe store and two confectionery stores, kept by colored people. Horton
street near by is filled with colored people who have recently come from
the South. There is a tendency on the part of the Negroes, however, to
get out from the center of the city, and fully a quarter of them lives
further out in wards nineteen, twenty and twenty-one. In all, sixty-two
per cent of the Negroes lived in 1900 in six wards.

In these wards there is a large foreign element. In the seventh, eighth
and eleventh wards there are many Russian Jews. A Negro church in the
eighth ward was sold last fall for a Jewish synagog, and the Negro
congregation is building in the thirteenth ward. In the twelfth ward
where many of the Negroes live who work in the mills, they have for
neighbors the Poles and Slavs. The well-to-do Negroes of the city are
moving out towards the East End.

Two or three apartment houses have been built especially for Negroes,
but in general, though living in certain localities, they are not
segregated. This does not mean that there are not some Negro streets,
but very often a row of from three to seven houses will be found in
which Negroes are living, while the rest of the street is filled with
white people. Again, a single Negro family may live between two white
families. When Negroes gain a foothold in a new street in any numbers,
the Americans move away; but the Jewish immigrants do not seem to object
to living near them, sometimes in the same house. And this is true of
more than the poorest of them.

In a way the Jews have been a help to the Negroes, for they will rent
houses to them in localities where they could not otherwise go. In
many cases the Jews have bought or built houses, filled them with
Negro tenants at high rents, and thus paid for them. But the Negroes
have learned from these experiences and many of them have started to
buy homes. They have decided that they might as well buy houses for
themselves as for the Jews.

The poorer Negroes live in a network of alleys on either side of Wylie
avenue in the seventh and eighth wards. For years the conditions here
have been very bad from every point of view. There are respectable
people living here, but the population consists chiefly of poor Negroes
and a low class of whites. As a result, there is much immorality in this
section,--speak easies, cocaine joints and disorderly houses abound.
I think I never saw such wretched conditions as in three shanties on
Poplar alley. Until a year ago many of the landlords had not complied
with the law requiring flush closets, and I found old fashioned vaults
full of filth. Where the flush closets had been put in they were in
many cases out of repair. In some alleys there were stables next to the
houses and while the odor was bad at any time, after a rain the stench
from these and from the dirt in the streets was almost unendurable.

The interiors of very many of the houses in which the Negroes live were
out of repair,--paper torn off, plastering coming down, and windows
broken. The tenants told me they had complained to the landlords and
had tried to get something done, but without success.

The twelfth ward near the mills also has some bad conditions. In Parke
row and Spruce alley, on the day of my visit, the rubbish, which is
removed only every two weeks, was piled high. On top of one pile was
an old dirty mattress. The houses I visited in Parke row were so dark
that it was necessary to use a lamp even at midday. There were also
depressing conditions among the Negro homes on Rose, Charles and
Soho streets. While some of the more ambitious are moving out from
these unhealthy localities, many who would like to move have not the
opportunity. One of these said to me, "The only place where there is
plenty of room for Negroes is in the alleys."

Yet even the very poorest Negro homes are usually clean inside and have
a homelike air. It would surprise one who has never visited such homes
to see with what good taste they are furnished. There is always some
attempt at ornamentation, oftenest expressed by a fancy lamp, which is
probably never lighted. Almost every family except the very poorest has
a piano. The best Negro houses,--usually not in Negro districts,--are
what people of the same means have everywhere. I was fortunate enough to
visit at least a dozen of these comfortable, well-furnished, attractive
homes and in them I met courteous, gracious and refined women. Only
in Spruce alley and Parke row did I find disorder and a general
indifference to dirt and there were some exceptions even there. The
hopelessness of keeping clean in such a location may have had something
to do with these conditions.

Compared with certain of the foreigners, the Negroes do not overcrowd
their houses, but they do often shelter too many people for comfort or
decency. I visited a house of three rooms where a man and wife, five
children and a boarder were living. In another house, also of three
rooms, there were a man and his wife, her mother, two children and a
lodger. These I think are not unusual cases. I also found a family of
ten in four rooms, and another family of seven and a boarder in three
rooms. Where a house of four rooms is taken by two families, they do
not often take lodgers, but if one family takes such a house it usually
cannot meet the expense alone. What is more serious than the number
of people in a house, is the carelessness in allowing young girls to
sleep in the same room with men lodgers. Such a case was that reported
by a probation officer of the Juvenile Court, of a girl of fifteen who
slept in the same room with her father, two brothers and a lodger. It
was "nothing," she told the court; the man was "an old friend of the
family." The suggestion that she occupy the vacant room in the house
plainly surprised her.

       *       *       *       *       *

The low ebb of living conditions in a Negro neighborhood is illustrated
by Jack's Run, a narrow, deep ravine leading down to the Ohio river
between Bellevue and Allegheny. Here, during the past six or seven
years, about one hundred and seventy-five colored people from the rural
districts of North Carolina and Virginia have found lodgement. Engaged
chiefly in domestic service and common labor, they have settled here
because the rents are cheap. Mixed in with them is a class of low
whites, and the standards of civilization are sucked down by immorality
and neglect, for the run is practically isolated from the rest of the
world. A mission Sunday school connected with the white Presbyterian
church in Bellevue has been held there for about five years. The
superintendent of this mission, who is a colored man, has endeavored
to reach the children of the run. As he feels the Sunday school alone
cannot do this, he is working to get a day school there. To be sure, the
children are enrolled in Bellevue or Allegheny, but he says they really
do not attend. A long climb up the hills shuts them off, and the white
children pester them when they show themselves. It is hard to know what
could be done to better the conditions in a place like Jack's Run, but
up to the present time, with the exception of this one man, few people
have tried to find out. The run has few visitors, and these are not
altruists. "I have seen a politician here," the superintendent told me,
"and an insurance collector; but never a preacher."

One of the most encouraging signs of the economic progress of the
Pittsburgh Negroes is found in the variety of occupations in which
they are engaged. In 1900, 146 were engaged in professions: actors,
artists, clergymen, dentists, engineers, lawyers, physicians and
others. Domestic and personal service, house servants, barbers,
janitors, hotel and restaurant keepers, soldiers, policemen, etc.,
employed 6,618; while in trade, and transportation, clerks, teamsters,
merchants, railway employes, telephone operators, etc., there were
1,612. Manufacturing and mechanical pursuits employed 1,365. There was a
total of 10,456 Negro wage earners: 8,382 males and 2,074 females. The
proportion of those engaged in professional pursuits is small,--only
a little over one per cent; and, with one exception, the number does
not seem to be increasing. In Pittsburgh and the vicinity there are
now eighteen Negro physicians, about three times as many as in 1900.
Six were graduated from Harvard University, five from the Western
University of Pennsylvania, two from Shaw, and one each from Ohio State,
Medico-Chirurgical, and Western Reserve. Four of these men took also
the degree of A. B. Ten have practiced five years or less. Among the
five practicing lawyers is one graduate of the Harvard Law School, one
from New York University Law School and one from Harvard University Law
School. Two of these lawyers were admitted to the bar in 1891. They were
the first Negroes to be admitted in Western Pennsylvania, as all who
had applied up to that time had been turned down. There are four Negro
dentists.

Most of the men in these three professions have some practice among
white people. A young physician who has been in Allegheny about three
years, and who at first had such difficulty in renting an office in a
suitable location that he almost gave up in despair, has now a number of
white patients. One of the first was a German girl to whom he was called
at the time of an accident because he happened to live near by, and
through her family he has been recommended to other white people.

Newspapers conducted by Negroes have not flourished in Pittsburgh but
last year there were two,--the _Pioneer_, a small sheet run in the
interests of the Baptists, and the _Progressive Afro-American_, a weekly.

Twenty per cent of the men follow manufacturing and mechanical pursuits.
Because of the abundance of work good Negro mechanics have no difficulty
in keeping busy, though they have made little headway in the unions.
An occasional Negro is a union member, as, for instance, four or five
carpenters, a few stone-masons and a few plasterers. Here, as elsewhere,
they gain admission easily only to the hardest kinds of work. The Negro
hod carriers indeed make up the greater part of the hod carriers union.
In McKeesport there are but two white hod carriers. In Pittsburgh
and the vicinity there are over a thousand colored hod carriers. The
colored stationary engineers and firemen have a union of their own,
the National Association of Afro-American Steam and Gas Engineers and
Skilled Laborers, incorporated June, 1903. It was once a part of a white
organization. It has three locals in Pittsburgh and it has been allied
with other labor organizations and represented in central labor bodies,
but it is yet rather weak. Three or four colored contractors hire
plasterers and masons.

Early in the seventies a few colored men found work in some of the
mills. One of the first to employ Negroes was the Black Diamond Mill
on Thirtieth street. There were a few here before 1878. In that year,
through a strike, Negro puddlers were put in, and since then the force
of puddlers has been made up largely of Negroes. About the same time
Negroes were taken into the Moorhead Mill at Sharpsburg, and also
through a strike, Negroes got into the Clark Mills on Thirty-fifth
street. Since 1892, there have been Negroes in the Carnegie Mills
at Homestead. It is the prevailing impression that numbers of Negro
strike-breakers were imported at the time of the "big strike," but I
have been told by an official of the Carnegie company, by a leading
colored resident of Homestead, and by a Negro who went to work in
the Homestead Mills in 1892, that this was not so. Word was given out
that anyone could find work who would come, the Negroes with the rest.
Negroes were brought up from the South at this time to take the place
of strikers in the Clark Mills. But Negroes already worked there and
some of them who went out at that time eventually went back to work.
Unquestionably Negro strike-breakers have been brought to Pittsburgh,
but I judge not in any large numbers. When the mills were last running
full there were about one hundred and twenty Negroes at the Clark Mills;
one hundred and twenty-six at Homestead, and about 100 in the other
mills of the Carnegie company, making in all the Carnegie works three
hundred and forty-six colored men. A conservative estimate would put
those at the Black Diamond and Moorhead Mills as at least three hundred
more. Many of these mill men are unskilled, but at the Clark Mills
two-thirds, and at Homestead nearly half are skilled or semi-skilled. It
is possible for a man of ability to work up to a good position.

A small but increasing number of Negroes are on the city's payroll.
On the date of my inquiry there were in the employ of the city of
Pittsburgh 127 persons of Afro-American descent, or one out of every
237 of the Negro population, while a total of 635 directly profited by
the $91,942 paid annually in salaries to colored persons. These city
employes include laborers, messengers, janitors, policemen, detectives,
firemen, letter carriers and postal clerks, and their salaries range
from $550 to $1,500 a year.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first Negroes to set up establishments of their own, dating back
twenty years and more, were the barbers and hairdressers. Formerly these
had much of the white patronage, but they are gradually losing it. With
a few exceptions, notably the Negro barber in the Union Station, their
shops are now found on Wylie avenue and in other Negro localities, and
are patronized by Negroes.

A partial list of Negro business enterprises,[10] with the number
employed is as follows:

                            _No. of       Persons_
                             _Firms       Employed_
  Barbers                      20              78
  Restaurants and hotels       12              66
  Groceries, poultry, etc.      8               9
  Tailors                       7              19
  Pool rooms                    6               6
  Hauling and excavating        5             170
  Saloons and cafes             3              15
  Printers                      3              19
  Pharmacies                    4               8
  Undertakers and livery        3              14
  Confectioners and bakeries    3               2
  Caterers                      3         6 to 30
  Miscellaneous                 8             105
                               --        --------
                               85         514-547

[10] Furnished by R. R. Wright, Jr., of the Armstrong Association,
Philadelphia, who investigated the Negro in Business in Pennsylvania for
the Carnegie Institution.

The number employed does not include the proprietors, so that over six
hundred persons are earning a living from these shops. Not counting
the barber shops, saloons or restaurants, there are certainly over one
hundred small stores kept by Negroes and until the financial depression
new ones were opening each month. Three or four drug stores were opened
in 1907. One of the Negro hotels doubled its capacity in a year.

The nine business enterprises listed under "miscellaneous" include an
insurance company, a stationery and book store, a men's furnishing
store, a photographer's gallery, a real estate company, a loan company,
a shoe store and repairing shop, and a manufactory of a hair growing
preparation, which has sent out sixty-five agents. The insurance company
has twenty-eight agents, all of whom are colored. Several of the barbers
have laundry agencies and boot-blacking stands and some have baths.
There are at least a dozen men who own their horses and wagons and
take contracts for hauling and excavating. One of the largest of these
Negro contractors was employing 135 men. Another employs thirty men for
hauling and also works 100 to 200 men on asphalt paving. There are many
more men who own a horse or two and do general expressing. One of these
told me that he spent his first one hundred and fifty dollars saved
after coming to Pittsburgh for a horse, which left him with a capital of
seventy-five cents. He now owns four horses. A Negro has had one of the
stalls in the Allegheny Market for many years and there is another in
the Diamond Market.

One of the most successful Negro business men lives in Homestead. As
a small boy he moved from Virginia to Ohio, and came to Homestead in
1879. Up to 1890 he was an engineer on the river, the only Negro to hold
a chief engineer's license. Then he went into boat building and built
twenty-one river steamboats. Five years ago he organized the Diamond
Coke and Coal Company, in which he is now master of transportation.
There are ten men in this company; the others are white. They own a
mine, docks, and steamboats, and employ about a thousand men. This
colored man owns considerable property. He lives in a large comfortable
house and owns one on either side which he rents. His older son entered
Penn Medical School last fall. His younger son was captain of the
Homestead High School football team. His daughter, who graduated from
the high school and had an additional three years at the California
Normal School, is teaching in the South. She could not get a school in
Homestead.

It is noticeable that the Pittsburgh Negroes show an encouraging variety
in their independent business enterprises as well as in their general
occupations. Of course they have usually been able to go into only those
that require small capital. The Negro who comes to Pittsburgh or any
northern city with no capital, no business experience and no business
traditions, and succeeds even in a small way in the midst of such
competition as he must face, is doing remarkably well.

But the mass of the Negroes in Pittsburgh are found in the same
occupations that are open to them in most northern cities with perhaps
fewer men (fifty-eight per cent) and rather more women (ninety per
cent) in domestic and personal service, and more men in manufacturing
and mechanical pursuits than is usual. This shifting of the men's
activities is due to the nature of the industries in Pittsburgh, to
the fact that the city is rapidly growing and consequently that there
is much building going on in which labor can be utilized, and to the
fact that Negroes gained a foothold in some of the mills during the
strike periods. While the largest and best hotels no longer have colored
waiters, many are still employed in hotels, restaurants and cafes.
Comparatively few Negroes are employed as porters and helpers in stores
while large numbers are employed as teamsters, probably more now than in
1900, as most of the sand wagons and other hauling carts are driven by
them. There are also many coachmen and chauffeurs.

       *       *       *       *       *

While the Negro men find a varied field for their labor, comparatively
few occupations are open to colored women. There is one woman who has
conducted a very successful hairdressing establishment for twenty years
and a half dozen others have opened little shops. A dozen or so find
work as clerks and stenographers in offices and stores of colored men,
but most are working as maids or laundresses. There are about a hundred
dressmakers and seamstresses. That there is not a greater variety of
openings for colored women works a great hardship. There is no hospital
where they can be trained as nurses; there is no place for them in the
department stores, except for a few as maids; they can look forward to
no positions in the public schools. Many who would stay and graduate
from the high school drop out because they see nothing ahead. They are,
of course, unwise in doing this, for more than most girls they need
to take advantage of every educational opportunity. A woman who is a
stenographer in a Negro insurance office, said her father thought she
was very foolish to study stenography as he was sure she could never
get a chance to use it. She went into this office to write policies.
When the agent found she was competent to do the higher work, he let his
white stenographer go and gave her the place. Another woman told me that
her daughter seriously objected to going to the high school; she said
she could never use what she would learn there. But her parents felt
able to send her, and insisted that she graduate. She is now employed
in the court house at a salary of $600 a year.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1900 the Negroes of Allegheny county paid taxes on property valued
at $963,000. Since that time wage-earning Negroes have commenced to
buy homes in still larger numbers. They usually pay something down and
the rest as rent until the entire sum is paid. In Beltzhoover there is
a settlement of a hundred or more families more than half of whom are
buying homes. To buy a house of any kind on small wages means industry
and many little sacrifices. One couple whom I visited in Beltzhoover
were buying a house of five rooms with a piazza and a generous sized
front yard. The husband, when he was married, had saved $300, which went
for the first payment. In the four years since then they had paid $800
and they had $1,000 more to pay. He was a janitor getting forty-eight
dollars a month, while his wife made six dollars a week as a seamstress.
To increase their income, they rented out a room to a man and his wife
who paid them ten dollars a month. They also raised and sold chickens
which brought in additional money. Most of the houses which colored
people of this class are buying are valued at from $2,500 to $3,300. On
Francis street, near Wylie avenue, there is a group of five six-room
houses occupied by Negroes. Three of these families were buying their
houses. One of the men was a waiter, one a porter in a bank, and one
owned a horse and wagon and did expressing.

The following experience, told me by a Tuskegee graduate, is an example
of what may be done in Pittsburgh by an industrious Negro who is
ambitious to establish a home: "I came to Pittsburgh in March, 1900," he
said, "on a freight train, arriving about three A. M. I asked for the
police station, but they wouldn't let me stay there when they found I
had fifty cents in my pocket. I was turned up Wylie avenue and finally
came to a colored lodging house. All the beds were full, but they said
that I could sit in the rocking chair for the balance of the night for
a quarter. The next morning I started out to look for work and found
it in a brick yard where I worked until August. Meanwhile I sent for
my wife and child. My wife, who is a dressmaker, soon found work. She
happened to sew for the wife of the manager of one of the steel mills.
He asked about me and said he thought he could give me something good
in the mill. I went there in August and have been there ever since. Now
I am a heater. All you see here was gotten together in the last seven
years." This man and his wife have paid $4,400 for a six-room house and
have furnished it attractively.

       *       *       *       *       *

The churches have the same prominent place in Negro life in Pittsburgh
as elsewhere. They include one Presbyterian, one Protestant Episcopal,
one Congregational, one Roman Catholic church, ten Methodist churches
and between thirty and thirty-five Baptist churches and missions.
The largest is the Bethel A. M. E. Church on Wylie avenue, which has
recently been built at a cost of $50,000. Colored slaters and roofers,
colored plasterers and three colored carpenters were employed in the
building of it. The interior decorations were in charge of a Negro
firm. The building together with the land, is valued at not less than
$110,000. The people give liberally to the churches; Bethel raised over
$10,000 in ten months toward paying off its mortgage.

But there is a large number not reached by the church in any real sense.
Though the new Bethel Church is in a district where the alleys and all
the bad conditions they imply are numerous, the pastor's plans for the
year as he outlined them were: first to pay the debt on the church,
second to have a revival to fill it up. Not a word was said of the great
need for active social work at its very doors. The rank and file of the
forty or fifty Negro ministers in Pittsburgh and Allegheny have not a
very high order of equipment or ethics. There are notable exceptions.
I met one minister who seemed filled with the desire to work for the
betterment of the Negroes of his neighborhood. In connection with the
new church which he was building he was planning to have a day nursery
and kindergarten and, if possible, a gymnasium. He hoped to have a
deaconess to visit the homes and was also trying to organize a colored
Y. M. C. A. At a meeting last fall in his church, the following subjects
were discussed:

"What is the influence of the Sunday School on the children?"

"Is the church accomplishing the desired end toward the masses?"

"Practical education and character making for the masses."

       *       *       *       *       *

Some of the laymen among the colored people, especially the women, are
working in similar directions. In 1880, in a small six-room house, a
group of these started a Home for Aged and Infirm Colored Women. The
present beautiful home on Lexington avenue was built in 1900 at a cost
of $42,500. It contains twenty-one rooms, six bath rooms and a hospital
room. The furnishings cost about $28,000. Several rooms were furnished
by the different Negro women's social clubs. The home is attractive,
cheery, clean and well-managed. The Working Girls' Home was similarly
started three years ago by some colored women who realized how much it
was needed. Girls coming to the city not only found it difficult to get
boarding places, but they were sometimes directed to undesirable houses.
In three years after it opened, the home had cared for forty to fifty
girls. As most of these girls go out to service, they do not remain
long at the home, but by paying a dollar a month a girl may store her
trunk if she wishes, and may come back there to spend Sundays and other
days "out," and to receive her callers. This is an arrangement which
is much appreciated by the girls, and its introduction in other places
might help solve the servant problem. A few girls who are seamstresses
live in the house. They pay $1.25 a week, buy their own provisions, and
have the use of the kitchen and gas range. The home has had a struggle
financially. Last year the Legislature granted it an appropriation of
$3,000 and it moved into a somewhat larger, though still too small
house. For this house, by the way, it had to pay thirty-two dollars a
month though the rent had formerly been twenty-five and the house had
been empty for some time.

The State Federation of Colored Women's Clubs formed five years ago,
is raising money to establish a colored orphan's home in New Castle,
Pennsylvania. A year ago these twenty-eight clubs had already raised
enough to make the first payment on seven acres of land. The Colored
Orphans' Home in Allegheny is under white management, and the colored
women are ambitious to have one of their own; a colored auxiliary to the
Juvenile Court Association was formed in 1906 to care for colored boys
and girls between nine and twelve years of age who are brought to the
court. The auxiliary also pays board for a group of colored children
who are in institutions outside the state. One member is a faithful
volunteer at the Juvenile Court.

More than twenty-five social clubs are formed of colored women. The
leading social organization for men is the Loendi Club. Besides this
and other private associations there are many such orders as the Odd
Fellows, Masons, Elks, Knights of Pythias and True Reformers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Since 1874, when separate schools for Negroes were abolished, the
colored children have attended the public schools with the white
children, and all the educational agencies of the city are open to them.
I was told that while a few stood well in their classes, the majority
lacked concentration. One principal attributed this to the impoverished
home conditions, lack of food and housing,--while another principal
to whose school came many of the children from the alleys, laid
their backwardness largely to their irregular attendance and immoral
tendencies. It was agreed that the average colored child requires about
two years longer than the white child to finish the grammar grades.

The total enrollment at the high school for the year 1906-7 was about
2,300, and of these only forty were colored. Forty-two were enrolled
last year, twenty boys and ten girls[11]. Few of these colored students
graduate. Five who were graduated in 1907 ranked well in their class.

[11] Transcriber 20 + 10 obviously does not equal 42

Thirty colored students attended the evening high school last year.
Two girls are in the day classes, and four in the night classes at the
Carnegie Technical Schools, and they have three colored boys. Five or
six boys have been graduated from the Schwab Manual Training School in
Homestead.

In writing of the Negroes of Chicago, Mr. Wright says "What Chicago
Negroes need is a great industrial school to teach Negroes domestic
science and the skilled trades." Greater Pittsburgh has a school that
should do this work. As early as 1849, Charles Avery, a Methodist
minister of Quaker descent, who was much interested in the colored
people, established for them in Allegheny the Avery College Trade
School. At his death he left the institution an endowment of $60,000
which has since increased in value, and it has also received a yearly
appropriation from the state. The school is controlled by a board of
trustees, of whom six are colored, three white. The principal and
teachers are colored. The courses which have been offered include
millinery, dressmaking, tailoring, music, some English courses and some
domestic science. Last spring, a hospital department was organized under
separate charter and offers a training course.

There is no doubt that the Avery school is not fulfilling the purpose
for which it was founded. It is inferior in equipment and in methods
and does not employ trained teachers. It is not reaching the colored
boys and girls of Pittsburgh and giving them the up-to-date training
which they so sorely need in those trades in which they can earn a
livelihood. It should be crowded and would be if it were offering what
the people want. Instead the enrollment at the end of the school year is
about one-third what it was at the beginning. There is no difficulty in
placing responsibility for success or failure, for the superintendent
is also secretary and treasurer. The colored people have brought many
complaints to the trustees in regard to the management of Avery but
no action has been taken. Here is a clear cut illustration of a badly
managed trust fund.

Mr. Avery also left twelve scholarships of $100 each to be awarded
to colored boys in the college and engineering departments of the
University of Pittsburgh, where a total of nineteen colored students is
enrolled.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of the 1,124 cases brought before the Juvenile Court in 1906, 168 (14.9
per cent), dealt with colored children. The court records show most
miserable conditions in the homes from which such children come. Usually
both mother and father are working away from home all day, so that out
of school hours there is no one to look after the children. They stop
going to school and begin to stay out late at night and the descent to
petty thieving and other offenses is swift and easy. On the morning of
my visit to the Juvenile Court several colored children were brought
before the judge. Harry D., a boy of eleven years, was under arrest for
his second offense. Twice he had broken into a chapel, the last time
stealing a lamp. The probation officer reported that on investigation,
she found Harry had scarcely been in school for a year. His mother
worked all day, earning three dollars a week and many days she came home
only early in the morning to cook. With three brothers and a sister this
boy slept on a cot in one room in which there was no other furniture
except two plush chairs and a plush sofa. An uncle who lived with the
children had taken to drinking and had not worked for some weeks. The
neighbors also bore testimony that Harry was neglected rather than bad.
Following Harry came a group of four colored boys on the charge that
on the previous Sunday they had broken into a liquor store and done
much mischief, such as turning on the spigots, breaking bottles full of
beer and smearing pretty much everything in the store, including some
cats, with black paint. The next morning they were arrested in a new
house near by where they were stealing lead pipe. Eugene, the youngest
boy, nine years old, had been in court two months before on the charge
of incorrigibility. His father was dead but his mother, by working out
by the day, managed to keep the home fairly clean and comfortable.
But Eugene was a truant; he stayed out nights and was in the habit of
stealing. For the lack of a more suitable solution, this nine-year-old
child was committed to the reformatory at Morganza. Two of these boys,
thirteen and eleven, were brothers. Their mother was dead; their father
was at work in a blast furnace, while their nineteen-year-old sister,
who might have kept the home, had left soon after the mother died
because she thought her father was too strict. The younger boy had been
staying out nights and playing truant. The older boy had never been in
trouble before. He had a good reputation and claimed, as did the fourth
boy, that he was not stealing but was trying to get the others away.
In other cases that came before the judge the parents were themselves
immoral and it is safe to say that the colored children who reach the
Juvenile Court have, as a rule, seen little but the seamy side of life.
A ready market for any bottle or piece of junk that these children can
beg or steal is found among the numerous junk dealers. The children will
be under a constant temptation to petty thieving for the sake of a few
pennies so long as this kind of exchange with juveniles is allowed.

The percentage of commitments among the adult Negroes (fourteen per
cent), is all out of proportion to their percentage in the population
(three and six-tenths). Women are most commonly arrested for disorderly
conduct; men for fighting and cutting, petit larceny and for gambling,
of which craps is the favorite form. There is much drunkenness. For some
time the police department of Pittsburgh has been warring against the
sale of cocaine. To the mind of the warden of the Allegheny county jail
the greatest single cause of crime committed by Negro men and women is
the use of this drug.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is evident that the Negroes of Pittsburgh are making commendable
progress along industrial lines. Some few have been conspicuously
successful while many more are earning a comfortable living and
attaining property. Negroes of this class present no special problems,
for they are usually good citizens and are educating and training their
children to be good citizens likewise. Their needs are the needs of the
rest of the community. They would be benefited by better housing, better
schools, better sanitation and a clearer atmosphere. But the problems in
connection with the poor, ignorant, incompetent or vicious Negroes are
many and pressing.

We have seen the need for eradicating the sale of cocaine, which
drags men under; and we have seen the need for rousing and equipping
the ambitious among them through industrial training, comparable to
that offered the southern Negro by Tuskegee and Hampton. A few of
the more obvious needs of the people who live in the alleys are day
nurseries to care for the babies of mothers who must go out to work;
some sort of supervised play after school hours, either in connection
with the schools or at playgrounds, for the older children of these
same families, settlements; and most pressing of all, a building on
lower Wylie avenue for social purposes with free baths, club rooms,
a gymnasium and other amusements as a counteracting influence to the
saloons and pool rooms that abound in this neighborhood. There is now
no place in Pittsburgh where a young colored man, coming a stranger to
the city, as so many are coming every year, may find innocent diversion
and helpful companionship. It is becoming increasingly clear that
these needs must be met by the Negroes themselves. A few, singly or in
small groups, are already working for social betterment, but so far
there has been no concerted, organized action. Left to themselves the
Negroes are slow or unable to organize but until they do, much of their
efforts as individuals will be wasted and but little definite good can
be accomplished. If the white people who have had greater experience in
dealing with civic and social needs realized this and extended to them
their co-operation, the community as a whole, no less than the Negroes,
would be richly repaid.




THE JEWISH IMMIGRANTS OF TWO PITTSBURGH BLOCKS

ANNA REED

COLUMBIAN SCHOOL AND SETTLEMENT, PITTSBURGH


The greater part of the Jewish community of Pittsburgh is situated in
what is known as the Hill District. This immigration brings with it
characteristics so entirely its own that much that is significant of the
common life was found summed up in a study of the families of two blocks
in the heart of this district. A census of them proved more surely than
even those of us who had long been residents in the neighborhood would
have anticipated, the permanence and stability of this new element in
the population. The two blocks reflected the sort of foothold which is
open to this distinctive people in what is for most purposes, a purely
industrial center; what relation their new occupations bear to their
training and experience in the old countries of Europe; and what, as
measured in terms of livelihood and accomplishment, comes to them in
this new setting.

The blocks selected were two adjoining Center avenue at different points
on the incline of the hill. Pittsburgh has no really large tenement
houses. These homes were originally built for two families, and while
some still contain but two, many have been converted so as to house a
great many more. In the process of rebuilding, downstairs front-rooms
have been changed into small stores where grocers, butchers and tailors
supply the needs of the neighborhood. The houses are of brick, and
many are garnished by a government license sign, which indicates that
somewhere in these already crowded quarters, a small stogy-factory is
located which sells in the larger market. The many synagogs where the
men still wear the old time praying shawls, and each repeats for himself
in monotonous, low, musical tones the ancient Hebrew prayers, bring
into this capital of the steel district, the wonderful and fascinating
spirit of the East. The Cheders where the Hebrew language, which every
hardworking father and mother, no matter what else is sacrificed, feel
must be taught to the boys, and the Kosher butcher-shops, where the
dietary laws are still observed, are all distinctive of a people, which
though it adopts American customs, still keeps many of the traditions in
its own communal life.

There were 1,080 people in these blocks, 817 of whom were Jewish. Of the
143 Jewish families, 110 were from Russia, twenty-seven from Roumania,
five from Austria-Hungary and one from Germany,--all largely from small
towns. Among them there were very nearly three hundred children of
school age or younger.

A third of these families had been in America over ten years and
two-thirds over five years. Of course, the fact that the census was
taken in a year of industrial depression may have had a large influence
on the comparatively small number of more recent immigrants in residence
in the neighborhood, for these would have less resources to keep them
in Pittsburgh during a period of hard times. But the actual number of
stable family groups was very considerable as shown in the following
classification:

              _Under 2_,  _2 to 5_,  _5 to 10_,  _10 to 20_,  _20 to 40_
  Years in
    America       10         33         50           32           18
  Years in
    Pittsburgh    12         36         49           29           17

This permanence as an element in the citizenship of Pittsburgh is in
contrast to an uninterrupted shifting among them as tenants. On the
one hand, the latter is merely a reflex of the success of particular
families in making their way and raising their standard of life; but the
greater part of it is due to the lack of proper houses at a fair rental
in Pittsburgh. It is a common occurrence for a family to move from place
to place in an effort to secure more livable quarters. One family went
through the torture of moving six times in one year. Two have lived from
ten to twenty years in the same place, eight from five to ten, forty-six
over two, while eighty-seven had been living in their present homes less
than two years.

Unsuspected by the casual visitor, there is a background of tragedy
and national crises to such a neighborhood. Among the great nations
of Europe, Russia and Roumania have absolutely refused political
and industrial freedom to their Jewish subjects. The concrete forms
which oppression and restriction assume are very real: prohibitions
against their owning land, their exclusion in one part of Russia from
the learned professions, in another from taking part in a government
contract, and in whole districts from owning their own homes. Here in
these blocks there are many families who have lived and traded in daily
terror of an outbreak or of the tyranny of an unscrupulous governor;
who have been deprived of the rights and privileges of citizens and yet
subjected to the full strain of military law and the brunt of religious
persecution. You chance to meet a man in the corner grocery,--he is tall
and gaunt; his long beard is well sprinkled with grey. On talking with
him you find he has served in the Russo-Turkish War, that his only son
served for four years in the Russian army, and that a "pogrom" finally
drove him to leave everything behind and flee to these shores. One man
was robbed and his family outraged,--a son and brother-in-law killed in
a recent massacre; another man already past forty, had to take up his
burden, and, like the pilgrims of old, go forth and search for a new
home, because the edict had been given in Moscow.

It was found that forty-one of the families had come for purely
religious and political reasons, ninety-two to better their economic
condition and thirty-four had followed relatives, friends and townsmen
who either sent for them or urged them to make the journey. Indeed,
this personal relationship is on many counts the most important factor
in swelling the population of a Jewish neighborhood. As a rule, no
matter how poor the immigrant may be, he saves, often by the most
drastic measures, to send for some loved ones. Such was the experience
of a young man, educated in the public schools of Roumania, who had
suffered in the uprisings there. His first employment in Pittsburgh
was with a local druggist. He went through the usual apprenticeship,
and soon another brother had come over and was working as a barber.
They saved and sent part of their earnings to their parents in the
old country, while the first, by work and study, prepared himself for
entrance into the local college of pharmacy, was graduated and his
earning capacity thereby increased. Then, the parents, a sister and two
brothers were brought over and, when an opportunity for buying a drug
store offered itself to him, the combined forces of the family made the
purchase possible. To-day, after eight years of hard work, he owns a
well-established business, is married and the entire family seems well
started on the road to success.

The question of what a man does, when he comes here an uninterpreted
stranger, is interestingly reflected in these two blocks. The
stogy industry and peddling are dominant; of those who have become
stogy-makers, four were students, two grocers, one was a peddler, one a
tailor, one a lumber trader, one a merchant and another a butcher.

The peddlers represent an even larger variety of skilled trades and
other occupations. A jewelry peddler and a rag peddler were printers; a
weaver, two lumber dealers, a gardener and a grocer have become peddlers
of clothing; a carpenter sells pictures; two blacksmiths, a tailor and
a farmer are peddling rags. Of those who were skilled, a goldsmith has
become a presser, a shoemaker is working at iron beds, an umbrella-maker
runs a pool room and a Hebrew teacher is now an egg-candler.

In contrast, and much more encouraging, are the six blacksmiths, eleven
tailors, three barbers, two bakers, three shoemakers, two printers
and a locksmith, a machinist, a plumber and a glazier, who started and
continue to use the trades they learned in the old country.

One of the most interesting facts brought out was that the number of
peddlers, grew from ten in the old country to twenty-eight on their
arrival in America and to thirty-two as the first work in Pittsburgh,
dropping again to seventeen who are peddling at the present time.

The following table compares occupations in the old country with those
practiced in the new:

                              _Old        New_
                            _Country.   Country._
  Store keepers                20          20
  Craftsmen                    37          28
  Laborers                      4           7
  Peddlers                     10          17
  Hucksters                     4          16
  Factory workers               1           9
  Factory owners                1           5
  Restaurant keepers            2           4
  Lumber dealers                3          ..
  Gardeners, farmers, etc.      7          ..
  Clerks                        1           4
  Travelling Salesmen          ..           2
  Miscellaneous                 2           7

     NOTE.--Under miscellaneous were classed a foreman, manager,
     agent, contractor, collector.

The meaning of this table will be made clearer by telling two stories,
one of a man who is succeeding, and one of a man who has known the keen
anguish that to the great masses of men is involved in the words "hard
times." For the results of an industrial depression show themselves with
promptness in such an immigrant neighborhood. One man, married and the
father of three children, was employed as a porter in a downtown store.
He was thrown out of work, and to the terrors of rent was added the
fact that his wife was soon to give birth to another child. Four weeks
afterward, the landlord levied on the furniture for the unpaid rent and
the weak, under-nourished mother became temporarily insane. She was
placed in a sanatorium, two of the children were sent to a day nursery
and the youngest child,--too young to be taken by the nursery,--was
sent to a private family. And then, for the man, began the struggle
to get work. He bought a small quantity of fruit and peddled it in a
basket from house to house. He was arrested one morning, in a freight
yard where he was charged by the yard policeman with stealing. He was
acquitted at the trial and the police sergeant claimed that cases of
injustice of this kind were not infrequent. Next, he secured work
as janitor in a hospital at five dollars a week, and after a time,
his wife's condition improved and he was able to reunite his family.
Thereupon, he borrowed ten dollars and bought a second-hand pushcart
with a license, and now he is once more trading in fruits and vegetables
in his struggle against odds to care for them. Another man, forty-eight
years old and the father of eleven children, had spent his early life in
a small town. His first job on coming to New York was that of a clothing
operator. The over-strain of the sweatshop caused the only too frequent
breakdown in health. Two years later he came to the Pittsburgh District,
where, as a peddler in the country towns, he gradually regained his
strength. To-day, he owns his home and has a paying grocery business.

Of the 263 non-Jews in these blocks, nine out of ten were Negroes; and
among them four questionable houses were found. Such an environment,
with the change from former surroundings and conditions, does not
always work out satisfactorily; the higher cost of living, the severe
struggle for existence, the sudden transition from oppression to
freedom, often have a deteriorating influence. They result in cases of
wife-desertion, in laxity of religious observances, in gambling sessions
at the coffee-houses, in occasional moral lapses, and in contempt for
the ideals, customs and beauties of the traditional family and religious
life of the old country. Yet, as a whole, we know the people of these
blocks, and of the hill, as immigrants who have suffered oppression
and borne ridicule; who in the face of insult and abuse have remained
silent, but who have stamped on their countenances a look of stubborn
patience and hope,--always hope,--and of capacity to overcome.

[Illustration: HOMESTEAD FROM THE HILL BEHIND THE TOWN.]

[Illustration: THE STREET--HOMESTEAD'S ONLY PLAYGROUND.]

[Illustration: MUNHALL HOLLOW.]

[Illustration: HOMESTEAD.]




HOMESTEAD

A STEEL TOWN AND ITS PEOPLE

MARGARET F. BYINGTON

ASSOCIATE SECRETARY FIELD DEPARTMENT FOR THE EXTENSION OF ORGANIZED
CHARITY


Seven miles from Pittsburgh, up the valley of the Monongahela River,
lie the town of Homestead and the largest steel plant in the world.
Seventeen years ago, Homestead was, for a time, the center of national
interest, while the men and the Carnegie Steel Company fought to the
finish one of the most dramatic battles in the history of the labor
movement. The men failed,--public interest died out,--but the mill
has gone on growing steadily and the town has kept pace, until now it
numbers about 25,000. Throughout this time, the corporation, through its
practically unquestioned decisions as to wages and hours of labor, has
in large measure determined the conditions under which the men shall
live. There is only one other industry in the town, the Mesta Machine
Company, and little other work except in providing for the needs of the
mill workers. We may consider then that the conditions resulting when a
great organized industry creates about it, without a definite plan, a
town dependent solely upon it for development, are fairly represented
in Homestead. For, after all, the town is to be considered in part as
a product of the steel industry, as well as the rails and armor plate
shipped in the great freight trains that puff away down the river, and
the success of the corporation must be estimated, in part, by its share
in creating the homes and moulding the lives of the workers.

Thirty years ago, two farms occupied the land now covered by the vast
plant and the homes of hundreds of workers. In 1881, when Klomans built
the mill, now a part of the United States Steel Corporation, the change
began. The very aspect of Homestead shows how during the twenty-seven
years that have passed, the plant has been the unifying and dominating
force in the town. The mill has now stretched itself for over a mile
along the river and the level space between the river and a hill rising
steeply behind, which was the original site of both mill and town,
has been entirely shut off from the water front. The smoke from the
many furnaces and from the two railroads which cross the town settles
heavily, making the section gloomy even on the brightest days. Wash day
for some must wait for a west wind, if the clothes are not to come in
blacker than when they went into the tub, and mothers find it a problem
to keep children even reasonably clean in a place where the grass itself
is covered with oily dust.

This level space was originally large enough to accommodate the houses
as well as the mill, but with the growth of the town, the homes have
spread up the hill, and even out into the region beyond. For the
English speaking people who were earlier comers, have been glad to
leave the level, smoke-hidden section to the more recent immigrants.
Here, in houses huddled together, where the totally inadequate sanitary
provisions and overcrowding are comparable to the worst sections
of a great city, we find now the homes of the Slavs. Courts where
seventy-five, or even in a few instances more than a hundred people, are
dependent for water supply on one hydrant, and houses with an average
of four or five persons to each room are frequent. These facts will be
considered more in detail in another article, exemplifying as they do
conditions existing in many small industrial centers.

Though there are no definite figures available as to the composition of
the population of Homestead, the nationality of the men employed in the
mill in July, 1907, will serve as a clue to the make up of the town as
a whole. Of 6,772 employes, 3,601 or more than half were Slavs, 1,925
were native whites, 121 colored, 397 English, 259 Irish, 129 Scotch, 176
German, and 164 were of other Europeans.

Aside from the Slavs, there is almost no tendency among the different
nationalities to live in separate sections. The more desirable part of
the town, which includes aside from the upper part of Homestead proper
the politically independent boroughs of West Homestead and Munhall, is
occupied by the whole English speaking group and it is with their life
that this paper deals.

Parallel to the main thoroughfare, along the side of the hill, runs
street after street lined with simple frame houses. These stand detached
from one another, though often with only a passageway between. There
is usually a porch in front and a small yard where growing flowers or
shrubs give a cheerful homelike air. The streets are full of merry
children, coasting in winter down the steep hillsides, or in summer
playing marbles and jumping rope. The hill lifts this section out of
some of the smoke, but even here the sky is seldom really bright, and
the outlook is over the stacks of the mills with their plumes of smoke.
In general arrangement, the town shows an absence of interest in future
development on the part of its original planners. The avenues, which run
parallel from east to west with alleys between, are crossed at right
angles by the main streets, cutting the town into rectangular blocks.
Here and there are beds of old water courses down the hillside, on whose
banks small houses, hardly more than shanties, have been built. The
narrow lots of the original plan have had, moreover, a bad effect on
the houses built on them. These houses are small, usually consisting of
four or five rooms, but the middle room in the latter case opens only on
the passage between the buildings, which is of necessity very narrow,
and is never reached by sunshine. Moreover, the narrow lot which limits
decidedly the choice in plans has resulted in a uniformity of design and
a lack of artistic quality in the houses. This, especially in winter
when there are no flowers to relieve it, gives to the streets an air of
monotony.

As Homestead grew, houses were built to the east of it on property
outside the borough limits, owned by the Carnegie Land Company, a
constituent part of the United States Steel Corporation. This district
and a section including most of the mill property were formed into
the separate borough of Munhall, said to be the richest one in
Pennsylvania. From the beginning the mill officials have taken a marked
interest in its development, and the general effect of Munhall shows
the results. In the center stand side by side, the imposing library
with its little park, the gift of Mr. Carnegie, and the handsome
residence of the superintendent of the mill. Behind are the houses of
the minor officials, whose wide lawns are kept in beautiful condition
by men in the employ of the company. On the streets farther back,
where the employes live, are many attractive houses, and on Sixteenth
avenue cottages of varying design set back from the street, show the
possibility of securing effective yet inexpensive plans.

But neither the presence of the mill nor the dull sameness of the
streets can hamper the sense of home-likeness which the workmen feel
as they step across their own doorsteps. The burden of creating this
falls on the shoulders of the housewife. Usually in these homes there
is that proof of an upward social trend, a "front room," which with its
comfortable furniture and piano or other musical instrument is the real
center of the life and amusement of the family. As one woman said, "The
children don't realize how much it costs to keep up the parlor, but
they want it to look nice so they can bring their friends in, and as
long as it keeps them home I'll manage it somehow." And no outsider can
understand the sacrifices involved, the ceaseless economies if parlor
curtains and pianos are to be evolved from a wage of fifteen dollars a
week.

[Illustration: SIXTEENTH AVENUE, MUNHALL.]

Of course extremes of thrift and inefficiency are met. In one home,
where the man earns but $1.65 a day and there are six to feed, they had
not only managed to buy an organ and give one of the girls lessons, but
had saved enough to tide them through the hard winter of 1908. But the
wife, the daughter of a Pennsylvania farmer, had learned the thrifty
ways of such a household. For this is skill amounting to genius and
cannot be expected of all. I remember, in contrast, a kitchen where all
is wretched, the children unwashed, the woman untidy, the room unswept.
In such a scene, it is not surprising to have the woman complain that
the man always goes to Pittsburgh with a crowd to spend the evening.
Though he earns nearly twice what the other man does, his wife, who had
been trained as a servant in a wealthy home and had learned extravagant
ways, realized in a helpless sort of way her inability to "get caught
up" financially, or to display any efficiency in managing her home and
training her children. Between these two types is that of the average
family, where the effort to make life wholesome meets with mingled
successes and failures.

[Illustration: GLEN ALLEY, HOMESTEAD.]

The recognition among the people of the value of home life, finds
perhaps no more striking proof than the zeal shown by many of them in
purchasing their houses. According to the census figures of 1900, 567
families owned homes in the borough, 27.3 per cent of the entire number
of houses, and 268 of these were free from encumbrance. Such business
organizations as the Homestead Realty Company have met the needs of
those wishing to buy on a slender income by a system of selling on the
instalment plan, which in large measure takes the place of building
and loan associations. The initial payment is small, sometimes as low
as $150 for a house of four rooms, the real estate company assumes the
obligations for insurance, taxes, and interest on the mortgage, and
the buyer pays a monthly instalment large enough to cover all this and
make a small reduction on the principal. For example, one family I know
bought a four-room house worth about $1,750. Of this, they paid down
$150, and thereafter a monthly instalment of sixteen dollars, which was
little more than they would have had to pay for rent. Though it has
taken fifteen years to buy the house, they now have a home of their own;
and without unreasonable sacrifice.

No phase of this attitude towards saving was to me more interesting
than the reasons given for and against buying. Two sisters were typical
of these different opinions. One with six children, whose husband made
something over three dollars a day, said: "I didn't try to buy, because
I wanted to give my children everything that was coming to them, and
I wouldn't stint them." So, as far as she could, she had given them
what the other children in school had, and truly three dollars goes
but a little way in a town where the rent is four dollars a room and
food-stuffs are said to be the highest in the country. The other,
wiser perhaps, had begun early to buy her home. Though she has been
married only five years, to a man whose income is about the same as the
brother-in-law, and there are two little ones to care for, they have
already made the initial payment on their home. It is a neat five-room
house on one of the good streets, with running water in the kitchen and
a bath-room, and is worth about $3,000. Of this they paid $300 down,
and their monthly instalment is twenty-five dollars. Since their family
is small, by subletting two rooms for eight dollars a month, they reduce
the monthly expenditure to about an ordinary rent. While it will take
some years to pay off the indebtedness, by the time that the children
are large enough to need the other rooms, they plan to be well on their
way toward accomplishing this.

With many, however, the initial purchase is only the beginning of their
home making, and, as soon as the house is paid for, the family take the
most genuine pleasure in its improvement. Sometimes it is the addition
of a bath-room; sometimes it is the repapering which the busy mother
finds time to do in the spring; sometimes the building of a wash-house
in the yard. But wherever such improvements are made it means always the
development of the sense of family life and its common interests.

In home buying there lurks, of course, an undeniable danger to the
workman: the danger of putting all his savings into a house, when
death, discharge, or a season of hard times may mean the necessity
of a forced sale with its inevitable loss. That the owning of a home
tends to lessen the mobility of labor is a factor to be considered in
upholding it as a desirable form of thrift. In Homestead, however, this
danger has been minimized by what has otherwise been a disadvantage to
the town, the lack of a sufficient number of houses.[12] Buildings have
not been erected fast enough to keep pace with the town's growth, and
consequently rents have risen and desirable houses are hard to secure.
This situation, while it stimulates people to buy their own homes, also
makes it possible to sell at almost any time.

[12] During the depression of 1907-8 there was an abundance of houses,
as families were doubling up to save rent, but this was only a temporary
situation.

There are many, however, to whom these real homes are not possible.
There rises to my mind, in contrast, a two-room tenement down in the
grimy corner where the mill joins the town. Here a woman was trying to
support four little children by sewing and washing. Her husband had died
after eight years of semi-invalidism resulting from an accident in the
mill. With his small wages they had not been able to save, and as the
injury had occurred so long ago, she was not eligible for a benefit from
the Carnegie Relief Fund. The kitchen was small and hot and the younger
children noisy, and the not unnatural consequence was that the oldest
girl drifted to the streets, mixed with a gay crowd, and eventually
became a charge of the Juvenile Court. The girl was not bad at heart,
and had there been a cheerful home where her friends could come, the end
might have been different.

[Illustration: BACK YARD POSSIBILITIES IN HOMESTEAD--I.]

This instance illustrates the fact, more or less true of the whole town,
that local conditions are such as to lay too large a responsibility
for providing enjoyment on the skill of the wife and mother. Where she
succeeds, the home becomes the center of the family's happiness, yet
even so, we should look to the town itself for those wider opportunities
for mental and physical relaxation which help maintain a normal life.
But to the stranger approaching Homestead, the town speaks more
eloquently of toil than of pleasure. The river, elsewhere so often a
source of endless enjoyment, is muddy and swift. Moreover, one bank is
preempted by the railroad, the other by the long and unsightly stretches
of mill yard. In the second ward, near the river, which is almost
solidly built up, the only place for the children to play is the street
or the alley. That the boys do not find these a wholly satisfactory
playground is shown by the following clipping from the local newspaper:

     BOYS CLAIM THEIR RIGHTS ARE BEING INTERFERED WITH.

     The boys of Homestead want to know why they cannot play
     basketball on the street, and they want to know what they can do.
     Burgess please answer in Monday's _Messenger_.

On the top of the hill there are open places where the bigger boys find
room for recreation, but it is a long climb, too long for the small
children in the section where a place for play is most needed.

The two recreation parks within a five-cent fare of the town, owned by
the street railway, are the scenes of many school and church picnics
and lodge gatherings. Here the young people find the skating rinks and
dancing pavilions and the shrill music of the merry-go-rounds, while
tired mothers seek quiet grass plots where they may sit and watch the
children play, and where they may have the rare chance to gossip with
their neighbors.

In Homestead itself the two popular forms of amusement are the
skating rink and the nickelodeon. The former fills the papers with
advertisements for moonlight skating parties, a "marriage on rollers,"
and other devices for attracting patronage. The gaiety and swing of
this pastime, which appeal to the young and vigorous, have made it in
general very popular. It offers, however, those dangers common to the
indiscriminate meeting of young people, which make some mothers hesitate
to let their girls go unless with "our own crowd."

[Illustration: BACK YARD POSSIBILITIES IN HOMESTEAD--II.]

The nickelodeon, whose small cost brings it within the financial reach
of most families, is perhaps the most popular entertainment. You are
admitted to a room the size of a small store, with rows of chairs, a
small stage, and an atmosphere that is soon unbearably close. Here
you witness for five cents a show lasting about fifteen minutes. On
the Saturday afternoon when I attended, there was a series of moving
pictures illustrating a story on the same theme as Camille, and two
sentimental songs illustrated by colored slides. While none of them
was of a high grade of amusement they evidently really entertained
the audience, at least half of whom were workingmen. To them the
nickelodeon seems to make a special appeal since it offers the variety
they crave after long days in the mill. This limited range of amusement
offered is almost the only entertainment which is available for older
people, or which can be enjoyed in common by them and by the young and
active members of the community. While this lack is met, in a degree,
by the entertainments which lodges and churches give, the latter are
rather sedate. The festivities which appeal to young people are all
money-making enterprises, with the abuses likely to result under such
conditions. Many of the clergymen expressed their belief that there was
need of a better kind of amusement, a need which might be met by such
institutions as the public recreation centers of Chicago.

Among the causes contributing to this lack of amusement is the
possibility for those with more money and leisure of securing the better
class of entertainment in Pittsburgh. Still as it is a forty-five
minutes' ride to the city, mothers tied down by the care of children,
and men wearied by the day's work seldom avail themselves of what
Pittsburgh offers. Another cause is found in the fact that the owners of
the mill are non-residents, and give neither money nor influence to help
the everyday normal development of the town. There is a marked contrast
in this between Homestead's situation and that of independent towns of
similar size. In the latter, where there is a larger proportion of the
well-to-do who are dependent for entertainment on what the town offers,
it is possible to secure fairly good theatrical performances, as well as
concerts and lectures.

[Illustration: EIGHTH AVENUE AT NIGHT, HOMESTEAD.]

Two additions to the opportunities for relaxation have, however, been
made by prominent officials of the steel corporation. At the Carnegie
Library there is a club providing classes for musical training which
give occasional concerts, as well as a gymnasium with a swimming pool,
bowling alleys, etc. This club, which is open to all on payment of two
dollars a year, is popular with the young men, especially those on
the clerical force. A series of entertainments, however, given during
the winter of 1907-8 under the management of a lecture bureau was not
successful.

[Illustration: A NICKELODEON AUDIENCE IN HOMESTEAD.]

The second, the gift from Mr. Frick of a small formal park transformed
from an ugly hole at the end of one of the ravines, is the source of
much pride to the town. A need which it does not supply, however, was
shown by a visit there one hot afternoon. Three or four men were sitting
in the sun on the benches set along the cement paths. The grass had
recently been cut and in a pile which lay on the edge of the street,
half a dozen little chaps were turning somersaults and revelling in the
coolness. For them, the park with its set flower beds and well-kept lawn
offered few inducements. They would prefer a real playground.

The chief obstacle to the development of amusements is, doubtless,
the hours and nature of mill work. Every other week the men work on
night turn. Then they get home early in the morning and are ready,
right after breakfast, for the much needed sleep; at four o'clock in
the afternoon they must be called, and after an early supper they are
off to the mill for the long night. That week there is no chance for
outside festivities, nor chance even for the family to have quiet
evenings together. Sometimes when sons who are also in the mill are
on the opposite shift, the family is not able to meet even for meals.
This irregularity not only tends to break into the family life, but
also by making regular engagements impossible, lessens the interest
in outside things. Even when the men are on day turn and are through
work at half-past five, the ten hours of heavy labor in the mill leave
them little ambition to seek out amusements. The exhausting nature of
the work, coupled with the lack of sleep due to this constant change
of habits, makes them weary enough, as they show by the slow steps and
bent shoulders of the homeward procession. Change of thought and genuine
relaxation are nevertheless a necessity, if the men are to maintain even
mere physical efficiency.

The spirit of the mill is the spirit of work. We have found that
the town itself provides for the men little opportunity for genuine
relaxation after the strain of the day's work; and when we turn to the
town again, seeking whether it offers any stimulus to mental activity,
we find in it the same failure to help in the development of a normal
life. There is the Carnegie Library to be sure, which has classes in
metallurgy, and provides expensive periodicals dealing with the steel
trade as well as general reading matter. But as many a man said to me,
"Oh what's the use of a library when a man works twelve hours a day?"

Although efforts towards a reorganization of the union are practically
at an end, because of the opposition of the mill officials, there
is earnest thinking going on among some of the men about the great
corporation which controls wages and hours, and so much of the rest of
life as is dependent upon them. One man, who during the recent hard
times was not earning enough to pay his rent, said, "I don't blame the
superintendent here for our being out of work, but the men in New York
could help it, only they don't know or don't care what a cut in wages
means to us."

That the changes in wage scale or the decisions to work but half time
last winter, which came to them without explanation, were related to an
industrial depression which affected a whole continent, was but dimly
understood. They knew of dividends, and they knew of wage-cuts. With the
feeling that they are impotent to change conditions, some of the more
thoughtful men are turning to socialism for the larger solution it seems
to offer. I was surprised to hear socialism advocated by the wife of a
mill clerk making two dollars a day. She and her husband were thrifty
people who had just succeeded in buying a piece of property,--not at
all the typical socialists of a conservative man's fears. But in their
twenty years of married life, the clerk's wages had been cut fifteen per
cent. With a growing family, needs had increased, and only stringent
economies, the cutting out even of five cents for the nickelodeon, had
made their home what it was. And now with mills idle and their little
savings rapidly going, a sense of social injustice was making itself
felt.

[Illustration: GOING HOME FROM WORK.

This picture grimly sums up Homestead--the mill at the left, the
Carnegie library on the hill in the center, and the mean houses of the
second ward to the right.]

Recently considerable agitation in regard to the subject was aroused by
the preaching of a minister, who is a Christian-socialist. While many
of the men were keenly interested in his theories, there was so much
opposition among the conservative members of the congregation, that
finally he was obliged to leave. I was told that in one of the first
committee meetings to discuss the situation, his position was approved
by the workingmen members, while opposition was expressed by two men who
served corporations in a professional capacity.

Again, a Scotchman, feeling the capitalist's lack of sympathy for the
working man's problems, expressed surprise that a number of wealthy
Scotchmen had joined in the celebration of Burns's birthday. "How can
they," he said, "when they think of his social theories? I should think
they would be ashamed to." To him, Burns was the man who wrote A Man's a
Man for A' That.

But men such as these are the exceptions. One of the most intelligent
men I know, an ardent socialist, told me of his exasperation because
his fellows were, he held, so unintelligent and were so unwilling to
talk about social questions. This he thought was due to the long hours
and hard work, since it took the other twelve hours to rest from the
day's labor. Most of them, truly, are both too tired to think and too
conscious of the dominance of the corporation to believe it worth
while to seek a solution of these problems. Neither is there much
within the mill to develop intellectual keenness. The men, it is true,
are encouraged to invent improvements, but though these undoubtedly
influence their promotion it is currently reported that the men receive
no direct reward. The general feeling, moreover, that promotion is due
to favoritism, lessens the stimulus to study and work up. With the
attitude of the mill officials toward trade unionism, men are more or
less afraid to discuss industrial questions with one another. An old
resident gave me this as a current maxim,

"If you want to talk in Homestead you must talk to yourself."

In one respect, however, the men do unite to meet conditions arising
under the industry. The work in the mills brings them constantly face to
face with the danger of accident. Almost daily, occur minor accidents: a
foot bruised by a heavy weight, a hand lacerated by a machine; accidents
not serious enough to prevent work for any length of time, or perhaps
to justify damages. But where the margin is small, two weeks or even
one of enforced idleness means a serious problem in family finances.
While the men injured are eligible to the Carnegie Relief Fund, this
fund gives assistance only when a man has been disabled for a year or
more, and consequently is of no help in minor accidents. In order to
meet these emergencies, then, the men have utilized the fraternal orders
which form one of the chief centers of interest in Homestead life.
There are more than forty lodges, and while it was impossible to learn
the exact membership, twenty-three lodges report a total membership of
3,663, of whom 3,400 are men. The strongest of these is the Odd Fellows,
with a membership of over 1,000, most of whom are steel workers. In
all but two out of twenty-seven, concerning which data were secured,
there are benefit features; a sick benefit usually of five dollars a
week for three months with a smaller sum thereafter; and a small death
benefit of only $150 or so. The fraternal insurance orders, which vary
the assessments with the amount of the benefit, give as high as $5,000.
Sometimes both regular and lodge insurance policies are carried. In
sixty-three families investigated, only nine of the heads of families
were uninsured, while eighteen carried both kinds. What this insurance
means, however, is but feebly shown by the amounts involved. One woman,
speaking of her early struggles, told how in the first year of her
married life, her husband was seriously burned in the mill and for three
months was unable to do a stroke of work. Fortunately, from the three
benefit orders to which he belonged came $12.50 a week, which supported
the family. "My baby came then," she added feelingly, "and if it had not
been for that money, I could have bought no clothes for her."

In addition to this benefit feature, the lodge offers an opportunity for
the development of sympathy and the consciousness of social solidarity.
A woman, who was a rather recent comer to Homestead, had been a member
of one of these lodges in another town. Her little baby became ill and
died, and where otherwise she would have been alone in her grief, her
fellow members came at once to watch with her during his sickness, and
to console her after his death. "Why, they were like my own sisters,"
she said, and it was this which counted rather than the twenty-five
dollars which helped meet the funeral expenses.

The lodge also affords an opportunity to show that interest in outside
matters, which otherwise finds scanty means of expression. I saw one day
a half bushel of fine potatoes ready for baking, which a woman told me
were her contribution to a supper being given for an emergency hospital
in Homestead. "We don't need that hospital," she said, "because my
man isn't in a dangerous place in the mill, but I'm glad to help even
if most of them are 'Hunkies.'" During the winter of 1907-8, almost
every lodge in town gave some sort of entertainment for the benefit of
this hospital. Aroused by the suffering of men seriously injured in
the mill, who have to be taken on the train to Pittsburgh, the whole
town united in a determination to meet this need of their community.
While the individual contributions of the workingmen would have been
discouragingly small, their real interest could express itself through
the existing lodge organizations. In fact, aside from the church, the
lodge seems to offer the one possibility of co-operative effort.

Many men also find here their one chance of meeting other men socially.
All the lodges, even the purely insurance ones, have social features,
and often at special meetings the whole family go together. While these
features of fraternal orders are of course common in all communities, in
Homestead, with its danger of accident and its limitation as to other
amusements, they play an especially important role.

[Illustration: ITEMS FROM THE HOMESTEAD "MESSENGER."

Illustrating how accidents become everyday happenings in a steel town.
Period: two weeks when the mills were running slack.]

Yet life needs some outlook for the future other than preparation to
meet its disasters. With the increase in the size of the corporation,
the days are passing when a rise to a position of eminence is possible
for a poor boy, so that personal ambition has become a negative factor.
But to the parents who seek for their children a better position, more
education and more of the refinements of life, the future is full of
interest. One woman complained that her neighbor was "all right, only
she talks too much about her children," but when one realized how much
the mother's interest and devotion had done to make her sons successful,
it was easy to forgive her. Another woman, of natural sweetness and
grace of manner, told of her efforts to teach her little girls those
formal niceties in which she had not been trained. "I bought a book on
manners," she said, "so as to teach the children, and I make myself do
the things so they will. It's awfully hard to say 'excuse me' when I
leave the table, but if I don't they'll never learn," and the greeting
given a stranger by the little daughter showed how well this mother was
succeeding.

The center of interest, especially to the fathers, is in the future of
their sons. Often the sons go ahead of their fathers in the race, and
one elderly man told me with pride that he owed his easy job to his son
who had become an assistant superintendent. Sometimes parents, most
frequently the mothers, are unwilling that their boys should enter the
mill, for the fear of accident makes the long nights a time of terror.
Many a woman has said, "When I was first married, I couldn't sleep when
the 'mister' was on night turn, but, of course, I'm used to it now."
Still when their sons grow up, they begin again to dread the danger.
The great mill, however, has a fascination of its own, so that most
of the boys "follow the stacks." They then live at home, contributing
their share to the family income, and we find that economic bond which
Mrs. Bosenquet has pointed out as so dominant a factor in strengthening
family life in England. This mutual affection is undoubtedly the most
potential factor in keeping pure the moral life of the town.

Morally the town is an average one. Along one of the railroads is a
section comparable in a small way to some of the dark parts of a great
city, and there gambling, immorality and drunkenness have their meeting
place, but in the districts where most of the workmen have their homes,
the former two evils are practically unknown. A doctor in a position
to know the situation well, believes that in the main this town is
clean morally, and his statement is confirmed by clergymen and other
physicians.

Intemperance, on the other hand, is a serious factor. In Munhall there
are no saloons, but in Homestead, there are fifty, eight in a single
block on Eighth avenue next to the mill entrance. As one resident
summed up the situation, "I think we have at least sixty-five saloons,
ten wholesale liquor stores, a number of beer agents, innumerable
speak-easies and a dozen or more drug stores,"--and this in a town of
25,000. In addition to their usual attractions of light and jollity, the
saloons appeal to the thirst engendered by hours of work in the heat.
Though this heat-thirst is frequently offered as an excuse for drinking,
men who do not drink are emphatic in their belief that alcohol lessens
their ability to withstand the extreme temperature. While intoxication
is not very frequent, the saloons do a thriving business and their
patrons were among the first to feel the hardships of the industrial
depression. A clergyman assured me that preaching against intemperance
did no good and that substitutes must be offered, but so far none has
been developed. The library, which is on the hill out of the men's way,
cannot be reckoned as a counter attraction, for they are too tired to be
often tempted by it.

The church, too, finds it hard to hold them. The fact that they usually
have to work either Saturday night or Sunday night, and some men during
Sunday as well, affects the attitude of the whole town towards Sunday
keeping. A clergyman who complained because a certain store was open on
Sunday, was told that as the mill ran that day, nothing could be done
about closing the store. "We can't take the little fish and let the big
one go." The men feel the inconsistency in being urged to attend church
when they have to work hard part of the day. Then too, they are often
very tired. One big, jovial colored man told me how he came home Sunday
morning from the mill expecting to go to church, but fell fast asleep
while waiting for the hour of service.

The churches, however, play an important part in the life of those,
especially the women and young people, who are actually connected
with them. The thirty churches represent all denominations, some of
them preserving their original race distinctions. Two Welsh churches
still have their service in the Keltic language. There are a number of
missions, among them one on the main street, whose transparency bearing
the legend, "The Wages of Sin Is Death," suggests a Bowery type. The
Salvation Army, while it has a short muster roll, has a strong grip on
the community which seems impressed by its earnestness, simplicity and
poverty. For whatever its intellectual limitations there is throughout
the town a profound respect for genuine spiritual devotion. During
the winter most of the churches, in addition to their regular weekly
services, held special revival meetings. These, while they have little
of the tense excitement sometimes associated with such meetings, seem to
be a strong force in developing the real spiritual power of the churches.

The church, moreover, meets certain of the social needs of the town
through its wholesome festivities. All winter the stores were full of
signs of "chicken and waffle suppers," and the papers told of socials
of all the varieties that a small church evolves. These were usually to
raise funds, sometimes for church expenses, sometimes for charity, and
in one instance, I remember, to help send out a foreign missionary. But,
whatever the object, they serve to increase the happiness of life under
wholesome conditions.

[Illustration: KENNYWOOD PARK AT NIGHT.]

[Illustration: A.--Profile of line A. B. in map opposite, showing slope
on which Homestead is built.--B.]

So the church plays its part, both spiritually and socially, in helping
its members to a fuller individual life. It does not, however, furnish
an opportunity for that discussion of matters of everyday concern to the
men, which might serve to arouse their interest in the whole life of the
church and to quicken their sense of civic responsibility. Moreover,
in a town where industrial questions are of paramount importance, the
church is only beginning to take an interest in them. In the larger
question of leadership in civic life, the churches seem also to have
missed a great opportunity. Though they took some action in the local
option campaign, this was an isolated instance, and in general they do
not appear to have accepted their full responsibility in arousing men to
a realization of the duties of citizenship.

[Illustration: HOMESTEAD VS. MUNHALL.

     The town-site back of the mills is divided into two boroughs.

     Munhall embraces most of the property of the U. S. Steel
     Corporation: the tax rate is 8-1/2 mills and the corporation pays
     $40,000 in taxes.

     In Homestead, where most of the workmen have their homes, the
     tax rate is 15 mills, and the corporation pays $7,000.]

That a sense of civic responsibility is needed, is emphasized by those
who know the life of the town, and who find there a serious political
situation. In Homestead, which is by far the largest and most important
of the three boroughs, the political conditions are worst. The borough
government consists of a burgess elected every three years, and a
council, which is also elective. Of the two important committees, the
Board of Health is appointed by the burgess with the consent of the
council, and the School Board is chosen directly by the people.

In spite of the possibility of influencing some of the local conditions
through these elected representatives, there is general indifference
in regard to local politics. In one matter where their direct family
interests are concerned, the people have demanded and received an
efficient administration. They are proud of their schools and the
personnel of the School Board, and certainly this is the best service
given to the people of the town. But while the men all agree that the
situation is dominated by the wholesale liquor interests, schemes for
political reform arouse little enthusiasm. In spite of years of casual
agitation against inadequately guarded railroad crossings, it was not
till the summer of 1908 that any effective protest was made. People
still pay a neighbor fifty cents a month for the privilege of getting
good water from his well, instead of insisting that it be provided by
the borough. A river, polluted by the sewage of many towns above it,
and by chemicals from the mills strong enough to kill all the fish,
furnishes the drinking water for the town.

To a certain extent at least, mental sluggishness due, as we have
seen, to the conditions under which men work, is at the root of their
indifference. It is, of course, true that the mill is not the source of
all the undesirable conditions in Homestead. Many of the disadvantages
of the town are similar to those of other suburban and industrial
centers that are less definitely influenced by a great industry. But
for a large part of the evil the mill must be considered responsible.
There was its influence, for example, in making Munhall into a separate
borough, thus securing a lower tax for its plant and real estate and by
that much adding to the burdens of the majority of its working people.
For in Homestead, the mill owns little property. In Munhall, the tax
rate is eight and one-half mills and the mill pays $40,000 a year in
taxes, while in Homestead, where the larger part of the workers live,
the tax rate is fifteen mills and the mill pays a tax of but $7,000.

The mill has, moreover, done nothing to give the town an effective
leadership, the most striking need of the situation. On the one hand
by the destruction of the union it has removed the one force by which
workingmen could have been trained for leadership; on the other hand,
since its owners are scattered throughout the country, it has not
supplied such a group of educated men with free time and public interest
as have been the strong influences in developing normal communities.
When I asked, in discussing the sanitary condition of the Slavic courts,
if anything could be done to improve the situation I was assured that
only a man of strong local influence could accomplish such a reform; but
no one could suggest the man.

In contrast then to the wonderful development of the industry itself,
with its splendid organization, its capable management, its efficient
methods, we find a town which lacks sound political organization, which
lacks true leadership, which lacks the physical and moral efficiency
which can come only through leisure to think and to enjoy. The only
genuine interest we find centers about the individual home life,
and, in spite of outward physical disadvantages, the hindrance of
inadequate income, the lack of proper training in household economics,
and the limited outlook which the town affords, the men and the women
are creating real homes. That many fail against these odds is not
surprising. "Life, work, and happiness, these three are bound together."
The mill offers the second, indifferent whether it is under conditions
that make the other two possible.




THE CIVIC RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEMOCRACY IN AN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT[13]

PAUL U. KELLOGG


American spread-eagleism has matured notably in the past ten years,
but there is still youth and ginger enough in it to make my first
postulate simply this,--that the civic responsibilities of democracy
in an industrial district are to come abreast of and improve upon any
community standards reached under any other system of government; and,
second, to do this in a democratic way as distinct from a despotic or
paternalistic way.

[13] An address given before the Joint Convention of the American Civic
Association and the National Municipal League, Pittsburgh, Nov. 16,
outlining some of the findings of the Pittsburgh Survey and drawing upon
data secured in various fields of investigation.

It was my good fortune to spend a week the past summer in Essen and
other industrial towns of the Rhenish-Westphalia district of Germany,
following something over a year spent in the Pittsburgh district. I
fancy that in our attitude toward the old countries, we are inclined
to regard their cities as long established and to find justification
for any lapses of our own in the newness of America. But Essen, for
instance, as an industrial center is new. The chronology of the
development of the steel industry there is not altogether different from
that of the same industry in Pittsburgh; and one of the great problems
of Fried. Krupp was to mobilize and hold within reach of his furnaces
and rolls a large and efficient working population. Entering the
industrial field generations later than England, German manufacturers
have not had a trained working force ready to hand. Krupp had to draw
his men from the country districts,--healthy, unskilled peasants, unused
to the quick handling of their muscles, unused to working indoors,
unused to machinery, unused to living in large communities. The wages
offered, as against the wages of agricultural districts, drew them
there; he must keep them there out of reach of his competitors, and he
must see that they worked at the top notch of their efficiency. It was
a loss to Herr Krupp when a man with five years' training in his works
left Essen, or was sick, or was maimed.

As a town, Essen was unprepared to absorb this great new industrial
population. There were not houses enough; the newcomers were sheltered
abominably and charged exorbitant rents by the local landlords. There
weren't food supplies enough within reach of the growing city, and the
workers had to buy poor bread and bad meat, and to pay heavily for
them. The town had not enough sanitary appliances to dispose of the
waste which a congregation of individuals sloughs off and which, if not
properly disposed of, breeds disease. The rents and high provisions
pared away most of the incentive in the wages which must attract this
working force to Essen; poor houses and poor food made directly for
stupid, half-roused workers and for poor work. Primarily as a business
proposition, then, Herr Krupp started that group of social institutions
which have since been expanded from one motive or another, until they
supply an infinite variety of wants to the Essen workers. The firm
bought up successive plots of land, laid them out, sewered them, parked
them, and to-day, at the end of fifty years, over thirty thousand
persons are living in houses belonging to the Essen works (ten thousand
of the sixty thousand Krupp employes are thus supplied). There has been
a growth in quality as well as in numbers of houses. The buildings of
the first workmen's colony, West End, are rough, crude boxes; the new
colonies of Alfredshof and Friedrichshof are beautiful, with their red
roofs, graceful lines, lawns, housekeeping conveniences and modest
rents. Not less than seventy-seven Krupp supply stores, operated on a
profit-sharing basis, sell meat, bread, manufactured goods and household
furniture. One of the greatest bakeries in Germany is operated on a
cost basis, and there are slaughter houses, flour mills, ice making
establishments, tailor shops, etc. Hospitals, convalescent homes,
pensions, and invalidity and accident funds have been instituted, and
have since been fortified and expanded under the imperial scheme of
industrial insurance, which governs throughout Germany.

This welfare work of the Krupps has not succeeded in keeping either
trade unionism or socialism out of the ranks of the working force; it
has tended to put the workers in a position of semi-feudal dependence
for comforts and to sap their initiative; and in those bearings it
is not in accord with American ideas; but it has served to gather at
Essen, to keep there, and to keep there at a high standard of working
efficiency, one of the most remarkable labor forces in Germany.

It is solely the latter aspect of the case that concerns us here. I
think it is agreed that when it comes to armor plate, I-beams, tubes, or
rails, the Pittsburgh steel plants can beat the world. But a week's stay
among the Krupp colonies at Essen brings with it the conviction that
we in America have considerable distance to go if we are to match the
Germans in the science of improved community conditions. The question
is how some of these higher standards can be worked out in an American
industrial district where one corporation does not dominate; where you
are dealing with a much greater aggregation of people spread over a
much greater territory, and where you must work out your solution in
democratic ways through democratic agencies.

It must be borne in mind that much that I say of Pittsburgh is true of
practically all our industrial centers; our severest criticism of any
one comes not from a comparison with its fellows, but from a comparison
of the haphazard development of its social institutions with the
splendid organic development of its industrial enterprises. And more,
in the methods and scope of progressive business organizations we have
some of the most suggestive clues as to ways for municipal progress.

My first point has to do with administrative areas. The most effective
city administration cannot act to advantage unless the units through
which it operates are workable and bear some relation to the function
they are designed to perform. The radius of the old time city, as
one English writer has pointed out, was the distance you could walk
from your work in the center to a home convenient in the outskirts.
To-day, for most purposes, a city is a rapid transit proposition.
For most purposes, a municipal area can be governed most effectively
if it includes all such districts as can be reached by city workers,
by subway, steam, or surface lines. The movement for a greater
Pittsburgh, which, within the last year, has been advanced by the
merging of Allegheny and the movement for a greater Birmingham, which
is now in progress in the corresponding English industrial center, are
recognitions of this fact. The police, fire,--in fact, every department
of municipal activity is cramped and rendered less effective by
restricted bounds.

But for certain functional activities much wider areas must be
covered. The sanitary inspection force of Cleveland, for instance,
inspects dairies and slaughter-houses throughout all that part of Ohio
that supplies the Cleveland market; in contrast with the Pittsburgh
inspection service which is at present able to inspect supplies only
as they come into the city and sources in the immediate neighborhood.
Again, the sewer and water problem of Pittsburgh is a water-shed
problem. One hundred and twenty-nine towns and boroughs are dumping
their sewage into the rivers which run past Pittsburgh and from which
Pittsburgh must draw its water. No one of these governmental units can
work out its sanitary problem alone. Close co-ordination of sanitary
work is needed throughout the whole river district.

There is necessity, then, for increasing our municipal administrative
areas and for relating them to the functions which must be performed
through them; and this very fact raises the distinctive civic problem
of creating this enlarged municipal machinery, without sacrificing
that local loyalty and interest which in neighborhoods and smaller
districts make for good government. In Pittsburgh we have a central
city,--a market and office center with groups of outlying mill towns and
half-agricultural districts between. The opponents of city congestion
would break up all our big urban centers into such an open work
structure; and if the citizenship of the Pittsburgh steel district can
work out effective methods of government and high standards of community
well-being for this ganglion of working communities, it will have made
an original contribution to municipal science.

       *       *       *       *       *

But let us look more carefully at this question of area as applied
to the functioning of particular social institutions. We have the
theory in America, for instance, that common school education should
be supplied by the public, and to this end, besides state subsidies
and other revenues, a general millage is laid on all taxable property
in Pittsburgh for the salaries of teachers and for other general
expenses. But the actual operation of the schools continues on an old
vestry system of ward control,--a system given up by Boston, Cleveland,
Chicago, Baltimore and other cities of Pittsburgh's class, because the
ward has proved an ineffective administrative unit. Let us see how it
works in Pittsburgh. Each ward lays and collects a tax on property
within its limits for the erection and maintenance of school buildings.
Thus, ward two in the business district, with a total of only 363
pupils, can draw on property with an assessed valuation of $37,491,708;
while ward fourteen, with 2,423 children, can draw on property worth
$34,264,077 (less taxable property and seven times as many children);
while ward thirty-one has 1,173 children and only $3,074,085 in assessed
property (or three times as many children as ward two and not one-tenth
the taxable property). No wonder, then, that the valuation of school
buildings and equipment ranges from approximately $41 per school child
in the thirty-first ward to $1,033 per school child in the second; and
the income for maintenance of buildings, etc., from $6 per school
child in the thirty-fifth ward to $84 per school child in the first. No
wonder, then, that in these ward-school buildings and their equipment
there is the utmost divergence. Our investigators found buildings every
room of which was overcrowded, with children sitting on benches, with
chairs in the aisles; wards in which basement rooms were thrown into
commission without adequate heat, light, desks or ventilation; schools
unconnected with the sewer; schools without fireproofing, without fire
escapes, without fire drills;--all these in contrast to progressive
schools in other wards with first-rate equipment, small classes, good
plumbing and adequate light. Wards which have the most children, whose
children have the least cultural environment and stimulus at home, have,
many of them, the least resources to tax for school purposes. By an
out-worn system of ward control and taxation, then, the teaching force
of Pittsburgh is supplied in districts where the work is hardest with
schoolhouses and other tools which are least effective. Some districts
have schools which in equipment and spirit rank with any in the country;
while in some the school plants ought to be scrapped offhand.

Turn to another social institution,--the hospitals. We may conceive
that the first service of hospitals is to be accessible to the sick
and injured, and that an adequate hospital system should be at all
times quickly available to the people who may have use for it. We may
compare it with the efficiency of the telephone company which, through
sub-exchanges, centrals and private connections, effectively reaches
every district. How stands the case with the hospitals of Pittsburgh?
The city is served by a group of private institutions, many of them
adequately equipped and progressively managed; but there is no system
of co-ordination between them, either in the operation of their free
wards or in the maintenance of an effective ambulance service. New
hospitals are erected under the eaves of old hospitals. Sick and injured
people are carried long, unnecessary distances at great risk. Seven
new hospitals are going up in Pittsburgh and yet, when they are all
completed and other changes which have been decided upon are carried
out, there will be a great belt of river wards, thickly populated,
without a convenient hospital plant,--wards in which we shall see
disease is most rife. This failure of a co-ordination of hospital
work in Pittsburgh is appreciated by a number of the most progressive
superintendents, and no one would welcome more than they a movement to
interlock the hospital service of the city in some effective way.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another point of contrast between Pittsburgh, the industrial center, and
Pittsburgh, the community, lies in the progressiveness and invention
which have gone into the details of one and the other; for instance,
aldermen's courts which dispense justice to the working population of
Pittsburgh and deal with the minor civil business of a city of half
a million. They serve very well in an agricultural district. They
are of the vintage of the village blacksmith. But with the exception
of a few well conducted courts, the forty or more ward courts may be
said to clutter up and befog the course of minor justice, and to be
an exasperation in the conduct of civil business. They add to rather
than subtract from the business of the higher courts, and there is no
effective supervision of their operation. They compare with the new
municipal courts of Chicago about as the open forges of King John's time
compare with a Bessemer converter.

Again,--Pittsburgh is the second city in Pennsylvania in point of
population; in some respects it is the center of the most marvelous
industrial district in the world. Thousands of men and women are engaged
in hundreds of processes. But the state factory inspection department
has not so much as an office in this city. There are inspectors, but
they are not easily get-at-able for the workingman who may be laboring
under unsanitary conditions or with unprotected machinery, or for
the citizen who may know of violations of the factory acts which he
conceives it his duty to report. My conception of an adequate labor
department office in Pittsburgh is more than that of an industrial
detective bureau. My conception is rather that of a headquarters, with
an adequate force of technical experts and physicians who would be
constantly studying the work processes of the district with the idea
of eliminating wherever possible, those conditions which make for
disease; with laboratory facilities for experiment and demonstration
of protective devices calculated to reduce accidents; drawing, to this
end, upon the industrial experience of the whole world. The factory
inspector's office in Birmingham, for instance, is in close co-operation
with courts, with employers and with workmen. Within three years, its
suggestions have reduced the number of deaths due to one variety of
crane from twenty-one to three.

The old time city built a wall about it. That kept out invaders. The
invaders of a modern city are infectious diseases. In the development of
sanitary service and bureaus of health of wide powers and unquestioned
integrity, the modern city is erecting its most effective wall. In
Pittsburgh, the health authority is still a subordinate bureau without
control over appointments under the civil service, and without that
final authority which should go with its supreme responsibility
toward the health of 500,000 people. Until the present incumbent was
appointed, there had seldom or never been a physician at the head of
this bureau. For five years there had not been so much as an annual
report. Two-thirds of the appropriations to the Pittsburgh Health Bureau
are to-day engrossed in a garbage removal contract; only one-third is
free for general health purposes. With such an inadequate barricade,
we can imagine that disease has sacked Pittsburgh throughout the
years; and comparison of death rates with four cities of corresponding
size,--Boston, Baltimore, Cleveland, St. Louis,--for five years, shows
this to have been the case. In her average death rate per 100,000 for
typhoid fever, for diarrhoea and for enteritis, Pittsburgh was first
and highest. Pittsburgh was only fourth or next to the lowest in the
list in pulmonary tuberculosis; but in pneumonia, in bronchitis and in
other diseases of the respiratory system; and in violence other than
suicide, Pittsburgh was highest. To retrieve the lost ground of years
of neglect of health conditions has been a task upon which the present
superintendent of the Pittsburgh Bureau of Health has entered, but it is
a task in which the city must invest increasing resources. For such work
it needs more than a health bureau. It needs a health department.

My point, then, is that democracy must overhaul the social machinery
through which it operates if it would bring its community conditions up
to standards comparable to those maintained by its banks, its insurance
companies and its industrial corporations.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are at least two tests to which the community can put such social
machinery. The first is that of operating efficiency. In hospitals,
in schools, in municipal departments, units of work and output can be
worked out as definitely as are the tons of the steel workers, the
voltage of the electricians, the dollars and cents of the banks. By
vigorous systems of audit and intelligent systems of budget-making,
understandable to the ordinary citizen, the community can see to it
that the output of these social institutions is comparable with the
investment it makes in them; that the taxpayer gets his money's worth.
The Bureau of Municipal Research in New York embodies this idea in its
program.

There is another, equally intensive test to which social institutions
and sanitary conditions can be put. It is conceivable that the tax
payer may get his money's worth from the municipal government, while
the families of the wage earning population and householders may be
suffering from another and irreparable form of taxation, which only
increased municipal expenditure along certain lines could relieve. So
it is that while I subscribe to the movement for stiffer standards of
municipal accounting as a basis for effective government, for knowing
the waste of a city's money, I subscribe further to the movement for
such methods of social bookkeeping as will show us the larger waste of
human life and private means; and will stand out not only for honesty
and efficiency, but for the common well-being.

Let me illustrate by the case of typhoid fever which has been epidemic
in Pittsburgh for twenty-five years. To eliminate typhoid Pittsburgh has
erected a 5-1/2 million dollar filtration plant,[14] for the years of
delay in the erection of which the city has suffered a terrible toll of
deaths and misery. There were 5,421 cases of typhoid fever in Pittsburgh
last year and 622 deaths. Computing death rate per 100,000 population
for the larger cities having the highest rates in 1901, Pittsburgh was
first with 124, New Haven second, Allegheny third; in 1902, Pittsburgh
was first, Allegheny second, Washington third; in 1903, Pittsburgh
first, Cleveland was second, Allegheny third; in 1904, Columbus was
first, Pittsburgh second, Allegheny third; in 1905, Allegheny was first,
Pittsburgh second and Columbus third; in 1906, Pittsburgh was first, and
Allegheny second. But even these figures, startling as they are, fail
to afford a grasp of the meaning of this typhoid scourge in the lives
of the wage earners of Pittsburgh. The Pittsburgh Survey undertook to
gauge this. In co-operation with Columbian Settlement, we collected
data as to 1,029 cases in six wards reported in one year; 448 cases
were found and studied. Of these 26 died. 187 wage earners lost 1,901
weeks' work. Other wage earners, not patients, lost 322 weeks,--a total
loss in wages of $28,899. The cost of 90 patients treated in hospitals
at public or private expense was $4,165; of 338 patients cared for at
home, $21,000 in doctors' bills, nurses, ice, foods, medicines; of 26
funerals, $3,186; a total cost of $57,250 in less than half the cases
of six wards in one year,--wards in which both income and sickness
expense were at a minimum. But there were other even more serious drains
which do not admit of tabulation. A girl of twenty-two, who worked on
stogies, was left in a very nervous condition, not as strong as before,
and consequently she could not attain her former speed. A blacksmith
will probably never work at his trade with his former strength. A
sixteen-year-old girl who developed tuberculosis was left in a weakened
physical condition. A tailor who cannot work as long hours as before,
was reduced $1 a week in wages. A boy of eight was very nervous; he
would not sit still in school and was rapidly becoming a truant. A
mother developed a case of pneumonia from over-exposure in caring for
children who had the fever, and she has not been well since. So the
story goes,--very real to the lives of the many who are so intimately
concerned. The money losses can be replaced. My figures include no
estimate of the value of human lives lost. And it is impossible to
compute in terms of dollars and cents, what it means to a family to
have the father's health so broken that he cannot work at his old job,
but has to accept easier work at less pay. It is impossible to put in
tabulated form the total value to a family of a mother's health, and
strike a proper balance when typhoid has left her a physical or nervous
wreck. It is impossible to estimate what is the cost to a boy or girl
who is obliged to leave school in order to help support the family,
because typhoid has incapacitated the natural bread-winners. Such facts
as these show the drain that typhoid has been on the vital forces of the
community. It is only one of such drains.

[14] In October there were but ninety-six cases of typhoid in Greater
Pittsburgh, as against 503 for October, 1907.

Such facts as these bring home concretely to the average workingman his
stake in good government.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is not possible here to enter into a discussion, even briefly, of
the democratic methods by which a community can improve the quality and
lessen the cost of its food supplies as an integral part of the program
for building up a vigorous working population. There is a direct bearing
between these costs of living and the holding power of the wages paid in
the Pittsburgh District.

       *       *       *       *       *

But there is one necessity of which there is a paramount shortage; that
is shelter. I should like you to compare the efficiency to perform the
function for which it is devised of a modern blast furnace and the
shacks which house some of the families in the Pittsburgh District.
The output of the one is pig iron; the output of the other, home life
and children. According to the tenement house census carried on by the
Pittsburgh Bureau of Health the past summer, there are 3,364 tenement
houses in the greater city. Nearly fifty per cent of these are old
dwellings built and constructed to accommodate one family and as a
rule without conveniences for the multiple households now crowded
into them. Let me give you an example,--a house on Bedford avenue,
with three families in the front and three in the rear, Negroes and
whites. The owner was notified over a year ago that the building must
be repaired and certain alterations made, but nothing has been done,
and by the veto of the governor of Pennsylvania of a bill which passed
the last Legislature, the Bureau of Health has no power to condemn such
unsanitary dwellings. In this building, two-room apartments rent for
twelve dollars a month. Water has to be obtained from a hydrant in the
yard, shared by eleven families; the foul privy vaults are also shared
by neighboring families.

Under Dr. Edwards's administration 5,063 such privy vaults have been
filled and abandoned in Pittsburgh and 8,281 sanitary water closets
installed in their place. The work is less than half done. The census
of only the first twenty wards of the older city shows a total of
nearly 6,000 vaults still existing in these wards alone. Consider
the contrast,--these old, ramshackle, unwholesome, disease breeding
appliances of the back country here in Pittsburgh, the city of the great
engineers, of mechanical invention and of progress. In a typhoid-ridden
neighborhood, a vault is an open menace to health. Investigations in
army camps and in given neighborhoods in Chicago have proved that
insects carry disease from such places to the tables and living rooms of
the people.

There are three points which I should like you to consider in connection
with this problem of shelter. The first is that the Bureau of Health,
however efficient in its supervisory work, cannot meet it single
handed. Even if through the activities of the Health Bureau, Tammany
Hall, Yellow Row and other old shacks have been torn down, even if the
owners of other old buildings are made to install sanitary appliances,
the situation is still unmet, unless new houses,--vast quantities of
new houses,--are erected to care for the increased population which
has flooded into Pittsburgh in the last ten years and which, there is
every indication, will multiply as greatly in the next ten. Real estate
dealers and builders have not been inactive in Pittsburgh, but the
situation is so serious as to demand the development of a constructive
public policy that will comprehend such elements as town planning, tax
reform, and investment at "five per cent and the public good."

My second point is that this haphazard method of letting the housing
supply take care of itself is a monetary drawback to the merchants of
the city. In the first place, it radically reduces the margin which
the workingman's family has to spend for commodities. Especially is
this true of immigrant tenants, who are obliged to pay more than
English-speaking. For instance, on Bass street, Allegheny, we found
Slavs paying twenty dollars a month for four rooms, as against fifteen
dollars paid by Americans. In the second place, it puts a premium on the
single men, drifters, lodgers, as against the man with a family. The
immigrant boarders who rent from a boarding-boss, and sleep eight or ten
in a room or sleep at night in the beds left vacant by the night workers
who have occupied them throughout the day,--such fellows can make money
in the Pittsburgh district. But the immigrant who wants to make his
stake here, bring his family over, create a household, must pay ten or
fifteen dollars a month for rooms; and must pay high prices for all the
other necessities of life. If I were asked by what means the merchants
of Pittsburgh could increase the volume of purchases of the buying
public, I should say that no one thing would affect that so impressively
as the multiplication of households, through the multiplication of low
cost, low rental, sanitary houses to meet the needs of stable family
groups as against the transient lodger.

My third point is that the housing problem is not a city problem alone.
It is repeated in each of the mill towns. I could cite instances in
Braddock, Duquesne, McKeesport, Sharpsburg, where old buildings are
filthy and overcrowded and where new buildings are put up in violation
of every canon of scientific housing,--back-to-back houses such as
were condemned in England seventy-five years ago as breeding places of
disease. Homestead, for instance, has no ordinance against overcrowding,
no ordinance requiring adequate water supply, or forbidding privy vaults
in congested neighborhoods. The foreigners live in the second ward
between the river and the railroads. In twenty-two courts studied in
this district, only three houses had running water inside. One hundred
and ten people were found using one yard pump. Fifty-one out of 239
families lived in one room each. Twenty-six of the two-room apartments
are used by eight or more people; one two-room apartment sheltered
thirteen; two, twelve; two, eleven. A crude reflection of the effect of
these conditions is indicated by the death rate in this second ward. Of
every three children born there one dies before it reaches two years
of age, as against one in every six in the rest of Homestead, where
detached, and livable dwellings prevail.

       *       *       *       *       *

This comparison of health conditions in a small town is true in a large,
cruel way of Pittsburgh itself. In co-operation with the Typhoid Fever
Commission we have analyzed by wards the death certificates of people
dying in Pittsburgh for the past five years. We have grouped these
wards into districts, the living conditions of which are more or less
of a kind. Let me compare the mortality figures of wards nine and ten
and twelve,--a group of river wards in the old city, near the mills,
peopled for the most part with a wage-earning population of small
income,--compare these wards with ward twenty-two, a new residential
district in the East End. What are the chances of life of the men,
women and children living in the one and in the other? The chance of
a man's dying of bronchitis in the river wards is two and a half as
against one in the East End; it is four of his dying from pneumonia as
against one in the East End, five of his dying of typhoid as against one
in the East End, six of his dying a violent death as against one in the
East End. These are rough proportions merely, but they are of terrific
significance. Our American boast that everybody has an equal chance
falls flat before them. The dice are loaded in Pittsburgh when it comes
to a man's health; his health is the workingman's best asset; and the
health and vigor of its working population are in the long run the vital
and irrecoverable resources of an industrial center.

This brings us to a point where we can define more concretely the plain
civic responsibility of democracy in an industrial district. That
responsibility is to contrive and to operate the social machinery of the
community, and to make living conditions in the district, such as will
attract and hold a strong and vigorous labor force, for the industries
on which the prosperity of the district must depend. Here lie the
responsibility of the community to the individual manufacturer,--and the
responsibility of the community to its own future:--that the efficiency
of its workers shall not be mortgaged before they go to work in the
morning.

       *       *       *       *       *

This carries a counter responsibility. In the interests of the community
as a whole, in the interests of all the industries as against the
interests of any single one, the public cannot afford to have such
a working force impaired or wasted by unsanitary or health-taxing
conditions during the working hours. What I mean will perhaps be
clearest by illustrating in the case of industrial accidents.
Pittsburgh cannot afford to have over 500 workingmen killed every
year in the course of employment, or the unknown number of men who
are seriously injured. During the past year, the Pittsburgh Survey
has made an intensive inquiry into the facts surrounding the deaths
of the entire roster of men killed in industry during twelve months,
and of the accident cases treated in the hospitals of the district
during three months,--not with the idea of raising anew the question
of responsibility for particular accidents, but to see if there are
any indications as to whether these accidents could be prevented and
whether the burden of them falls where in justice it should. The work
has been done by a staff of five people, including a lawyer, an engineer
and interpreters, and we have had the co-operation of claim agents,
superintendents, foremen, trade union officials and others. We found
that of the 526 men killed in the year studied in Allegheny county,
the accidents fell on Americans as well as foreigners; 224 were native
born. The ranks of steel workers and train men suffer most,--the pick of
the workmen in the district. There were 195 steel workers killed, 125
railroad men, seventy-one mine workers, and 135 in other occupations.
It was found that it was the young men of the district who went down in
the course of industry. Eighty-two were under twenty years of age, 221
between twenty and thirty. Over half the men killed were earning less
than fifteen dollars a week, a fact which raises the question if the
law is fair in assuming, as it does in Pennsylvania, that wages cover
risk. Fifty-one per cent of the men killed were married with families
to support; an additional thirty per cent were single men, partly, or
wholly, supporting a family. It was shown that the greatest losses were
not due to the spectacular accidents, but to everyday causes. In the
steel industry, for instance, forty-two deaths were due to the operation
of electric cranes, thirty-one to the operation of broad and narrow
gauge railroads in the mills and yards, and twenty-four to falls from
a height or into pits, vats, etc. Pittsburgh has stamped out smallpox;
its physicians are fighting tuberculosis; the municipality is checking
typhoid. Cannot engineers, foremen, employers and workmen come together
in a campaign to reduce accidents? Considerable has already been done
in this direction by progressive employers. The problem is that of
bringing up the whole district to progressive standards.

On the other hand we have put these industrial accident cases to that
same test of human measurement which we found of such significance in
gauging the losses due to typhoid fever. This steady march of injury and
death means an enormous economic loss. Is the burden of this loss justly
distributed? What takes the place of the wages of these bread-winners?
What resources of their own have these families to fall back on? What
share of the loss is shouldered by the employer? What share falls in
the long run upon the community itself, in the care of the sick and
dependent? Is the Pennsylvania law fair that exempts the employer from
paying anything to the family of a killed alien if that family lives
in a foreign country? Are the risks which the law supposes that the
workman assumes when he hires out for wages, fair risks under modern
conditions of production? Is it in the long run, to the interest of
the employer to leave to the haphazard, embittered gamble of damage
suits, this question of meeting in a fair way the human loss which
with even the best processes and the greatest care, is involved in the
production of utilities? I am not in a position here to put forward the
economic facts brought out by our inquiries; but I can say that on every
hand, among employers and claim agents and workmen, there is profound
dissatisfaction and an increasing open-mindedness toward some such sane
and equitable system of working-men's compensation as those in operation
in Germany and in England.

But this question of industrial accidents is only part of another and
larger question of the relation of industry to health. The workers of
Pittsburgh are dealing not with simple ploughs and wash tubs and anvils,
but with intricate machines or in great work rooms where hundreds work
side by side; dealing with poisons, with voltage, with heat, with
a hundred new and but half mastered agents of production. Are the
conditions under which some of this work is carried on directly inimical
to health? Could they be bettered without serious loss to the trades and
with great gain to the workers?

In the rapid development of factories in America, we have only begun
to devise our plants with reference to the health of the worker as
well as with reference to output. Let me illustrate from the women
employing trades. In only two of the twenty-eight commercial laundries
in Pittsburgh, is the wash room on the upper floor. In twenty-six,
rising steam and excessive heat not only cause discomfort in the other
departments, but tend to induce diseases of the respiratory organs.
Tobacco dried in many of the stogy sweatshops, makes the air heavy with
nicotine, fills the room with fine dust and increases the danger, always
present in the tobacco trades, from tuberculosis. In foundries and
machine shops, the custom of placing annealing ovens in the rooms where
the cores are made, causes excessive heat in the work room and fill the
air with a black dust. We have the statements of old employes that not
more than twenty-five girls of the 300 in the coil winding room in one
of the Pittsburgh electrical industries have been in the plant as long
as three or four years. The speeding-up tends to make the girls nervous,
weak and easily overcome by illness.

Apart from dangers of accident, of speeding and of injurious processes,
the health of a working force bears a direct relation to the length of
the working day. The tendency with respect to both hours and Sunday work
in the steel industry in Pittsburgh has been, for fifteen years, towards
an increase, and there is no indication that the end has yet been
reached. There is not the opportunity here to analyze the time schedule
of the varied departments of the steel industry, but in a majority
of them the day of twenty-four hours is split between two shifts of
workers; and the men work not six days, but seven a week. And a very
considerable share of them, once a fortnight in changing shifts, work a
long turn of twenty-four hours.

Employers may differ as to whether they can get the most work and the
most effective work out of a man if he works twelve hours a day, or ten,
or eight. But I hold that the community has something at stake here. How
much citizenship does Pittsburgh get out of a man who works twelve hours
a day seven days a week? How much of a father can a man be who may never
see his babies except when they are asleep; or who never gets a chance
to go off into the country for a rollick with his boys? The community
has a claim on the vigor and intelligence of its people, on their
activity in civic affairs, which I believe it is letting go by default.
It is getting only the tired out leavings of some of its best men.

My argument, then, is that if the civic responsibilities of democracy
in an industrial district are to be met, the community should do what
a first-rate industrial concern would do, figure out the ground it
can cover effectively and gear its social machinery so to cover it.
By social machinery I mean hospitals, schools, courts and departments
the city structure, and all that wide range of activities that have a
direct bearing on the living conditions of a people. Second, to hold
these agencies as closely accountable as are enterprises in the business
world; and to bring them to the ultimate touchstone of their effect on
the welfare of the average citizen. Unless a wage-earning population is
so insured against disease, its vigor and effectiveness so conserved,
the community is not meeting its responsibilities toward the industries
which must depend upon these workers for output and profit. In turn, the
public should see to it that the industries do not cripple nor exploit
the working force which constitutes the great asset of the community.
And further, if such a program is to be carried out in an American and
democratic way, the workers themselves must have greater leeway and
leisure in which to bear their share of the burdens and responsibilities
of American democracy.

I bear a message to Pittsburgh from John Burns, president of the Local
Government Board of England, one of the foremost labor leaders of Great
Britain, who has been hailed this fall as one of the conserving forces
of the present Liberal ministry in dealing with the vast economic
problems which are facing the British Empire. He has visited America and
Pittsburgh as a member of various commissions, and it was on the basis
of his knowledge of our situation here that I asked him for suggestions
as to ways of advance, which would lead to the improvement of civic and
labor conditions in the Pittsburgh steel district. "Six days work a
week instead of seven," he said. "Three shifts of eight hours instead
of two shifts of twelve; no twenty-four hour shifts; better housing;
counter-attractions to the saloon; more parks,--open spaces; the
improvement of the river front;--the humanizing of labor instead of the
brutalization of toil. There you are. Those are Pittsburgh's marching
orders."

Pittsburgh's three rivers and the great mineral resource's they tap
brought the people here. Environment is inevitable as a selective
agency; but the people once here, can by their willing, mould and
perpetuate or destroy the holding power of the district. Other cities
have large admixtures of clerks and trading classes. I doubt if there is
such another working force in the country as that which peoples these
valleys. Therein lies a civic resource worth conserving to the utmost
of its potential goods. Will Pittsburgh as a community, as a democratic
community, meet that responsibility?

Will the industrial communities of the nation, as democratic
communities, meet their responsibility?




THE TREND OF THINGS


The working woman is coming up as a result of her invasion of commercial
pursuits. While the department store pays poorer wages than the factory
or domestic service, it has a standing, its girls a position due to
their dress and their surroundings, which the others do not give. Grant
it every evil ever charged against it, say Mr. Hard and Mrs. Dorr in
the third article of their series on The Woman's Invasion, in the
January _Everybody's_, make the case out as bad as long hours, poor pay,
Christmas rush time, the need for expensive clothes, can total. Still
it is superior socially; its hours are shorter; it draws the American
as against the foreign-born girl; it offers better opportunity for
marriage, and all these things appeal to a girl because she is not,
consciously at least, in industry to stay, but to pass the time until
marriage. That's why "a store can get for six dollars the kind of girl
that will earn ten dollars in a shoe factory."

Low as the wages are,--and they are set by this social advantage and by
the predominant number of department store clerks who are not wholly
dependent on themselves,--there is a chance for real advancement. Woman
has been in factory work for a century, but she remains an operative
except for occasional forewomen, and as a result of piece work she
quickly reaches her maximum earning capacity and afterwards declines.
But in the department store, where she has been only a few years, she
has advanced to positions of real responsibility, particularly as a
buyer, and sometimes draws a salary of from $1,500 to $6,000; her wages
go steadily up, and the clerks in some departments draw good, living
wages with the ever-present example of the buyer and her kind just
ahead, elevated from their own ranks.

The article, in parts, in a stirring description of the life of the
20,000 department store clerks on State street, Chicago, and one of
the best parts of it is the contrast of the girl clerk who sells
handkerchiefs, and the girl machine operative who makes handkerchiefs,
the clerk "getting handkerchiefs out of boxes for querulous, exacting
customers, putting handkerchiefs back in boxes for querulous, exacting
stock inspectors, taking parcels to the cage of the wrapper girl,
pacifying purchasers waiting for their change, attracting new purchasers
coming down the aisle, discriminating between 'buyers' and 'shoppers,'
drawing the 'buyers' on, edging the 'shoppers' off, rearranging the
counter,--from eight or half-past in the morning to half past five in
the afternoon;" the factory girl sitting before a counter on which there
are a blue cross, a red cross and a machine with a clutching hand, who
"takes a handkerchief, places it on the blue cross, pushes it over to
the red cross, and the claw of the machine snatches it away. She takes
a second handkerchief, places it on the blue cross, pushes it over to
the red cross, and the machine snatches it away. She takes a third
handkerchief, a fourth, a fifth, a sixth, a seventh, an eighth, two a
second, 120 a minute, 7,200 an hour, all the morning hours, all the
afternoon hours, of every week, all the working weeks of every year....
The wide prevalence of this kind of sub-human toil in factories is one
of the two great reasons why department store managers can often pay
sub-human wages."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Dorr has an article along very similar lines in the January
_Hampton's Broadway Magazine_, using with effect little stories of women
workers in many trades. Girls come out of school at fourteen and go to
work; after a short apprenticeship they are put at the machines, and
quickly earn the most they ever will earn. Gradually their nerves, their
muscles, their eyes, their efficiency decline, their wages follow. Later
they stand beside the young apprentices, earning the minimum wages after
a life spent in a factory.

Women do hard, manual work, too, much as we have been accustomed to
think of that as peculiar to some European and Asiatic countries. Indian
squaws no longer till the fields and do the heavy work in America, but
Mrs. Dorr has found a modern substitute: "Go into the iron and metal
working factories of American cities and see Polish women working in the
heat of horrible furnaces, handling heavy weights, doing work fit only
for strong men. Go into the rubber factories of Boston and see Greek
and Armenian women drunk in the fumes of naphtha. See them in non-union
hat factories with the skin scalded from their hands as they shrink the
felt in streams of boiling water. We do not want to see American women
doing such things. Yet not a year ago, in the first months of the panic
of 1907, I received a letter from an American woman out of employment,
asking if it were not possible for her to obtain work as a street
cleaner. That work, she said, seemed to her easier than the office
scrubbing she was doing then."

But to return to the factory girl, Mrs. Dorr declares she is not
arraigning those who own and operate factories, for they are keen for
skilled workers to replace the unskilled girls who must be driven at
a pace set by the machines; but rather the system under which our
industries are run and by which we make our workers. The skilled worker
can be made only by training, and in that she finds the keynote to
the whole situation. Let us establish a great network of industrial
training schools, such as the Manhattan Trade School for Girls and the
Hebrew Technical School for Girls in New York, and the school maintained
by the Woman's Industrial and Educational Union in Boston. Then we shall
have not only skilled workers, earning fair wages, but we shall be
safeguarding the mothers of to-morrow and the Children of the day after.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The doctor," says Rudyard Kipling in the January _Ladies' Home
Journal_, "can hoist a yellow flag over a center of civilization and
turn it into a desert; he can hoist a red cross in the desert and turn
it into a center of civilization." He can break the speed limit, go
unmolested through riotous crowds, forbid any ship to enter any port in
the world and order whole quarters of cities to be pulled down or burned
up.

These are some of his conspicuous privileges. On the other hand, "in
all times of flood, fire, plague, pestilence, famine, murder and sudden
death it is required of the doctor that he report himself for duty, and
remain on duty till his strength fails him or his conscience relieves
him,--whichever shall be the longer period." There is no eight-hour law
for the physician, no one cares whether he is "in his bath, or his bed,
or on his holiday, or at a theater."

It is pretty well worth while, though, for "every sane human being
agrees that this fight for time which we call Life is one of the most
important things in the world, if not the most important. It follows,
then, that the doctors who plan and conduct and who re-enforce this
fight are among the most important men in the world."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Immigration Department of the International Committee of the Young
Men's Christian Association has issued two attractive little pamphlets
for the newly arrived immigrant. The policy of the association is
neither to encourage nor to discourage immigration but to give a helping
hand to those who have fully made up their minds to immigrate or are
already in this country. The two new books are entitled The Country to
Which You Go, giving an elementary outline of some of our political and
social institutions, and How to Become a Citizen of the United States,
which gives the immigrant a clear idea of the process to be undergone in
order to become a voter.

Oscar Straus, secretary of the Department of Commerce and Labor, says
of the work of the Immigration Department, "No nobler, better or more
practical work can be done by the Young Men's Christian Association than
to teach our young men, be they either native-born or alien, a proper
understanding of the basic principles of our government."

       *       *       *       *       *

The last issue of _The Outlook for the Blind_, published by the
Massachusetts Association for Promoting the Interests of the Blind and
edited by Charles F. F. Campbell, contains a chart showing in detail
all educational institutions for the blind in the United States and
Canada, with information of the training offered, the number of pupils,
number of instructors, and other information. Presented in this form,
the information is graphic and may readily be compared by states. The
same issue contains articles on industrial training for the blind, a new
typewriter for the blind, conferences here and abroad, reports of work
in different states, and some splendidly printed illustrations. Such an
issue seems indispensable to any one interested in the sightless.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is to be expected that an anti-suffragist should take the particular
attitude toward woman clearly manifested by Dr. Lyman Abbott in The
Home Builder.[15] In speaking of the wife he says, "Her one dominating
desire is, not to be independent, but to be dependent on the man she
loves." It is true that Dr. Abbott speaks of the widest and most
perfect unity between man and wife but it is ever the attitude of the
dependent, the chattel, the possession of man as the end and aim of the
woman's existence. It is hardly a modern ideal for either the daughter,
the wife, the mother, the housekeeper or even the philanthropist, as
some of the headings are called. One of the most valuable points which
Dr. Abbott does bring out, however, is the preservation of the sense
of humor through all of the vicissitudes of the woman's life. If the
book is intended for a quaint old lady, far away from the confines of
civilization, it might meet her placid requirements. But it hardly
possesses the philosophy that the modern, active woman of the larger
communities can find use for.

[15] The Home Builder by Lyman Abbott. Small 12 mo. Boards. Houghton,
Mifflin and Co., 75 cents. Pp. 129. This book may be obtained at
publisher's price through CHARITIES AND THE COMMONS.

Life Insurance satisfies the conscience, eases the mind, banishes worry
and gives old age a chair of contentment.

[Illustration]

     Metropolitan Policies are the Standards of Life Insurance
     Excellence

[Illustration]

Metropolitan Life Insurance Company

1 MADISON AVENUE, NEW YORK

(Incorporated by the State of New York. Stock Company.)

       *       *       *       *       *

TYRREL PRINT, NEW YORK.


IT IS SUMMER IN
California, Arizona, Mexico,
Texas, Louisiana,

You can
Motor, Drive, Ride, Fish, Hunt, Bathe, Climb, Coach, Canoe, Yacht, Golf,

Every Day in the Year

Points in these States best reached via the

Southern Pacific Sunset Route

THE NATURAL WINTER GATEWAY
THE OPEN WINDOW ROUTE

     Rock-Ballast Roadbed--Automatic Block Signals--Oil-Burning
     Locomotives--Superior Equipment.

     Ten days' Stopover at New Orleans on all Tickets.

For free illustrated pamphlet address: L. H. NUTTING, G. E. P. A., 349
Broadway, New York, or Southern Pacific Agent at

  CHICAGO,
  120 Jackson Blvd.

  NEW ORLEANS,
  Magazine St.

  BOSTON,
  170 Washington St.

  PHILADELPHIA,
  632 Chestnut St.

  SYRACUSE,
  212 W. Washington St.

  BALTIMORE,
  29 W. Baltimore St.

       *       *       *       *       *

Please mention CHARITIES AND THE COMMONS when writing to advertisers.

       *       *       *       *       *


      Transcriber's Notes:

      Simple typographical and spelling errors were corrected.

      Italics words are denoted by _underscores_.

      Bold words are denoted by =equals=.

      P. 606 added transcriber footnote "[Footnote 1: Transcriber 20
      + 10 obviously does not equal 42]." Obviously the total or the
      boy or girl numbers are incorrect.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Charities and the Commons: The
Pittsburgh Survey, Part I: The People, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARITIES AND THE COMMONS: ***

***** This file should be named 46029.txt or 46029.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/0/2/46029/

Produced by Richard Tonsing, Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
