The Project Gutenberg EBook of Canada in Flanders, Volume I (of 3), by
Lord Max Aitken Beaverbrook

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Canada in Flanders, Volume I (of 3)

Author: Lord Max Aitken Beaverbrook

Release Date: June 27, 2014 [EBook #46114]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANADA IN FLANDERS, VOLUME I ***




Produced by Al Haines








  CANADA IN FLANDERS

  BY SIR MAX AITKEN, M.P.

  THE OFFICIAL STORY OF THE
  CANADIAN EXPEDITIONARY FORCE

  VOLUME I.




  CANADA IN
  FLANDERS


  By Sir Max Aitken, M.P.


  WITH A PREFACE BY
  THE RT. HON. A. BONAR LAW,
  M.P., LL.D.,
  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE COLONIES

  AND AN INTRODUCTION BY
  THE RT. HON. SIR ROBERT BORDEN,
  G.C.M.G., M.P., LL.D.,
  PRIME MINISTER OF CANADA



  _WITH MAPS AND APPENDICES_



  HODDER AND STOUGHTON
  LONDON TORONTO NEW YORK
  MCMXVI




  FIRST EDITION . . Printed January, 1916.
  SECOND EDITION . . Printed January, 1916.
  THIRD EDITION . . Printed January, 1916.
  FOURTH EDITION . . Printed February, 1916.
  FIFTH EDITION . . Printed February, 1916.
  SIXTH EDITION . . Printed February, 1916.
  SEVENTH EDITION . . Printed February, 1916.
  EIGHTH EDITION . . Printed February, 1916.
  NINTH EDITION . . Printed February, 1916.
  TENTH EDITION . . Printed February, 1916.




  TO THE OFFICERS AND MEN
  NOW SERVING IN THE CANADIAN
  EXPEDITIONARY FORCE IN FLANDERS
  AND TO THE MEMORIES OF THOSE
  WHO HAVE FALLEN, I DEDICATE
  THIS LITTLE BOOK.




PREFACE

BY THE RT. HON. A. BONAR LAW, M.P.

The author of this book is an intimate personal friend, and possibly
for that reason I take too favourable a view of his work; but I think
he has already rendered a great service, and not to Canada alone.

As Canadian Record Officer, he published a glowing account of the part
played in the Battle of Ypres by the Canadian contingent.  This account
was circulated widely, and it contributed largely to make the deeds of
the Canadian soldiers a household word, not only throughout the
Dominion, but in the United Kingdom as well.

The present work seems to me a model of lucid, picturesque, and
sympathetic narrative, and it will have, I feel sure, a lasting value.

We have a right to feel very proud of the part which is being played in
the terrible tragedy of this war by the great Dominions of the British
Crown.  We had no power to compel any one of them to contribute a
single penny, or to send a single man, but they have given of their
best, not to help us, though I think they would have done that also,
but to defend the Empire which is theirs as much as ours.

Led by a General who a few years ago was in arms against us and who is
the Prime Minister of South Africa, the Union Government have wrested
from Germany a territory larger than the whole German Empire; and a
South African contingent is now in England ready to play their part on
the battlefields of Flanders.

The Australians and New Zealanders have shown in the Dardanelles that
in courage, resourcefulness, and tenacity better troops have never
existed in the world.  Whatever the final result of that operation may
be, the blood which has been shed there has not been shed in vain.  Not
to Australians and New Zealanders alone, but to men of every race
throughout the British Empire, the Peninsula of Gallipoli will for ever
be sacred ground because of the brave men who lie buried there.

  "In glory will they sleep, and endless sanctity."

What Canada has done, and is doing, shines out in every page of this
book.  Higher praise could not be given than was contained in the
despatch of the Commander-in-Chief after the Battle of Ypres: "In spite
of the danger to which they were exposed, the Canadians held their
ground with a magnificent display of tenacity and courage, and it is
not too much to say that the bearing and conduct of these splendid
troops averted a disaster which might have been attended with most
serious consequences."

Our enemies said, and probably they believed, that the outbreak of war
would be the signal for the breaking-up of the British Empire.  They
have been mistaken.  After this war the relations between the great
Dominions and the Mother Country can never be the same again.  The
pressure of our enemies is welding us together, and the British Empire
is becoming in reality, as well as in name, a united nation.

A. BONAR LAW.

COLONIAL OFFICE,
   _December_ 6_th_, 1915.




INTRODUCTION

BY RT. HON. SIR ROBERT L. BORDEN, G.C.M.G.

More than a year ago the bugles of the Empire sounded throughout the
world the call to duty.  The justice of the cause was recognised in
every quarter of the King's dominions, and nowhere more fully than in
Canada; it has since been confirmed by the judgment of the civilised
world.  Within a week Canada had sprung to arms; within three weeks
35,000 men were marshalled on Valcartier Plain, which had been
transformed, as if by magic, into a great military camp; within six
weeks from the outbreak of war a Canadian Division, fully organised and
equipped in every branch of the service, with a surplus of guns and
ammunition nearly sufficient for another Division, and with a detail of
reinforcements amounting to 10,000 men, was ready to proceed overseas.

Twice in September of last year I saw these forces march past under
review by the Duke of Connaught.  Later, I visited every unit of the
contingent, addressed their officers, and bade them all God-speed.  The
Armada which left the shores of Gaspe on October 3rd, 1914, carried the
largest army that ever crossed the Atlantic at one time.

In the midst of the following winter they went to the front.  Few of
them had any previous experience of war.  They had lived in a
peace-loving country; they had been gathered from the varied avocations
of our national life; they had come from the hills and valleys and
surf-beaten shores of the Maritime Provinces; from the banks of the St.
Lawrence and its hundred affluents in the two great central Provinces;
from the mining and lumber camps of the north; from the broad prairie
Provinces and their northern hinterlands; from the majesty of the
mountains that look to the east upon the prairies and to the west upon
the Pacific; from the shores of the great western ocean; from all the
far-flung communities of our Dominion they had hurried, quickly
responsive to the call.

Almost in the dawn of their experience at the front there came to them
an ordeal such as has seldom tested the most tried of veterans.  An
unknown and terrible means of warfare, which temporarily shattered the
gallant forces that held the line at their left, poured upon them
torture and death.  The bravest and most experienced troops might well
have been daunted and driven back by the fierceness of the onslaught to
which they were exposed and by the horrible methods of the attack.
Assailed by overwhelming numbers on front and flank, the held their own
in a conflict which raged for days; they barred the path against the
German onrush and saved the day for the Empire, for the Allies and for
the world.

The story of their tenacity, their valour, and their heroism has been
well told in the pages that follow.  But it can never be completely
told.  Many of those upon whom memories along splendid incidents of
that story were indelibly engraven lie beneath the sod in Northern
France and in Belgium.

On more than one stricken field the record thus made by the 1st
Canadian Division has held good.  From the lips of those who fought at
Festubert and at Givenchy, from dauntless survivors of the Princess
Patricia's Regiment, I have heard, in many a hospital and convalescent
home in the Motherland, what their comrades had dared and done.

No Canadian can ever look forth unmoved upon that valley where Ypres
lies shattered in the distance, and the sweep of the hills overlooks
the graves of more than 100,000 men who fell because a remorseless
militarist autocracy decreed this war.

In the years to come it will be the duty and the pride of Canada to
rear, both in this Dominion and beyond the ocean, monuments which will
worthily commemorate the glorious deeds of her sons who offered the
supreme sacrifice for liberty and civilisation.

R. E. BORDEN.

OTTAWA, _December_ 6_th_, 1915.




  "'Carry the word to my Sisters--
    To the Queens of the East and the South,
  I have proven my faith in the Heritage
    By more than the word of the mouth.
  They that are wise may follow
    Ere the world's war-trumpet blows:
  But I--I am first in the battle,'
    Said our Lady of the Snows."
                          --KIPLING.




AUTHOR'S NOTE

I am so conscious of the imperfections of the chapters which follow
that I was for long unwilling to publish them in the form of a book.
They were written under great difficulties and in many moods; nor am I
unaware that the excuse for collecting them is very slender.  It was,
however, represented to me by persons of much authority, that the
subjects dealt with excited an interest so lively in Canada that
imperfections in the workmanship would be readily overlooked in the
Dominion.

I therefore publish my impressions of the fortunes of the 1st Canadian
Division and of Princess Patricia's Regiment.  Some of the scenes
described fell in whole, or in part, under my own observation.  In
dealing with others I have had access, in the discharge of my duties,
to a large number of military diaries and official documents.

It may be stated that the greatest care is being taken by the Canadian
Government to collect and preserve every authoritative document which
may hereafter throw light upon the military history of the Canadian
Expeditionary Force.  Nor is there reason to doubt that the official
historian of Canada (whoever he may prove to be) will find abundant
material for a grave and adequate work.  Perhaps such a one may find
here and there in these hurriedly written pages a contemporary echo,
however faint and elusive, of the clash and passion of war which the
author has attempted to describe.

I shall be content if one Canadian woman draws solace from this poor
record of her dead husband's bravery; if even one reader recognises for
the first time the right of the Canadians to stand as equals in the
Temple of Valour with their Australian brothers who fought and died at
Anzac; if the task of consolidating our Imperial resources, which may
be the one positive consequence of this orgy of destruction, counts one
adherent the more among those who have honoured me by reading these
records.

And of Englishmen I ask nothing but that they shall hereafter think of
my countrymen as "Brothers in whom a man trusts even if a great quarrel
arises."

W. M. AITKEN.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I

MOBILISATION

War without warning--Canada's loyalty--Improvising an Army--Efforts of
the Minister of Militia--Camp at Valcartier--Canadian Armada
sails--Arrival at Plymouth--Lord Roberts's interest--King's visit to
Canadian Camp--Training completed--Sailing for France


CHAPTER II

WARFARE

"Plug Street"--British Army in being--At General Headquarters--Rest
billets--Mud or death--The trenches--Buzzing bullets--Sir Douglas
Haig--The Front--Restrictions on the narrative--Reviewed by
Commander-in-Chief--Canadians in the trenches--Our men take to
football--"Jack Johnsons"--A German challenge--General Alderson--The
General's methods--His speech to the Canadians--A fine Force


CHAPTER III

NEUVE CHAPELLE

Canadians' valuable help--A ride in the dark--Pictures on the
road--Towards the enemy--At the cross-roads--"Six kilometres to Neuve
Chapelle"--Terrific bombardment--Grandmotherly howitzers--British
aeroplanes--Fight with a Taube--Flying man's coolness--Attack on the
village--German prisoners--A banker from Frankfort--The Indians'
pride--A halt to our hopes--Object of Neuve Chapelle--What we
achieved--German defences under-rated--Machine gun citadels--Great
infantry attack--Unfortunate delays--Sir John French's
comments--British attack exhausted--Failure to capture Aubers
Ridge--"Digging in"--Canadian Division's baptism of
fire--"Casualties"--Trenches on Ypres salient


CHAPTER IV

YPRES

Canadians' glory--A civilian force--Ypres salient--Poelcappelle
road--Disposition of troops--Gas attack on French--Plight of the 3rd
Brigade--Filling the gap--General Turner's move--Loss of British
guns--Canadian valour--St. Julien--Attack on the wood--Terrible
fire--Officer casualties--Reinforcements--Geddes detachment--Second
Canadian Brigade bent back--Desperate position--Terrible
casualties--Col. Birchall's death--Magnificent artillery work--Canadian
left saved--Canadians relieved--Story of 3rd Brigade--Gas attack on
Canadians--Canadian recovery--Major Norsworthy killed--Major McCuaig's
stand--Disaster averted--Col. Hart-McHarg killed--Major Odlum--General
Alderson's efforts--British reinforce Canadians--3rd Brigade
withdraws--General Currie stands fast--Trenches wiped out--Fresh gas
attack--Germans take St. Julien--British cheer Canadians--Canadians
relieved--Heroism of men--Col. Watson's dangerous mission--The Ghurkas'
dead--Record of all units--Our graveyard in Flanders


CHAPTER V

A WAVE OF BATTLE

Individual heroism--Canadian tenacity--Before the battle--The civilian
element--A wave of battle--New meaning of "Canada"--"Northern
Lights"--The fighting paymaster--Major serves as
lieutenant--Misfortunes of Hercule Barre--"Runners"--A messenger's
apology--Swimming a moat--Rescue of wounded--Colonel Watson's
bravery--Colonel Watson's leadership--His heroic deed--Dash of Major
Dyer and Capt. Hilliam--Major Dyer shot--"I have crawled home"--Lieut.
Whitehead's endurance--Major King saves his guns--Corpl. Fisher,
V.C.--The real Canadian officer--Some delusions in England--German
tricks--Sergt. Richardson's good sense--"No surrender!"--Corpl. Baker's
heroism--Bombs from the dead--Holding a position single-handed--The
brothers McIvor--Daring of Sergt.-Major Hall--Sergt. Ferris,
Roadmender--Heroism of the sappers--Sergt. Ferris, Pathfinder--A
sergeant in command--Brave deeds of Pte. Irving--He
vanishes--Absurdities in tragedy--Germans murder wounded--Doctors under
fire--The professional manner--Red hours--Plight of refugees--Canadian
colony in London--Unofficial inquiries--Canada's destiny


CHAPTER VI

FESTUBERT

Objective of Aubers and Festubert--Allies' co-operation--Great French
offensive--Terrific bombardment--British support--Endless German
fortresses--Shortage of munitions--Probable explanation--Effect of
_Times_ disclosures--Outcry in England--Coalition Government--After
Ypres--The Canadian advance--Disposition of Canadians--Attack on the
Orchard--Canadian Scottish--Sapper Harmon's exploits--Drawback to
drill-book tactics--A Canadian ruse--"Sam Slick"--The Orchard
won--Arrival of Second Brigade--The attempt on "Bexhill"--In the German
trenches--Strathcona's Horse--King Edward's Horse--Cavalry fight on
foot--Further attack on "Bexhill"--Redoubt taken--"Bexhill"
captured--"Dig in and hang on"--Attack on the "Well"--Heroic efforts
repulsed--General Seely assumes command--A critical moment--Heavy
officer casualties--The courage of the cavalry--Major Murray's good
work--Gallantry of Sergt. Morris and Corpl. Pym--Death of Sergt.
Hickey--Canadian Division withdrawn--Trench warfare till June


CHAPTER VII

GIVENCHY

Minor engagements--A sanguinary battle--Attacks on "Stony Mountain" and
"Dorchester"--Disposition of Canadian troops--An enemy
bombardment--"Duck's Bill"--A mine mishap--"Dorchester" taken--A
bombing party--Coy.-Sergt.-Major Owen's bravery--Lieut. Campbell mounts
machine-gun on Private Vincent's back--How Private Smith replenished
the bombers--Fighting the enemy with bricks--British Division unable to
advance--Canadians hang on--"I can crawl"--General Mercer's
leadership--Private Clark's gallantry--Dominion Day


CHAPTER VIII

PRINCESS PATRICIA'S LIGHT INFANTRY

Review in Lansdowne Park--Princess Patricia presents the Colours--South
African veterans and reservists--Princess Patricias in the
trenches--St. Eloi--Major Hamilton Gault--A dangerous
reconnaissance--Attack on a sap--A German onslaught--Lessons from the
enemy--A march to battle--Voormezeele--Death of Colonel
Farquhar--Polygone Wood--Regiment's work admired--A move towards
Ypres--Heavily shelled--A new line--Arrival of Major Gault--Regiment
sadly reduced--Gas shells--A German rush--Major Gault wounded--Lieut.
Niven in command--A critical position--Corporal Dover's heroism--A
terrible day--Shortage of small arms ammunition--Germans' third
attack--Enemy repulsed--Regiment reduced to 150 rifles--Relieved--A
service for the dead--In bivouac--A trench line at
Armentieres--Regiment at full strength again--Moved to the south--Back
in billets--Princess Patricias instruct new troops--Rejoin Canadians--A
glorious record


CHAPTER IX

THE PRIME MINISTER

The Prime Minister's visit--Passing of Politics--End to domestic
dissensions--The Imperial idea--Sir Robert's foresight--Arrival in
England--At Shorncliffe--Meeting with General Hughes--Review of
Canadian troops--The tour in France--A Canadian base hospital--A
British hospital--Canadian graves--Wounded under canvas--Prince Arthur
of Connaught--Visiting battle scenes--Received by General
Alderson--General Turner's Brigade--Speech to the men--First and Second
Brigades--Sir Robert in the trenches--Cheered by Princess
Patricias--Enemy aeroplanes--Meeting with Sir John French--The Prince
of Wales--With the French Army--General Joffre--A conference in
French--The French trenches--The stricken city of Albert--To Paris--The
French President--Conference with the French War Minister--Shorncliffe
again--Canadian convalescent home--A thousand convalescents--Sir
Robert's emotion--His wonderful speech--End of journey


CHAPTER X

THE CANADIAN CORPS

Tranquil Canadian lines---German reconnaissance--Incident at "Plug
Street"--Pte. Bruno saves Capt. Tidy--A sniper's month--Sharpshooters'
compact--Sergt. Ballendine--The Ross rifle--"No Man's Land"--Our
bombers--Sergt. William Tabernacle--His new profession--General Sir Sam
Hughes' visit--Canadian patriotism--Civilian armies--"Last Word of
Kings"--Art of the "soldier's speech" Lord Kitchener's
inspiration--Lord Roberts and the Indians--General Hughes arrives in
France--At British Headquarters--Consultation with King Albert--Meeting
with Prince Alexander of Teck--Conference with General Alderson--The
second Canadian Contingent--In the firing line--Many friends--General
Burstall's artillery--Inspection of cavalry--Meeting with Prince of
Wales--The Princess Patricias--Conference with Sir Douglas
Haig--General Hughes' suggestions--Meeting with General Foch--Impressed
with General Joffre--The ruin at Rheims--General Hughes' message on
departure--A quiet August--The Canadian Corps--General Alderson's New
Command--An appreciation of a gallant Commander--Conclusion


APPENDIX I

THE KING'S MESSAGES TO THE CANADIANS


APPENDIX II

CANADIANS IN DESPATCHES


APPENDIX III

THE PRIME MINISTER AND THE WAR


APPENDIX IV

LIEUT.-GENERAL E. A. H. ALDERSON, C.B., COMMANDING THE CANADIAN CORPS


APPENDIX V

HONOURS AND REWARDS GRANTED


APPENDIX VI

STATEMENT OF CASUALTIES




CHAPTER I

MOBILISATION

War without warning--Canada's loyalty--Improvising an Army--Efforts of
the Minister of Militia--Camp at Valcartier--Canadian Armada
sails--Arrival at Plymouth--Lord Roberts's interest--King's visit to
Canadian Camp--Training completed--Sailing for France.


  "O ye by wandering tempest sown
    Neath every alien star,
  Forget not whence the breath was blown
    That wafted you afar!
  For ye are still her ancient seed
    On younger soil let fall--
  Children of Britain's island-breed
  To whom the Mother in her need
    Perchance may one day call."
                        --WILLIAM WATSON.


War came upon us without warning, like a thunderbolt from a clear sky.
Our people were essentially non-military, fearing no aggression from a
peace-loving neighbour, and ignorant of the imminence of German
aggression.  Yet, in seven weeks, Canada created the first apparatus of
war.  In seven weeks we assembled an army which, a few months later,
was to save Calais on the battlefield of Langemarck.  As a
demonstration of practical loyalty the exertions of Canada were only
equalled by Australia and New Zealand.  As an example of administration
rising to an emergency, the effort has never been surpassed in military
history.

When the British ultimatum to Germany demanding the recognition of the
neutrality of Belgium expired, the Canadian Government decided to raise
an Expeditionary Force.  As this news flashed across the Dominion, the
fires of patriotism, which had been smouldering, burst into flame in
every province.  Parliament was in vacation, but the Prime Minister
returned from the West and summoned his Cabinet.  The Minister of
Militia was already at work in his office, for the proposal of the
Canadian Government to raise 20,000 men had been accepted by the
British Government.

Within two months of the outbreak of war between Great Britain and
Germany, the Dominion of Canada concentrated, armed, and sent to Europe
an Expeditionary Force of 33,000 men.  A voluntary army, the first
complete Canadian Division ever assembled, with more than half a
Reserve Division, this force was by far the greatest body of soldiers
that had ever crossed the Atlantic at one time.  It comprised cavalry,
artillery, infantry, engineers, signallers, supply and ammunition
columns, field ambulances and hospital staffs, provided with all the
apparatus required for the handling and treatment of the wounded; it
carried its own complement of rifles, machine guns, field guns, and
heavy artillery, and a store of ammunition.

It was not the first time that Canadians had taken up arms in defence
of Imperial interests.  In the Crimean War, Canadians fought in the
ranks of the British Army.  The Indian Mutiny saw the old Prince of
Wales' Royal Canadian Regiment at Gibraltar and at Malta.  More than
7,000 Canadians fought for England in the South African War.  But now
the Empire was to be tested to its foundations.  The Minister of
Militia, Major-General the Hon. Sir Sam Hughes, K.C.B., acted with the
promptness and energy for which he was already famous in the Dominion.
In less than a month the Government, which had asked for 20,000 men,
found almost 40,000 at its disposal, and the Minister of Militia deemed
it necessary to issue orders that no more recruits be enrolled for the
first contingent.

Thus did Canada answer the call.  From the workshops and the offices of
her cities, from the lumber camps of her forests, from the vast
wheatfields of the West, from the farms and orchards of the East, from
the slopes of the Rockies, from the shores of Hudson Bay, from the
mining valleys of British Columbia, from the banks of the Yukon, from
the reaches of the St. Lawrence, the manhood of Canada hurried to arms.

No mere jackboot militarism inspired them.  They sought neither the
glory of conquest nor the rape of freedom, nor the loot of sacked
cities.  No selfish ideal led them to leave their homes and exchange
the ease and comforts of civil life for the sufferings of war and the
risk of death.  They came forward, free men and unconstrained, with a
simple resolve to lay down their lives, if need be, in defence of the
Empire--their Empire too--the very existence of which, as they swiftly
saw, was menaced by the most formidable military combination which had
ever sprung to arms.  The first contingent was born partly of the glory
of adventure but more of the spirit of self-sacrifice; and this spirit,
in its turn, was born of the deepest emotions of the Canadian
people--its love of Country, of Liberty, and of Right.

The Government, in deciding to raise a contingent for service in
Europe, were carrying out the national will, and when Parliament
entered upon its special session, some days after the declaration of
War, unanimity prevailed.  The Prime Minister spoke for all parties
when he declared that Canada stood "shoulder to shoulder with Britain
and the other British Dominions in this quarrel."  Sir Wilfrid Laurier
spoke of the "double honour" of Canadians of French descent in the
opportunity of "taking their place to-day in the ranks of the Canadian
Army to fight for the cause of the allied nations."  The Government
announced its further intention of raising a sum of fifty millions of
dollars for war purposes.

As soon as the policy of the Government had been ratified, General
Hughes devised and ordered the establishment of the largest camp that
had ever been seen on Canadian soil.  The site at Valcartier was well
chosen.  It lay some sixteen miles to the west of Quebec, within a
day's march of the gathering transports.  The soil was, in the main,
light and sandy, and a river of pure water was available.  Yet the work
of adapting this virgin soil to military purposes was enormous, and the
transformation, effected within a fortnight by an army of engineers and
workers, a remarkable triumph of applied science.  Roads were made,
drains laid down, a water supply with miles of pipes installed,
electric lighting furnished from Quebec, and incinerators built for the
destruction of dry refuse.  A sanitary system, second to none that any
camp has seen, was instituted.  Every company had its own bathing place
and shower baths; every cookhouse its own supply of water.  Troughs of
drinking-water, for horses, filled automatically, so that there was
neither shortage nor waste.  The standing crops were garnered, trees
cut down and their roots torn up.  A line of rifle targets 3-1/2 miles
long--the largest rifle range in the world--was constructed.  Three
miles of sidings were run out from the wayside station, and a camp
telephone exchange was quickly put in working order.

Camp and army leaped to life in the same hours.  Within four days of
the opening of the camp, nearly 6,000 men had arrived in it.  A week
later the number was 25,000.  In those August days all roads led to
Valcartier, and the railways rose to the occasion, gathering the first
Division to the rendezvous, from every corner of the country, in great
trains, each of which carried and fed 600 men.

The assembling force comprised elements from every phase of Canadian
life.  There were those whose names were known throughout the land.
There were men who had fought at Paardeburg--some of them "very barely"
within the age limit of 45.  One, who had retired from a colonelcy of a
regiment, offered to serve as a private, so anxious was he to go.  He
was more than satisfied when he received a majority.  Another, who had
spent his fifteenth birthday as a bugler in South Africa, has since
celebrated his third war birthday in the Flemish trenches.

The original intention of the authorities was to send to England a
Division, consisting of the regular complement of three infantry
brigades; but, on September 1st, General Hughes announced at the camp
that a fourth brigade would be formed, to be used as drafts to supply
the war wastage in the other three.  Towards the end of the month the
Government decided to send all four brigades over together.  "The total
reinforcements for the first year of a great war," said Sir Robert
Borden in announcing his decision, "are estimated at from 60 to 70 per
cent.  If the reserve depots necessary for supplying such
reinforcements were established in Canada, eight or ten weeks might
elapse before they could reach the front....  For these reasons, as
well as others, we deem it advisable that the reserves shall be kept on
hand in Great Britain, as the Force at the front must continually be
kept at full strength, and that without the slightest unnecessary
delay."

While the new army underwent its preliminary training at Valcartier,
there were other preparations of every kind to be made.  The cloth
mills of Montreal began to hum with the manufacture of khaki, which the
needles of a great army of tailors converted into uniforms, greatcoats
and cloaks.  The Ordnance Department equipped the host with the Ross
rifle--a Canadian-made arm.  Regiments were shuffled and reshuffled
into battalions; battalions into brigades.  The whole force was
inoculated against typhoid.  There were stores to manufacture and to
accumulate; a fleet of transports to assemble; a thousand small cogs in
the machine to be nicely adjusted.

Early in September, the whole First Division was reviewed by the
Governor-General in a torrential downpour of rain; and again, towards
the end of the month, a few days before embarkation, the Duke of
Connaught (accompanied by the Duchess and the Princess Patricia) took
the salute at Valcartier from the first army of Canada.  At this final
review the contingent was fittingly led past the saluting base by the
man whose name, more than any one other, will be linked in history with
the first Canadian Division.  General Hughes had cause to be proud of
the 33,000 men who marched past that day, fully armed and fully
equipped, well within two months of the declaration of war in Europe.

The feat of raising such a force is all the more remarkable when one
considers that, with the exception of the Princess Patricia's Light
Infantry, the overwhelming majority of the men who volunteered for the
great War were civilians, without previous experience or training.  The
"Princess Pats," as that already famous regiment is now commonly
called, was the only one that consisted almost entirely of old soldiers.

The Governor-General's review over, news from the camp came fitfully.
The censor was at work, and the public guessed rightly that the
division was on the move.  Through the darkness and the rain and the
mud of the night of September 23rd-24th, the guns crawled down the
sixteen miles of valley that brought them to Quebec at daybreak, the
men drenched, but happy in the knowledge that they were at last off to
the war.  The weather was so bad that the infantry, instead of
marching, were brought down in a long succession of heavy trains.  The
embarkation of horses, men, guns and wagons was completed in less than
three days.  And so the First Canadian Division, with its Reserves,
sailed away down the St. Lawrence, in a fleet of Atlantic liners such
as the mighty gateway of Canada had never before borne on her bosom.

The fleet assembled in Gaspe Basin, on the coast of Quebec, where the
warships which were to convoy it across the Atlantic awaited it.  On
October 3rd the transports steamed out of Gaspe Bay in three lines
ahead, led by His Majesty's ships _Charybdis_, _Diana_, and _Eclipse_,
with the _Glory_ and _Suffolk_ on the flanks, and the _Talbot_ in the
rear.  Later, the _Suffolk's_ place was taken by the battle-cruiser,
_Queen Mary_.  The sealing-ship _Florizel_, with the Newfoundland
Regiment aboard, joined the fleet after its departure from Gaspe Bay.

The voyage was uneventful if rather long, the fleet entering Plymouth
Sound on the evening of October 14th.  So strict had been the
censorship that the arrival of the Canadian Armada was quite unexpected
by the people of Plymouth and Devonport; but no sooner had the word
gone forth that the Canadian transports had arrived, than the townsfolk
flocked to the waterside, to cheer and sing, and cheer again.

No one was allowed on board the transports, but, when on the succeeding
days the troops were landed and marched through the streets, they
received a welcome which they will never forget.  Hundreds of the men
had relatives and friends who were anxious to catch a glimpse of them
at the docks, but access was refused.  The only exception made
throughout the various disembarkations was in the case of the late
Field-Marshal Lord Roberts.

Lieut.-General Alderson[1] had been appointed to the command of the
contingent, and visited the commanding officers before the work of
disembarkation began.

The Canadian Division, the Princess Patricia's Canadian Light Infantry,
and the Newfoundland Regiment occupied camps on Salisbury Plain at
Bustard, West Down South, West Down North, Pond Farm, Lark Hill, and
Sling Plantation.  Here the Canadians remained until their departure
for France.  Here, in the mud and cold and rain of those four dismal
months, they worked and lived and displayed that spirit of endurance,
courage, and willingness which has since proclaimed them to the world
as troops of the finest quality.  On the sodden grazing lands, in the
fog and mud of the battalion lines, in the dripping tents and crowded,
reeking huts, the men of Canada gave promise of the great spirit they
possessed, and their officers saw it and were proud.

Lord Roberts visited the Division soon after its arrival in England.
It was the last public appearance of this great soldier in England, and
the following are the principal points in his speech to the Canadian
troops:--


    "We have arrived at the most critical moment of our history, and
    you have generously come to help us in our hour of need.

      *      *      *      *      *

    "Three months ago we found ourselves involved in this war, a war
    not of our own seeking; but one which those who have studied
    Germany's literature and Germany's aspirations, knew was a war
    which we should inevitably have to deal with sooner or later.  The
    prompt resolve of Canada to give us such valuable assistance, has
    touched us deeply.  That resolve has been quickened into action in
    a marvellously short space of time, under the excellent organising
    and driving power of your Minister of Militia--my friend,
    Major-General Hughes.

      *      *      *      *      *

    "We are fighting a nation which looks upon the British Empire as a
    barrier to her development, and has, in consequence, long
    contemplated our overthrow and humiliation.  To attain that end she
    has manufactured a magnificent fighting machine, and is straining
    every nerve to gain victory.

      *      *      *      *      *

    "It is only by the most determined efforts that we can defeat
    her."[2]


The King paid his first visit to our troops early in November.  His
Majesty was accompanied by Field-Marshals Lords Roberts and Kitchener,
Sir George Perley, Member of the Canadian Cabinet in charge of the
office of the High Commissioner in London,[3] and Sir Richard McBride,
Prime Minister of British Columbia.

The Princess Patricia's Canadian Light Infantry left Salisbury Plain
early in December and joined the 27th British Division.  The Regiment
was brigaded with the 3rd King's Royal Rifles, 4th King's Royal Rifles,
4th Rifle Brigade, and 2nd King's Shropshire Light Infantry.

The King again visited the Canadian troops on February 4th, 1915; and
on the following day a Division composed of three infantry brigades,
three artillery brigades, ammunition column, divisional engineers,
divisional mounted troops, and divisional train, marched off Salisbury
Plain and entrained for their port of embarkation under the command of
Lieut.-General Alderson.

Lieut.-Colonel (now Major-General) M. S. Mercer commanded the 1st
Infantry Brigade, which was composed of the 1st Battalion (Ontario
Regiment) under Lieut.-Colonel F. W. Hill, the 2nd Battalion under
Lieut.-Colonel (now Brigadier-General) David Watson, the 3rd Battalion
(Toronto Regiment) under Lieut.-Colonel (now Brigadier-General) R.
Rennie, and the 4th Battalion under Lieut.-Colonel A. P. Birchall, who
was killed in action.

The 2nd Infantry Brigade was commanded, by Lieut.-Colonel A. W. Currie
(now Major-General), and his four battalions, the 5th, 7th, 8th, and
10th, were commanded respectively by Lieut.-Colonels G. S. Tuxford, W.
F. H. Hart-McHarg, L. J. Lipsett (now Brigadier-General), and R. L.
Boyle.  Colonels Hart-McHarg and Boyle fell at Ypres.

Colonel R. E. W. Turner, V.C., D.S.O., who has since been promoted to
the rank of Major-General, commanded the 3rd Infantry Brigade, with
Lieut.-Colonels F. O. W. Loomis, F. S. Meighen (now Brigadier-General),
J. A. Currie, and R. G. E. Leckie (since promoted to Brigadier-General)
commanding respectively the 13th Battalion (Royal Highlanders of
Canada), the 14th Battalion (Royal Montreal Regiment), the 15th
Battalion (48th Highlanders of Canada), and the 16th Battalion
(Canadian Scottish).

Lieut.-Colonel (now Brigadier-General) H. E. Burstall commanded the
Canadian Artillery, with Lieut.-Colonels E. W. B. Morrison (now
Brigadier-General), J. J. Creelman and J. H. Mitchell commanding
artillery brigades.  The Officer Commanding Divisional Engineers was
Lieut.-Colonel C. J. Armstrong (now Brigadier-General); Lieut.-Colonel
F. C. Jameson was in command of the Divisional Mounted Troops and Major
F. A. Lister of the Divisional Signal Company.

The Division sailed from Avonmouth, and the last transport reached St.
Nazaire, on the Bay of Biscay, in the second week of February.

The 6th, 9th, 11th, 12th, and 17th Battalions were left in England as
the Base Brigade of the Division.  These battalions were formed later
into the Canadian Training Depot; later still, together with
reinforcements from Canada, into the Canadian Training Division, under
the command of Brigadier-General J. C. MacDougall.

Such, in its principal commands, was the Army which left Canada for the
Great Adventure.  It carried with it, and it left behind, high hopes.
It was certain that no men of finer physique or higher courage could be
found anywhere in any theatre of this immense struggle.  But there were
some--and these neither faint-hearted nor unpatriotic--who recalled
with anxiety the scientific organisation and the tireless patience with
which Germany had set herself to create the most superb military
instrument which the world has ever seen.  And they may have been
forgiven if they asked themselves:

"Can civilians, however brave and intelligent, be made in a few months
the equals of those inspired veterans who are swarming in triumph over
the battlefields of Europe?"

"Can Generals, and Staffs, and officers be improvised, able to compete
with the scientific output of the most scientific General Staff which
has ever conceived and carried out military operations?"

These were formidable questions, and even a bold man might have shrunk
from a confident answer.

The story of Canada in Flanders, however inadequately told, will make
it unnecessary ever to ask them again.



[1] Lieut.-General Edwin Alfred Hervey Alderson, C.B., has a
distinguished record of service.  He was born in 1859, at Ipswich, and
began his military career with the Militia, from which he passed to the
Regular Army in December, 1878.  He joined the Royal West Kent Regiment
as Second Lieutenant, and was promoted to Lieutenant in July, 1881; and
in this year he first saw active service with the Natal Field Force in
the Transvaal campaign.  He was ordered to Egypt in the following year,
serving there with the mounted infantry.  He was in two actions, at
Kassassin and at the battle of Tel-el-Kebir on September 13th.  He
received the medal with clasp and the Khedive's bronze star.  Lieut.
Alderson took part in the Nile Expedition of 1884-1885.  He was
promoted Captain in June, 1886, and Major in May, 1896, and received
the brevet of Lieut.-Colonel in 1897.  In 1896 and 1897 he served in
South Africa under Sir Frederick Carrington.  In October, 1899, he was
given the command of the mounted infantry of the 1st Cavalry Brigade.
His services throughout the South African campaign were constant and
distinguished.  In 1903 he was promoted Colonel, and appointed to the
command of the 2nd Infantry Brigade, 1st Army Corps.  He became a
Major-General in 1906, and in 1908 commanded the 6th Division, Southern
Army, India.  His rank of Lieut.-General dates from October 14th, 1914.
General Alderson has received the honour of K.C.B. since this book was
in the press.

[2] From _Canada_ of October 31st, 1914.

[3] When war was declared Sir George Perley, K.C.M.G., M.P., was in
London, on his way from Canada to attend a congress of the
International Parliamentary Union for Peace, at Stockholm.  He remained
in England to act as High Commissioner for Canada, in succession to the
late Lord Strathcona, whose place had not been filled.  Sir George is
the first Commissioner, from any Dominion, of Cabinet rank, and the
advantage to Canada is at once obvious.  He is, of course, a man of
vast business experience, and it would be difficult to over-estimate
the services he has already rendered to the Imperial Government and the
Government of Canada.




CHAPTER II

WARFARE

"Plug Street"--British Army in being--At General Headquarters--Rest
billets--Mud or death--The trenches--Buzzing bullets--Sir Douglas
Haig--The Front--Restrictions on the narrative--Reviewed by
Commander-in-Chief--Canadians in the trenches--Our men take to
football--"Jack Johnsons"--A German challenge--General Alderson---The
General's methods--His speech to the Canadians--A fine Force.


  "Things 'ave transpired which made me learn
    The size and meanin' of the game.
  I did no more than others did,
    I don't know where the change began;
  I started as an average kid,
    I finished as a thinkin' man."
                            --KIPLING.

  "The strong necessity of time commands
  Our services awhile."
                    _Antony and Cleopatra_.


After a slow journey by rail of 350 miles from the landing point in
France, the Canadians reached a wayside station which lies about twelve
miles due west of Ploegsteert--the war-historic "Plug Street" wood,
which British regiments had already made famous.  At this point the
Canadians were well within that triangle of country lying between St.
Omer to the west, the ruins of Ypres to the east, and Bethune to the
south, which at that time contained the entire British Army in France.

It was one of the most remarkably interesting pieces of triangular
territory imaginable, full of movement, romance, and the intricate
detail of organisation.  Within it lay the already wonderful beginnings
of the great British force as it is to-day, and I will do my best to
make clear how, within that triangle, the first British Army lived,
moved, fought, and generally had its being.

You must picture the British Army in the field, spread out like a fan.
The long, wavy edge of the fan is the line of men in the firing
trenches, at the very forefront of affairs, often within a
stone's-throw of the opposing German line.  Some hundreds of yards
behind this firing line lie the support trenches, also filled with men.
The men in the firing and supporting trenches exchange places every
forty-eight hours.  After a four days' spell they all retire for four
days' rest, fresh troops taking their places as they move out.  At the
end of their four days' rest they return again to the trenches.  All
relieving movements are carried out in the dark to avoid the enemy's
rifle fire.

Further back, along the ribs of the fan, one finds the headquarters of
the many brigades; behind these, headquarters of divisions; then
headquarters of army corps, then of armies--the groups becoming fewer
and fewer in number as you recede--until, at the end of the fan handle,
one reaches the General Headquarters, where the Commander-in-Chief
stands, with his hand on the dynamo which sends its impulses through
every part of the great machine spread out in front.

From General Headquarters the movements of the entire British Army, or
rather of the several British armies, are directed and controlled.  It
is a War Office in the field, with numerous branches closely
co-ordinated and working together like a single machine.  Here is the
operations office, where plans of attack are worked out under the
direction of the Commander-in-Chief and his chief of staff.

Near by is the building occupied by the "signals" branch, which with
its nerve system of telegraphs, telephones, and motor-cycle despatch
riders, is the medium of communication with every part of the field,
and also with the base of supplies and the War Office in London.
"Signals" carries its wires to within rifle shot of the trenches, and
every division of the Army has its own field telephones from battalions
headquarters to the firing line.

Close at hand is the office of the intelligence branch, which collects
and communicates information about the enemy from every source it can
tap.  It receives and compares reports of statements made by prisoners,
and interrogates some prisoners itself.  It goes through documents,
letters, diaries, official papers--captured in the field--and extracts
points from these.  It collects news from its own agents--it is only
your enemy who calls them spies--about events that are happening, or
are likely to happen, behind the screen of the enemy's lines.

At General Headquarters you find the department of the
Adjutant-General, who is responsible for the whole of the
arrangements--keeping the army in the field supplied with men and
munitions of war, for the transfer of all prisoners to the base, for
the trial of offences against discipline, and for the spiritual welfare
of the troops.

From a neighbouring office the Quartermaster-General controls the
movements of food and fodder for men and horses, and all other stores,
other than actual munitions of war.

Still another branch houses the Director-General of Medical Service,
who supervises the treatment of the wounded from the field aid post to
the field clearing station, from there to the hospital train, and
thence to the base hospital in France or Great Britain.

One of the most fascinating spots at General Headquarters is the map
department.  Thousands of maps of various kinds and sizes have been
produced here since the war began.  They vary from large maps, to be
hung on walls or spread on great tables, down to small slips--with a
few lines of German trenches accurately outlined--and most handy for
the use of battery and battalion commanders.  Remarkable photographs
are also printed here--panoramic views and photographs of German
positions, taken at very close quarters, often under fire.  There are
officers who specialise in this perilous and wonderful business.

As one goes forward from General Headquarters towards the edge of the
fan, one comes in contact with more and more men, and realises quickly
that, in spite of the hardships of trench warfare, our troops are
superbly fit and ready for any task which the fortunes of war may
impose on them.  Their physical condition remains so robust as to be
astonishing.

For instance, the evening that I reached the billeting area, I saw
several battalions of the Expeditionary Force marching from their
billets towards the trenches--they had been at the front for months,
yet they stepped as freshly as though they were just from home or
route-marching in English lanes.  Their faces shone with health; their
eyes were as bright as those of a troop of schoolboys.  They were, in
fact, tramping down a long, straight, poplar-lined Flemish highway,
with a misty vista of flat ploughed land on either side.  They whistled
as they marched.

The complete efficiency of the men is largely due to the excellence of
their food.  The Army is, in fact, healthier than any other army that
has ever faced war.  Typhoid is almost unknown.  The amazing record of
health owes much to the sanitary precautions which are taken.  One of
the most remarkable of these is the system of hot baths and the
sterilising of clothing.

Bathing establishments have been put up in various parts of the field,
and the largest of them is in a building which, before the war, was a
jute factory.  Every hour of the day, successive companies of men have
hot baths here.  They strip to the skin, and while they wallow in huge
vats of hot water, their clothing is treated with 200 degrees of heat,
which destroys all vermin.

At first the small towns, the villages, and the many farmhouses and
cottages within easy reach of the firing line provided all the rest
billets.  A great many men are billeted in this way still.  I found,
for instance, a company of Territorials snugly resting in a huge farm,
the officers having quarters in the farmhouse on the other side of the
yard; but recently a large number of wooden huts have been put up in
various places across the countryside, and here the men come back from
the trenches to rest.  They are tired when they come "home," but a
sound sleep, a wash, a hearty breakfast, and a stroll in the fresh
air--out of range of the insistent bullets--have a magical effect.  In
the afternoon you find them playing football as blithely as boys, and
those who are not playing stand round and chaff and applaud.  I saw as
many games of football one day, in the course of a motor run behind the
lines, as one would see on a Saturday afternoon in England.

Every day brings its letters and newspapers--every rail-head has its
little travelling letter office shunted into a siding.  Here the
letters of a division are sorted.  They average more than one letter a
day for every man in the field.  That is another reason why the Army is
in good spirits.  No army in the world before ever got so much news
from home, so regularly and so quickly.  Besides this, drafts of men
are constantly being sent home--across the Channel--for five or seven
days' leave.

The firing line is not much further from the base than London is from
the sea.  One passes on through the region of rest billets and
headquarters of sections of troops, and arrives behind the firing line.
When the Canadians first landed, the British forces held a front
between twenty and thirty miles long, running from Ypres, on the north,
where the Seventh Division made its heroic stand against the Prussian
Guards, to Givenchy, on the south, near the scene of the battle of
Neuve Chapelle.

This stretch had been held ever since the British troops made their
swift dart from the Aisne to Flanders, hoping (how strange it seems
now) to outflank the Germans, and in fact, by immense exertions,
defeating a far more formidable outflanking movement by the enemy.
Here they have maintained their ground.  They lived and fought in seas
of mud all through the winter.  The water was pumped out of the
trenches with hand-pumps, only to ooze back again through the sodden
soil.  Plank platforms were put down, and straw was piled in.  Yet the
mud smothered everything.  The men stood in mud, sat in mud, and lay in
mud.  Often it was as much as they could do to prevent the mud from
clogging their rifles.  They crawled through mud to the trenches when
it was their time to relieve those in the firing line.  They had to
hide in the mud of the trenches to escape the German bullets.  It was a
choice of mud or death.  With the arrival of spring, conditions were
improved.  There was less rain, and the winds had begun to dry the
ground.  On fine days there was even dust on the paved roads, although
the quagmire of mud, each side of the centre strip of granite, still
remained.  The trench mud was becoming firmer.

The line of trenches runs nearly everywhere through low-lying ground,
intersected with watery ditches and small streams; the land is so
level, and the atmosphere so heavy, that, as a rule, the eye ranges
little further than a rifle bullet will carry.  The nearer the firing
line the more difficult you find it to set eyes on men.  Thousands of
men are almost within hailing distance, but none are to be seen.
Friend and foe alike are hidden in the trenches.

Some of the most famous trenches are in a wood that is known to all the
army as "Plug Street," although, as I have already made clear, it is
spelled a little differently on the maps.  To reach the trenches you
have, of course, to come within rifle-shot of the enemy, for in most
places the German and British trenches are not more than 250 yards from
each other, and here and there they are only 40 or 50 yards apart.  One
creeps and crawls at dusk along paths which months of experience has
told the soldiers are the best means of approach; and one eventually
scrambles into a communication trench which, in a number of zig-zags,
leads you to the firing trench, where the men are waiting, rifle in
hand, in case of attack, or now and again taking a snap-shot through a
loophole in the trench parapet.

The trenches in "Plug Street" are like all the other trenches--very
exciting to think about before you reach them, but, unless you happen
to arrive when shells are bursting overhead, comparatively dull and
matter-of-fact when you are actually there.  It is only the chance of
death that gives them their peculiar interest over other holes
excavated by men in clammy earth.  The bee-like buzz of an occasional
bullet overhead reminds you that death is searching for its prey.
"Plug Street" has a fame which will endure.  All through the first
winter, the men squashed about in its awful mud, making quite a number
of slimy, ankle-deep, or knee-deep lanes from point to point among the
trees.  In course of time each of the muddy woodland alleys received
its nickname from the men in the ranks.

Such was the appearance and atmosphere of things at the front when the
Canadians first arrived.  After a few days of special instruction they
were billeted in the area of the First Army under Sir Douglas Haig.
The Divisional Headquarters were located near Estaires, with the
Brigade Headquarters in advanced positions, and the "Front" is clearly
indicated by the sketch on page 37.

I have described, as fully as is permissible, the general disposition
and the general organisation of the British Army in the field as it was
when the Canadians first set foot in France.  It now becomes necessary
to deal in detail with the "Front"--that almost endless succession of
warren-like lines where scores of thousands of men stand to arms by
night and day, and where the Canadian troops have already fought with a
gallantry and a dash, and yet a tenacity, which have seldom, if ever,
been equalled in military history.

None can examine what, for want of a better name, is called the "Front"
of this amazing war, without realising the truth of what has been so
often said--that it is a war almost without a "Front."

As one approaches from a distance the actual point of contact between
the opposing forces, one is struck ever more and more by the immense
numbers which are converging, as it seems, for some great military
purpose.  But the nearer the front approaches the more completely does
all that is spectacular disappear, until, finally, the flower of the
youth of Europe vanishes and is swallowed up by immense but barely
visible lines of field fortifications.

And now the Canadian Division, too, has reached the front.  The long,
the tedious winter discomfort of Salisbury Plain, never resented but
always disliked, already seems far away.  No one in the Canadian
Division grudges the honour which was paid to Princess Patricia's Light
Infantry, to carry first the badge of Canada on the battlefields of
Flanders.  It was freely recognised that this Regiment had arrived with
greater technical knowledge and had reached a degree of efficiency
which the other battalions could hardly equal without longer
preparation.  The fortunes of the Princess Patricias will be told in
another chapter, but it can be said that the Battalion has proved
itself worthy of fighting side by side, and on equal terms, with the
army of veterans and heroes which held the trenches during the first
horrible winter in Flanders.

It is a story which will demand the utmost care in the telling, and, in
any case, much that would be of the greatest interest must of necessity
be omitted, because, in face of the superb organisation of the German
Intelligence Department, it might be mischievous to publish details of
units, and of their doings, as long as the general military formations
in which these units play a part remain unchanged.  It is out of
respect for this consideration that the day for giving full honours to
units by exact identification has so often to be postponed, so that the
records of our men's heroism only appear when, in the maelstrom of
fresh splendid deeds, they are already half forgotten.

This volume, and those which it is hoped will follow it, must always be
read in the light of these most necessary restrictions.  Nevertheless
it is possible, while observing every rule which has been laid down for
our guidance, to give a general picture of the Canadian Division, its
surroundings and its doings, which, whether it interests other people
or not, will not be read without emotion by those who sent their sons
and brothers to the greatest battlefields of history in support of
principles which, in their general application, are as important to the
liberties of Canada as they are to the liberties of Europe.

Before the Canadians took up their allotted positions in the trenches
they marched past the Commander-in-Chief and his Staff.  Those who
watched the troops defile in the grey, square market-place of a typical
Flanders town, were experienced judges of the physique and quality of
soldiers.  No one desires in such a connection to use exaggerated
language, and it is therefore unnecessary to say more than that the
unanimous view of those who watched so intently and so critically, was
that, judging the men by their physique and their soldierly swing, no
more promising troops had come to swell our ranks since the day the
Expeditionary Force landed in France.

When the Canadian troops first took their turn as a Division in the
trenches, nothing sensational happened to them.  It was not their
fortune, at the outset, to be swung forward in a desperate attack, or
to cling in defensive tenacity to trenches which the Germans had
resolved to master.  There were, of course, casualties.  One does not
enter or leave trenches without casualties, for the sniper never fails
to claim his daily toll, but the early trench experiences of the
Canadians were not eventful, as one judges incidents in this war.  This
period of immunity, however, was all to the good.  Whatever else he is,
the Canadian is adaptable, and the experience of these weeks brought
him more wisdom than others might have drawn from it.

Work in the trenches no longer involves, in respect of duration, the
heartbreaking strain which was imposed upon all in the dark and anxious
days of the autumn of 1914, when a thin line of khaki held, often
wholly unsupported by reserves, so immense a line against superior
forces.  Trench work now, in relation to the period of exposure, is
well within the powers of stout and resolute troops.  For a certain
period, relays of the force take their turn in holding their lines.
When that period is passed they are relieved by their comrades.

Exciting, if occasionally monotonous, though life in the trenches may
be, it is strange to a Canadian, and deeply interesting, to study the
tiny town in which the troops in repose are billeted, and the hustling
life on which they have already stamped so much of their individuality.
Picture to yourself a narrow street, the centre paved, the sides of
tenacious mud.  Line it on each side with houses, rather squalid, and
with a few unimportant stores.  Add a chateau (not a grand one) for the
Headquarters, a modest office for the Staff, and you have a fair
conception of the billeting place which shelters that part of the
division which reposes.  But this town is like many other towns in this
unattractive country.  Its interest to us lies in the tenants of the
moment.  Walk down the street, and you will, if you are a Canadian,
feel at once something familiar and homelike in the atmosphere.  One
hears voices everywhere, and one does not need the sight of the brass
shoulder badges, "CANADA," to know the race to which these voices
belong.  It may be the speech of Nova Scotia, it may be the voice of
British Columbia, or it may be the accents in which the French-Canadian
seeks to adapt to the French of Flanders the tongue which his
ancestors, centuries ago, carried to a new world; but, whichever it
be--it is all Canadian.

And soon, a company swings by, going perhaps to bath parade--to that
expeditious process which, in half an hour, has cleansed the bathers
and fumigated every rag which they possess.  And as they pass they sing
carelessly, but with a challenging catch, a song which, if by chance
you come from Toronto, will perhaps stir some association.  For these,
or many of them, are boys from the College; and the song is the
University song whose refrain is, "Toronto."

And if you go still a little further in the direction of the front, you
will soon--very soon--after leaving the place of billeting, come to the
country over which the great guns, by day and night, contend for
mastery.  And as one advances, there seem to be Canadians everywhere.
Here are batteries, skilfully masked.  Here are supplies on their way
to the trenches.  And all the time can be seen reliefs and reserves
until it is strange to meet anyone not in khaki and without the badge
of "CANADA."  The passion for football, which the Canadian has begun to
share with his English comrade, abates none of its keenness as he
marches nearer to the front.  A spirited match was in progress near our
lines not long ago when a distracting succession of "Weary Willies"
began to distribute themselves not very far from the football ground.
The only people who took no notice were the players, and nothing short
of a peremptory order from the Provost Marshal brought to an end a game
which was somewhat unnecessarily dangerous.  And our men have, of
course, made the acquaintance of "Jack Johnson," and without liking
him--for he is not likeable--they endure him with as much constancy as
brave men need.  Nor, indeed, have our own artillery failed to do more
than hold their own.  The gunners inherited from the division which
preceded them in the trenches a disagreeable inheritance in the shape
of an observation post which had long harassed and menaced our lines by
the information which it placed at the disposal of the enemy.  We were
so fortunate as to put it out of action in the third round which we
fired--a success very welcome as an encouragement, and giving a
substantial relief from an unwholesome scrutiny.

Our infantry were not specially engaged in the fighting at Neuve
Chapelle, but our artillery played its part in that triumph of
artillery science which preceded the British attack, and our men were
ready during the whole fight for the order which, had the tactical
situation so developed, would have sent them, too, to make their first
assault upon the German trenches.  And there were not a few who were
longing for that order.  They thought that the Germans had presumed
upon a slight acquaintance.  For, the very first night on which our men
were put into the trenches, the Germans began to call out, "Come out,
you Canadians!  Come out and fight!"  Now, the trenches at normal times
have their own code of manners and of amenity, and this challenge was,
and is, regarded as impertinent.

The Canadian brings his own phrases into his daily life.  When the
German flares in the trenches nervously lighted up the space between
the two lines, "There are the Northern Lights" was the comment of
Canada; and "Northern Lights" they have remained to this day.

It would be evidently impertinent to say more of the General Officer
Commanding the force, General Alderson, than that he enjoys the most
absolute confidence of the fine force he commands.  He trusts them, and
they trust him; and it will be strange if their co-operation does not
prove fruitful.  And an observer is at once struck by the
extraordinarily accurate knowledge which the General has gained of the
whole body of regimental officers under his command.  He seems to know
them as well by name and sight, as if he had commanded the force for
six years instead of six months.  And this is a circumstance which, in
critical moments, counts for much.

General Alderson's methods--his practical and soldierly style--could
not be better illustrated than by some extracts from the speech which
he addressed to the troops before they went into the trenches for the
first time:--

"All ranks of the Canadian Division: We are about to occupy and
maintain a line of trenches.  I have some things to say to you at this
moment which it is well that you should consider.  You are taking over
good and, on the whole, dry trenches.  I have visited some myself.
They are intact, and the parapets are good.  Let me warn you first that
we have already had several casualties while you have been attached to
other divisions.  Some of those casualties were unavoidable, and that
is war.  But I suspect that some--at least a few--could have been
avoided.  I have heard of cases in which men have exposed themselves
with no military object, and perhaps only to gratify curiosity.  We
cannot lose good men like this.  We shall want them all if we advance,
and we shall want them all if the Germans advance.  Do not expose your
heads, and do not look round corners, unless for a purpose which is
necessary at the moment you do it.  It will not often be necessary.
You are provided with means of observing the enemy without exposing
your heads.  To lose your lives without military necessity is to
deprive the State of good soldiers.  Young and brave men enjoy taking
risks.  But a soldier who takes unnecessary risks through levity, is
not playing the game.  And the man who does so is stupid, for whatever
be the average practice of the German Army, the individual shots they
employ as snipers shoot straight, and, screened from observation behind
the lines, they are always watching.  And if you put your head over the
parapet without orders they will hit that head.

"There is another thing.  Troops new to the trenches always shoot at
nothing the first night.  You will not do it.  It wastes ammunition and
it hurts no one.  And the enemy says: 'These are new and nervous
troops.'  You will be shelled in the trenches.  When you are shelled,
sit low and sit tight.  This is easy advice, for there is nothing else
to do.  If you get out you will only get it worse.  And if you go out
the Germans will go in.  And if the Germans go in, we shall
counter-attack and put them out; and that will cost us hundreds of men,
instead of the few whom shells may injure.  The Germans do not like the
bayonet, nor do they support bayonet attacks.  If they get up to you,
or if you get up to them, go right in with the bayonet.  You have the
physique to drive it home.  That you will do it I am sure, and I do not
envy the Germans if you get among them with the bayonet.

"There is one thing more.  My old regiment, the Royal West Kents, has
been here since the beginning of the war, and it has never lost a
trench.  The Army says, 'The West Kents never budge.'  I am proud of
the great record of my old regiment.  And I think it is a good omen.  I
now belong to you and you belong to me; and before long the Army will
say: 'The Canadians never budge.'  Lads, it can be left there, and
there I leave it.  The Germans will never turn you out."

I may, before concluding the present chapter, point out that the most
severe military critics, both in England and in France, are loud in
their admiration of the organising power which, in a non-military
country, has produced so fine a force in so short a time.  In
equipment, in all the countless details which in co-ordination mean
efficiency, the Division holds its own with any division at the war.
This result was only made possible by labour, zeal, and immense driving
power, and these qualities were exhibited in Canada at the outbreak of
war by all those whose duties lay in the work of improvisation.




CHAPTER III

NEUVE CHAPELLE

Canadians' valuable help--A ride in the dark--Pictures on the
road--Towards the enemy--At the cross-roads--"Six kilometres to Neuve
Chapelle"--Terrific bombardment--Grandmotherly howitzers--British
aeroplanes--Fight with a Taube--Flying man's coolness--Attack on the
village--German prisoners--A banker from Frankfort--The Indians'
pride--A halt to our hopes--Object of Neuve Chapelle--What we
achieved--German defences under-rated--Machine gun citadels--Great
infantry attack--Unfortunate delays--Sir John French's
comments--British attack exhausted--Failure to capture Aubers
Ridge--"Digging in"--Canadian Division's baptism of
fire--"Casualties"--Trenches on Ypres salient.


"The glory dies not, and the grief is past."--BRYDGES.

"During the battle of Neuve Chapelle the Canadians held a part of the
line allotted to the First Army, and, although they were not actually
engaged in the main attack, they rendered valuable help by keeping the
enemy actively employed in front of their trenches."--_Sir John
French's Despatch on the Battle of Neuve Chapelle, which began on
March_ 10_th_, 1915.


It was night when I left the Canadian Divisional Headquarters and
motored in a southerly direction towards Neuve Chapelle.  It was the
eve of the great attack, and in the bright space of light cast by the
motor lamps along the road, there came a kaleidoscopic picture of
tramping men.

Here at the front there is no need of police restrictions on motor
headlights at night as there is in London and on English country roads.
The law under which you place yourself is the range of the enemy's
guns.  Beyond that limit you are free to turn your headlights on, and
there is no danger.  But, once within the range of rifle fire or shell,
you turn your lights on at the peril of your own life.  So you go in
darkness.

As we rode along with lamps lit, thousands of khaki-clad men were
marching along that road--marching steadily in the direction of Neuve
Chapelle.  The endless stream of their faces flashed along the edge of
the _pave_ in the light of our lamps.  Their ranked figures, dim one
moment in the darkness, sprang for an instant into clear outline as the
light silhouetted them against the background of the night.  Then they
passed out of the light again and became once more a legion of shadows,
marching towards dawn and Neuve Chapelle.  The tramp of battalion after
battalion was not, however, the tramp of a shadow army, but the firm,
relentless, indomitable step of armed and trained men.

Every now and then there came a cry of "Halt," and the columns came on
the instant to a stand.  Minutes passed, and the command for the
advance rang out.  The columns moved again.  So it went
on--halt--march--halt--march--hour by hour through the night along that
congested road--a river of men and guns.

For while in one direction men were marching, in the other direction
came batteries of guns, bound by another route for their position in
front of Neuve Chapelle.  The two streams passed one another--legions
of men and rumbling, clattering lines of artillery, all moving under
screen of the dark, towards the line of trenches where the enemy lay.

This was no time to risk a block in traffic, and my motor, swerving off
the paved centre of the road, sank to her axles in the quagmire of
thick, sticky mud at the side.  The guns passed, and we sought to
regain the paved way again, but our wheels spun round, merely churning
dirt.  We could not move out of that pasty Flemish mud, until a
Canadian ambulance wagon came to our aid.  The unhitched horses were
made fast to the motor, and they heaved the car out of her clinging bed.

In the early morning I came to the cross roads.  The signpost planted
at the crossing and pointing down the road to the south-east bore the
inscription "Six kilometres to Neuve Chapelle."

This was the road that the legions had taken.  It led almost in a
straight line to the trenches that were to be stormed, to the village
behind them that was to be captured, and to the town of La Bassee, a
few kilometres further on, strongly held by the Germans.

"Six kilometres to Neuve Chapelle "--barely four miles; one hour's easy
walking, let us say, on such a clear, fresh morning; or five minutes in
a touring car if the time had been peace.  But who knew how many hours
of bloody struggle would now be needed to cover that short level
stretch of "Six kilometres to Neuve Chapelle"!  Between this signpost
and the village towards which it pointed the way, many thousands of
armed men--sons of the Empire--had come from Britain, from India, from
all parts of the Dominions Overseas, to take their share in driving the
wedge down to the end of this six kilometres of country road, and
through the heart of the German lines.  Here for a moment they paused.
What hopes, what fears, what joys, what sorrows, triumphs and tragedies
were suggested by that austere signpost, pointing "like Death's
lean-lifted forefinger" down that little stretch of road marked "Six
kilometres to Neuve Chapelle"!

I went on foot part of the way here, for so many battalions of men were
massed that motor traffic was impossible.  These were troops held in
reserve.  Those selected for the initial infantry attack were already
in the trenches ahead right and left of the further end of the road,
waiting on the moment of the advance.

I had just passed the signpost when the comparative peace of morning
was awfully shattered by the united roar and crash of hundreds of guns.

This broke out precisely at half-past seven.  The exact moment had been
fixed beforehand for the beginning of a cannonade more concentrated and
more terrific than any previous cannonade in the history of the world.
It continued with extraordinary violence for half-an-hour, all calibres
of guns taking part in it.  Some of the grandmotherly British howitzers
hurled their enormously destructive shells into the German lines, on
which a hurricane of shrapnel was descending from a host of smaller
guns.  The German guns and trenches offered little or no reply, for the
enemy were cowering for shelter from that storm.

I turned towards the left and watched for awhile the good part which
the Canadian Artillery played in that attack.  The Canadian Division,
which was a little further north than Neuve Chapelle, waited in its
trenches, hoping always for the order to advance.

Then I passed down the road until I came to a minor crossways where a
famous general stood in the midst of his Staff.  Motor despatch riders
dashed up the road, bringing him news of the progress of the
bombardment.  The news was good.  The General awaited the moment when
the cannonade should cease, as suddenly as it had begun, and he should
unleash his troops.

Indian infantry marched down the road and saluted the General as they
passed.  He returned the salute and cried to the officer at the head of
the column, "Good luck."  The officer was an Indian, who, with a smile,
replied in true Oriental fashion: "Our Division has doubled in
strength, General-Sahib, since it has seen you."

While the bombardment continued, British aeroplanes sailed overhead and
crossed over to the German lines.  The Germans promptly turned some
guns on them.  We saw white ball-puffs of smoke as the shrapnel shells
burst in front, behind, above, below, and everywhere around the
machines, but never near enough to hit.  They hovered like eagles above
the din of the battle, surveying and reckoning the damage which our
guns inflicted, and reporting progress.

[Illustration: Map--Line occupied by British in March 1915]

Once a German Taube rose in the air and lunged towards the British
lines.  Then began a struggle for the mastery, which goes to the
machine which can mount highest and fire down upon its enemy.  The
Taube ringed upwards.  A couple of British aeroplanes circled after it.
To and fro and round and round they went, until the end came.  The
British machines secured the upper air, and soon we saw that the Taube
was done.  Probably the pilot had been wounded.  The machine drooped
and swooped uneasily till, like a wounded bird, it streaked down
headlong far in the distance.

I walked over to where a British aeroplane was about to start on a
flight.  The young officer of the Royal Flying Corps in charge was as
cool as though he were taking a run in a motor-car at home.  "As a
matter of fact," he said, "I wanted change and rest.  I had spent five
months in the trenches, and was worn out and tired by the everlasting
monotony and drudgery of it all.  So I applied for a job in the Flying
Corps.  It soothes one's nerves to be up in the air for a bit after
living down in the mud for so long."

I watched him soar up into the morning sky and saw numerous shrapnel
bursts chasing him as he sailed about over the German lines.  What a
quiet, easy-going holiday was this, dodging about in the air, a clear
mark for the enemy's guns!  But, to tell the truth, the British flying
men and machines are very rarely hit.  Flying in war-time is not so
perilous as it looks, though it needs much skill and a calm, collected
spirit.

At length the din of the gunfire ceased, and we knew that the British
troops were rushing from their trenches to deal with the Germans, whose
nerve the guns had shaken.  Astounded as they had been by our artillery
fire, the Germans were still more amazed by the rapidity of the
infantry attack.  The British soldiers and the Indians swept in upon
them instantly till large numbers threw down their weapons, scrambled
out of their trenches, and knelt, hands up, in token of surrender.

The fight swept on far beyond the German trenches, through the village,
and beyond that again.  The big guns occasionally joined in, and the
chatter of the machine-guns rose and broke off.  Now the motor
ambulances began to come back--up that road down which the finger
pointed to Neuve Chapelle.  They lurched past us as we stood by the
signpost in an intermittent stream, bearing the wounded men from the
fight.

Presently the cheerful sight of German prisoners alternated with the
saddening procession of ambulances.  Large squads of prisoners went by,
many hatless and with dirt-smeared faces, their uniforms looking as
though dipped in mustard, the effect of the bursting of the British
lyddite shells among them in their trenches.  The dejection of defeat
was on their faces.

Some of them were halted and were questioned by the General.  One man
turned out to be a Frankfort banker, whose chief concern later was what
would become of his money, which he said had been taken charge of by
some of his captors.  He was also anxious to know where he would be
imprisoned, and seemed relieved, if not delighted, when he heard that
it would be in England.

Another prisoner had been a hairdresser in Dresden.  The General
questioned him, and he gave an entertaining account of his experiences
as a soldier.

"I am a Landwehr man," he said.  "I was in Germany when I was ordered
to entrain.  Presently the train drew up and I was ordered to get out,
and was told I had to go and attack a place called Neuve Chapelle.  So
I went on with others, and soon we came into a hell of fire, and we ran
onwards and got into a trench, and there the hell was worse than ever.
We began to fire our rifles.  Suddenly I heard shouting behind me, and
looked round and saw a large number of Indians between me and the rest
of the German Army.  I then looked at the other German soldiers in the
trench and saw that they were throwing their rifles out of the trench.
Well, I am a good German, but I did not want to be peculiar, so I threw
my rifle out also, and then I was taken prisoner and brought here.
Although I have not been long at the war, I have had enough of it.  I
never saw daylight in the battlefield until I was a prisoner."

Some of the prisoners were brought along by the Indian troops who had
captured them.  They complained bitterly that they, Germans, should be
marched about in the custody of Indians!  They did not understand the
grimly humorous reply: "If the Indians are good enough to take you,
they are good enough to keep you."

The Indians smiled with delight, for they are particularly fond of
making prisoners of Germans.  Most of them brought back their little
trophies of the fight, which they held out for inspection with a smile,
crying, "Souvenir!"

The stream of prisoners and of wounded passed on.  The fury of battle
relaxed.  Now and then some of the guns still crashed, but the machine
guns rattled further and further away, and the crackle of the rifle
fire came from a distance.

The British Army had traversed in triumph those "six kilometres to
Neuve Chapelle."

At Neuve Chapelle it halted, and there halted, too, the hopes of an
early and conclusive victory for the Allied forces.

The enemy's outposts had been driven in, but beyond these, their
fortified places bristled with machine guns, which wrought havoc on our
troops, and, indeed, brought the successful offensive to a close.
Controversy has arisen over the disappointing results which were
achieved.  For a month after the battle, Neuve Chapelle was heralded by
the public as a great British victory.  But doubt followed confidence,
and in a few weeks the "victory" was described as a failure.  The truth
lies between these extremes.

The object of this battle of Neuve Chapelle was to give our men a new
spirit of offensive and to test the British fighting machine which had
been built up with so much difficulty on the Western front.  Besides,
if this attack succeeded in destroying the German lines, it would be
possible to gain the Aubers ridge which dominates Lille.  That ridge
once firmly held in our hands, the city should have been ours.  That
would have been a great victory.  It would probably have meant the end
of the German occupation of this part of France.  In any case it must
have had a marked effect upon the whole progress of the war.[1]

That was what we hoped to do.  What we actually accomplished was the
winning of about a mile of territory along a three-mile front, and the
straightening of our line.  The price was too high for the result.

It was the first great effort ever made by the British to pierce the
German line since it had been established after the open field battles
of the Marne and the Aisne.  The British troops had faced the German
lines for months, and while the fundamental principles of the German
defences were fairly well understood, their real strength was very much
underrated.

Things went badly from the beginning of the action.  The artillery
"preparation" represented quite the most formidable bombardment the
British had so far made, but even so, it was ineffective along certain
sections of the line.  After the way had been paved by shrapnel and
high explosive, the British infantry moved forward in a splendid
offensive to secure what everyone believed would be a decisive victory;
and trained observers of the battle were under the impression that the
gallant British infantry had won their end.  This is an impression,
too, which was shared by some of the men for a time.

For many months the British had been almost entirely on the defensive,
and over and over again been called on to repulse heavy, massed German
attacks.  The casualties sustained in repulsing these attacks first
revealed our shortage of machine-guns.  What they lacked in
machine-guns, however, the British troops made up for in a deadly
accuracy of rifle fire, which was at once the terror and the admiration
of the Germans.  The British had thus come to an exaggerated idea of
the efficacy of rifle fire, and a consequent over-estimate of the
importance of the German first line trenches.  Over these they swarmed,
and the word went forth that the day was won.

It was only when the British troops had occupied the enemy's first and
second line trenches, they discovered that, in actual fact, they had
not done more than drive in the outposts of an army.  Close at hand,
the Germans' third line loomed up like a succession of closely
interlocked citadels.  Nay, more, those citadels were so constructed
that the trenches from which our men had ousted the enemy with so much
heroism and loss were deathtraps for the new tenants.  The
circumstances were such that to retire meant acknowledgment of failure,
and to hang on, a grisly slaughter.

Even so, there were features of the situation which made for hope.
There were positions to be won which would very seriously jeopardise
the whole German scheme of defence; but, at the critical moment of the
battle, the advanced troops seem to have passed beyond the control of
the various commanders in the rear on account of the misty weather.

The real tragedy, however, was the non-arrival of the supports at a
point and at a time when the appearance of reserves might have made all
the difference to the fortunes of the day.  The enemy was still
bewildered and demoralised, and, but for the delay, might have been
completely routed.  Unfortunately, the British front was in great need
of straightening out.  The 23rd Brigade continued to hang up the 8th
Division, while the 25th Brigade was fighting along a portion of the
front where it was not supposed to be at all.  Units had to be
disentangled and the whole line straightened before further advance
could be made.

The fatal result was a delay which, Sir John French says, would never
have occurred had the "clearly expressed orders of the General Officer
commanding the 1st Army been more carefully observed."

Sir Douglas Haig himself hurried up to set things right, but it was
then too late to retrieve the failure which had been occasioned by
delay.  The attack was thoroughly exhausted, its sting was gone, and
the enemy had pulled himself together.  Night was falling, and there
was nothing to be done but "dig in" beneath the ridge above Lille, the
capture of which would have altered the whole story of the campaign on
the Western front.

As I have said, the Canadian infantry took no part in the battle,
though the troops waited impatiently and expectantly for the order to
advance, but the activity of the Canadian artillery was considerable
and important.  The Canadian guns took their full share in the
"preparation" for the subsequent British infantry attack, and the
observation work of our gunners was good and continuous.

After Neuve Chapelle, quiet reigned along the Canadian trenches, though
the battle raged to the north of us at St. Eloi, and the Princess
Patricia's Battalion was involved.  Early in the last days of March our
troops were withdrawn and retired to rest camps.

The Canadians had received their baptism of fire, and in extremely
favourable circumstances.  They had not been called on to make any
desperate attacks on the German lines.  Nor had the Germans launched
any violent assaults upon theirs.  The infantry had sustained a few
casualties, but that was all; while German artillery practice against
our trenches had been curtailed on account of the violent fighting both
to the south and the north.

On the other hand, we had been surrounded by all the circumstances of
great battles.  We had watched the passage of the giant guns, of which
the British made use for the first time at Neuve Chapelle, and we had
moved and lived and stood to arms amid all the stir and accessories of
vehement war.  The guns had boomed their deadly message in our ears, we
had seen death in many forms, and understood to the full the meaning of
"Casualties," while, day by day, the aeroplanes wheeled and circled
overhead, passing and re-passing to the enemy's lines.

The Canadians had come to make war, and had dwelt in the midst of it,
and after their turn in the trenches many of them, no doubt, accounted
themselves war-worn veterans.  Little they knew of the ordeals of the
future.  Little they dreamt, when towards the middle of the month of
April they were sent to take over French trenches in the Ypres salient,
that they were within a week of that terrible but wonderful battle
which has consecrated this little corner of Flanders for Canadian
generations yet unborn.



[1] The scheme of the attack on Neuve Chapelle had been worked out by
General John Gough just before he was killed, and it was explained to
his Corps Commanders by Sir John French on May 8th as follows:--The 1st
Army was to launch the main assault, the 4th Corps being on the left
flank and the Indian Corps on the right.  To hold up the enemy all
along the line, and to prevent his massing reinforcements to meet the
main attack, two other supplementary attacks were also to be made--one
attack by the 1st Corps from Givenchy, and the other by the 3rd
Corps--detailed from the 2nd Army for that purpose--to the south of
Armentieres.




CHAPTER IV

YPRES

Canadians' glory--A civilian force--Ypres salient--Poelcappelle
road--Disposition of troops--Gas attack on French--Plight of the 3rd
Brigade--Filling the gap--General Turner's move--Loss of British
guns--Canadian valour--St. Julien--Attack on the wood--Terrible
fire--Officer casualties--Reinforcements--Geddes detachment--Second
Canadian Brigade bent back--Desperate position--Terrible
casualties--Col. Birchall's death--Magnificent artillery work--Canadian
left saved--Canadians relieved--Story of 3rd Brigade--Gas attack on
Canadians--Canadian recovery--Major Norsworthy killed--Major McCuaig's
stand--Disaster averted--Col. Hart-McHarg killed--Major Odlum--General
Alderson's efforts--British reinforce Canadians--3rd Brigade
withdraws--General Currie stands fast--Trenches wiped out--Fresh gas
attack--Germans take St. Julien--British cheer Canadians--Canadians
relieved--Heroism of men--Col. Watson's dangerous mission--The Ghurkas'
dead--Record of all units--Our graveyard in Flanders.


  "If my neighbour fails, more devolves upon me."
                                      --WORDSWORTH.

  "Gloucester, 'tis true that we are in great danger;
  The greater therefore should our courage be."
                                      --SHAKESPEARE.


The fighting in April, in which the Canadians played so glorious a
part, cannot, of course, be described with precision of military detail
until time has made possible the co-ordination of all the relevant
diaries, and the piecing together in a narrative both lucid and exact
of much which is confused and blurred.[1]

[Illustration: Map of Ypres and area]

The battle which raged for so many days in the neighbourhood of Ypres
was bloody, even as men appraise battles in this callous and
life-engulfing war.  But as long as brave deeds retain the power to
fire the blood of Anglo-Saxons, the stand made by the Canadians in
those desperate days will be told by fathers to their sons; for in the
military records of Canada this defence will shine as brightly as, in
the records of the British Army, the stubborn valour with which Sir
James Macdonnel and the Guards beat back from Hougoumont the Division
of Foy and the Army Corps of Reille.

The Canadians wrested from the trenches, over the bodies of the dead
and maimed, the right to stand side by side with the superb troops who,
in the first battle of Ypres, broke and drove before them the flower of
the Prussian Guards.

Looked at from any point, the performance would be remarkable.  It is
amazing to soldiers, when the genesis and composition of the Canadian
Division are considered.  It contained, no doubt, a sprinkling of South
African veterans, but it consisted in the main of men who were
admirable raw material, but who at the outbreak of war were neither
disciplined nor trained, as men count discipline and training in these
days of scientific warfare.

It was, it is true, commanded by a distinguished English general.  Its
staff was supplemented, without being replaced, by some brilliant
British staff officers.  But in its higher and regimental commands were
to be found lawyers, college professors, business men, and real estate
agents, ready with cool self-confidence to do battle against an
organisation in which the study of military science is the exclusive
pursuit of laborious lives.  With what devotion, with a valour how
desperate, with resourcefulness how cool and how fruitful, the amateur
soldiers of Canada confronted overwhelming odds may, perhaps, be made
clear even by a narrative so incomplete as this.

The salient of Ypres has become familiar to all students of the
campaign in Flanders.  Like all salients, it was, and was known to be,
a source of weakness to the forces holding it; but the reasons which
have led to its retention are apparent, and need not be explained.

On April 22nd the Canadian Division held a line of, roughly, five
thousand yards, extending in a north-westerly direction from the
Ypres-Roulers railway to the Ypres-Poelcappelle road, and connecting at
its terminus with the French troops.[2]  The Division consisted of
three infantry brigades, in addition to the artillery brigades.  Of the
infantry brigades the first was in reserve, the second was on the
right, and the third established contact with the Allies at the point
indicated above.

The day was a peaceful one, warm and sunny, and except that the
previous day had witnessed a further bombardment of the stricken town
of Ypres,[3] everything seemed quiet in front of the Canadian line.  At
five o'clock in the afternoon a plan, carefully prepared, was put into
execution against our French allies on the left.  Asphyxiating gas of
great intensity was projected into their trenches, probably by means of
force pumps and pipes laid out under the parapets.

The fumes, aided by a favourable wind, floated backwards, poisoning and
disabling over an extended area those who fell under their effects.
The result was that the French were compelled to give ground for a
considerable distance.[4]  The glory which the French Army has won in
this war would make it impertinent to labour the compelling nature of
the poisonous discharges under which the trenches were lost.  The
French did, as everyone knew they would, all that stout soldiers could,
and the Canadian Division, officers and men, look forward to many
occasions in the future in which they will stand side by side with the
brave armies of France.

The immediate consequences of this enforced withdrawal were, of course,
extremely grave.  The 3rd Brigade of the Canadian Division was without
any left, or, in other words, its left was "in the air."  The following
rough diagrams may make the position clear.

[Illustration: Map--Ypres--POSITION BEFORE DISCHARGE OF GAS]

Contrast this with the diagram on the following page.

[Illustration: Map--Ypres--POSITION AFTER DISCHARGE OF GAS]

It became imperatively necessary greatly to extend the Canadian lines
to the left rear.  It was not, of course, practicable to move the 1st
Brigade from reserve at a moment's notice, and the line, extended from
5,000 to 9,000 yards, was naturally not the line that had been held by
the Allies at five o'clock, and a gap still existed on its left.  The
new line, of which our recent point of contact with the French formed
the apex, ran, quite roughly, as follows:--

[Illustration: Map--Ypres--POSITION ON FRIDAY MORNING]

As shown above, it became necessary for Brigadier-general Turner (now
Major-General), commanding the 3rd Brigade, to throw back his left
flank southward, to protect his rear.  In the course of the confusion
which followed on the readjustment of the position, the enemy, who had
advanced rapidly after his initial successes, took four British 4.7
guns, lent by the 2nd London Division to support the French, in a small
wood to the west of the village of St. Julien, two miles in the rear of
the original French trenches.

The story of the second battle of Ypres is the story of how the
Canadian Division, enormously outnumbered--for they had in front of
them at least four divisions, supported by immensely heavy
artillery--with a gap still existing, though reduced, in their lines,
and with dispositions made hurriedly under the stimulus of critical
danger, fought through the day and through the night, and then through
another day and night; fought under their officers: until, as happened
to so many, these perished, gloriously, and then fought from the
impulsion of sheer valour because they came from fighting stock.

The enemy, of course, was aware--whether fully or not may perhaps be
doubted--of the advantage his breach in the line had given him, and
immediately began to push a formidable series of attacks on the whole
of the newly-formed Canadian salient.  If it is possible to
distinguish, when the attack was everywhere so fierce, it developed
with particular intensity at this moment on the apex of the
newly-formed line running in the direction of St. Julien.

It has already been stated that four British guns were taken in a wood
comparatively early in the evening of April 22nd.  The General Officer
Commanding the Canadian Division had no intention of allowing the enemy
to retain possession of either the wood or the guns without a desperate
struggle, and he ordered a counter-attack towards the wood to be made
by the 3rd Infantry Brigade under General Turner.  This Brigade was
then reinforced by the 2nd Battalion under Lieut.-Colonel (now
Brigadier-General) Watson and the 3rd (Toronto) Battalion under
Lieut.-Colonel Rennie (now also a Brigadier-General), both of the 1st
Brigade.  The 7th Battalion (British Columbia Regiment), from the 2nd
Brigade, had by this time occupied entrenchments in support of the 3rd
Brigade.  The 10th Battalion of the 2nd Brigade, intercepted on its way
up as a working party, was also placed in support of the 3rd Brigade.

The assault upon the wood was launched shortly after midnight of April
22nd-23rd by the 10th Battalion and 16th (Canadian Scottish) Battalion,
respectively commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Boyle and Lieut.-Colonel (now
Brigadier-General) R. G. E. Leckie.  The advance was made under the
heaviest machine gun and rifle fire, the wood was reached, and, after a
desperate struggle by the light of a misty moon, they took the position
at the point of the bayonet.

An officer who took part in the attack describes how the men about him
fell under the fire of the machine guns, which, in his phrase, played
upon them "like a watering pot."  He added quite simply, "I wrote my
own life off."  But the line never wavered.

When one man fell another took his place, and, with a final shout, the
survivors of the two Battalions flung themselves into the wood.  The
German garrison was completely demoralised, and the impetuous advance
of the Canadians did not cease until they reached the far side of the
wood and entrenched themselves there in the position so dearly gained.
They had, however, the disappointment of finding that the guns had been
destroyed by the enemy, and later in the same night, a most formidable
concentration of artillery fire, sweeping the wood as a tropical storm
sweeps the leaves from the trees of a forest, made it impossible for
them to hold the position for which they had sacrificed so much.

[Illustration: Map--St. Julien and area]

Within a few hours of this attack, the 10th Canadian Battalion was
again ordered to advance by Lieut.-Colonel Boyle, late a rancher in the
neighbourhood of Calgary.  The assault was made upon a German trench
which was being hastily constructed within two hundred yards of the
Battalion's right front.  Machine gun and rifle fire opened upon the
Battalion at the moment the charge was begun, and Colonel Boyle fell
almost instantly with his left thigh pierced in five places.  Major
MacLaren, his second in command, was also wounded at this time.
Battalion stretcher-bearers dressed the Colonel's wounds and carried
him back to the Battalion first aid station.  From there he was moved
to Vlamertinghe Field Hospital, and from there again to Poperinghe.  He
was unconscious when he reached the hospital, and died shortly
afterwards without regaining consciousness.

Major MacLaren, already wounded, was killed by a shell while on his way
to the hospital.  The command of the 10th Battalion passed to Major D.
M. Ormond, who was wounded.  Major Guthrie, a lawyer from Fredericton,
New Brunswick, a member of the local Parliament and a very resolute
soldier, then took command of the Battalion.

The fighting continued without intermission all through the night of
April 22nd-23rd, and to those who observed the indications that the
attack was being pushed with ever-growing strength, it hardly seemed
possible that the Canadians, fighting in positions so difficult to
defend and so little the subject of deliberate choice, could maintain
their resistance for any long period.

Reinforcements of British troops, commanded by Colonel Geddes, of the
Buffs, began to arrive in the gap early on Friday morning.  These
reinforcements, consisting of three and a half battalions of the 28th
Division--drawn from the Buffs, King's Own Royal Leinsters, Middlesex,
and York and Lancasters--and other units which joined them from time to
time, became known as Geddes' Detachment.  The grenadier company of a
battalion of the Northumberland Fusiliers, numbering two officers and
120 men, who were on their way to rejoin their division after eight
days of trench-fighting at Hill 60, encountered Colonel Geddes' force
and joined it.[5]

At 6 a.m. on Friday, the 2nd Canadian Brigade was still intact, but the
3rd Canadian Brigade, on the left, was bent back upon St. Julien.  It
became apparent that the left was becoming more and more involved, and
a powerful German attempt to outflank it developed rapidly.  The
consequences, if it had been broken or outflanked, need not be insisted
upon.  They would not have been merely local.

It was therefore decided, formidable as the attempt undoubtedly was, to
try to give relief by a counter-attack upon the first line of German
trenches, now far, far advanced from those originally occupied by the
French.  The attack was carried out at 6.30 a.m. by the 1st (Ontario)
Battalion and the 4th Battalion of the 1st Brigade, under
Brigadier-General Mercer, acting with Geddes' Detachment.  The 4th
Battalion was in advance and the 1st in support, under the covering
fire of the 1st Canadian Artillery Brigade.

It is safe to say that the youngest private in the ranks, as he set his
teeth for the advance, knew the task in front of him, and the youngest
subaltern knew all that rested on its success.  It did not seem that
any human being could live in the shower of shot and shell which began
to play upon the advancing troops.

They suffered terrible casualties.  For a short time every other man
seemed to fall, but the attack was pressed ever closer and closer.  The
4th Canadian Battalion at one moment came under a particularly
withering fire.  For a moment--not more--it wavered.  Its most gallant
Commanding Officer, Lieut.-Colonel Birchall, carrying, after an old
fashion, a light cane, coolly and cheerfully rallied his men, and at
the very moment when his example had infected them, fell dead at the
head of his Battalion.  With a hoarse cry of anger they sprang forward
(for, indeed, they loved him) as if to avenge his death.

The astonishing attack which followed, pushed home in the face of
direct frontal fire, made in broad daylight by battalions whose names
should live for ever in the memories of soldiers, was carried to the
first line of the German trenches.  After a hand-to-hand struggle, the
last German who resisted was bayoneted, and the trench was won.

The measure of our success may be taken when it is pointed out that
this trench represented, in the German advance, the apex in the breach
which the enemy had made in the original line of the Allies, and that
it was two and a half miles south of that line.  This charge, made by
men who looked death indifferently in the face--for no man who took
part in it could think that he was likely to live--saved, and that was
much, the Canadian left.  But it did more.

[Illustration: Map--1st Canadian Division situation at 7 a.m. April
23rd, 1915]

Up to the point where the assailants conquered, or died, it secured and
maintained during the most critical moment of all, the integrity of the
Allied line.  For the trench was not only taken--it was held thereafter
against all comers, and in the teeth of every conceivable projectile,
until the night of Sunday, April 25th, when all that remained of the
war-broken but victorious battalions was relieved by fresh troops.

In this attack, the work of the 1st Artillery Brigade was extremely
efficient.  Under the direction of Lieut.-Colonel Morrison, whose
services have gained him the command of the artillery of the 2nd
Division with the rank of Brigadier-General, the battery of four
18-pounders was strengthened, in the afternoon, with two heavier guns.

Captain T. E. Powers, of the Signal Company attached to General
Mercer's command, maintained communication throughout with the advanced
line of the attack under a heavy shell fire that cut the signal wires
continually.  The work of the Company was admirable, and was rendered
at the price of many casualties.

It is necessary now to return to the fortunes of the 3rd Brigade,
commanded by General Turner, which, as we have seen, at five o'clock on
Thursday was holding the Canadian left, and after their first attack
assumed the defence of the new Canadian salient, at the same time
sparing all the men it could to form an extemporised line between the
wood and St. Julien.  This Brigade was also at the first moment of the
German offensive made the object of an attack by a discharge of
poisonous gas.  The discharge was followed by two enemy assaults.[6]

Although the fumes were extremely poisonous, they were not, perhaps,
having regard to the wind, so disabling as on the French lines (which
ran almost east to west), and the Brigade, though affected by the
fumes, stoutly beat back the two German assaults.  Encouraged by this
success, it rose to the supreme effort required by the assault on the
wood, which has already been described.  At 4 a.m. on the morning of
Friday, the 23rd, a fresh emission of gas was made both on the 2nd
Brigade, which held the line running north-east, and on the 3rd
Brigade, which, as has been fully explained, had continued the line up
to the pivotal point as defined above, and had there spread down in a
south-easterly direction.

It is, perhaps, worth mentioning that two privates of the 48th
Highlanders, who found their way into the trenches commanded by
Lieut.-Colonel (now Brig.-General) Lipsett (90th Winnipeg Rifles), 8th
Battalion, perished in the fumes, and it was noticed that their faces
became blue immediately after dissolution.  The Royal Highlanders of
Montreal, 13th Battalion, and the 48th Highlanders, 15th Battalion,
were more especially affected by the discharge.  The Royal Highlanders,
though considerably shaken, remained immovable on their ground.  The
48th Highlanders, who no doubt received a more poisonous discharge,
were for the moment dismayed, and, indeed, their trench, according to
the testimony of very hardened soldiers, became intolerable.

The Battalion retired from the trench, but for a very short distance
and for a very short time.  In a few moments they were again their own
men.  They advanced on and reoccupied the trenches which they had
momentarily abandoned.

In the course of the same night, the 3rd Brigade, which had already
displayed a resource, a gallantry, and a tenacity for which no eulogy
could be excessive, was exposed (and with it the whole Allied cause) to
a peril still more formidable.  It has been explained, and, indeed, the
fundamental situation made the peril clear, that several German
divisions were attempting to crush or drive back this devoted Brigade,
and in any event to use their enormous numerical superiority to sweep
around and overwhelm its left wing.  At some point in the line which
cannot be precisely determined, the last attempt partially succeeded,
and, in the course of this critical struggle, German troops in
considerable, though not in overwhelming numbers, swung past the
unsupported left of the Brigade, and, slipping in between the wood and
St. Julien, added to the torturing anxieties of the long-drawn struggle
by the appearance, and indeed for the moment the reality, of isolation
from the Brigade base.

In the exertions made by the 3rd Brigade during this supreme crisis it
is almost impossible to single out one battalion without injustice to
others, but though the efforts of the Royal Highlanders of Montreal,
13th Battalion, were only equal to those of the other battalions who
did such heroic service, it so happened, by chance, that the fate of
some of its officers attracted special attention.

Major Norsworthy was in the reserve trenches, half a mile in the rear
of the firing line, when he was killed in his attempt to reach Major
McCuaig with reinforcements; and Captain Guy Drummond fell in
attempting to rally French troops.  This was on the afternoon of the
22nd, and the whole responsibility for coping with the crisis then fell
upon the shoulders of Major McCuaig until he was relieved early on the
morning of the 23rd.

All through the afternoon and evening of the 22nd, and all through the
night which followed, McCuaig had to meet and grapple with difficulties
which might have borne down a far more experienced officer.  His
communications had been cut by shell fire, and he was, therefore, left
to decide for himself whether he should retire or whether he should
hold on.  He decided to hold on, although he knew that he was without
artillery support and could not hope for any until, at the earliest,
the morning of the 23rd.

The decision was a very bold one.  By all the rules of war McCuaig was
a beaten man.  But the very fact that he remained appears to have
deceived the Germans.  They might have overwhelmed him, but they feared
the supports, which did not in reality exist.  It was not in the
enemy's psychology to understand that the sheer and unaided valour of
McCuaig and his little force would hold the position.

But with a small and dwindling force he did hold it, until daylight
revealed to the enemy the naked deception of the defence.

In case the necessity for retreat developed, the wounded had been moved
to the trenches on the right; and, under the cover of machine gun fire,
Major McCuaig withdrew his men just as Major Buchanan came up with
reinforcements.

The sorely tried Battalion held on for a time in dug-outs, and, under
cover of darkness, retired again to a new line being formed by
reinforcements.  The rearguard was under Lieut. (now Captain)
Greenshields.  But Major McCuaig remained to see that the wounded were
removed.  It was then, after having escaped a thousand deaths through
the long battle of the night, that he was shot down and made a prisoner.

The story of the officers of the 7th Battalion (British Columbia
Regiment) is not less glorious.  This Battalion was attached to the 3rd
Brigade on Thursday night, and on Friday occupied a position on the
forward crest of a ridge, with its left flank near St. Julien.  This
position was severely shelled during the day.  In the course of the
afternoon the Battalion received an order to make its position secure
that night.  At half-past four Colonel Hart-McHarg, a lawyer from
Vancouver, Major Odlum (who is now Lieut.-Colonel commanding the
Battalion), and Lieut. Mathewson, of the Canadian Engineers, went out
to reconnoitre the ground and decide upon the position of the new
trenches to be dug under cover of darkness.  The exact location of the
German troops immediately opposed to their position was not known to
them.  The reconnoitring party moved down the slope to the wrecked
houses and shattered walls of the village of Keerselaere--a distance of
about 300 yards--in broad daylight without drawing a shot; but, when
they looked through a window in the rear wall of one of the ruins, they
saw masses of Germans lining hedges not 100 yards away, and watching
them intently.  As the three Canadian officers were now much nearer the
German line than their own, they turned and began to retire at the
double.  They were followed by a burst of rapid fire the moment they
cleared the shelter of the ruins.  They instantly threw themselves flat
on the ground.  Colonel Hart-McHarg and Major Odlum rolled into a
shell-hole near by, and Lieut. Mathewson took cover in a ditch close at
hand.  It was then that Major Odlum learned that his Commanding Officer
was seriously wounded.  Major Odlum raced up the hill under fire in
search of surgical aid, leaving Lieut. Mathewson with the wounded
officer.  He found Captain George Gibson, medical officer of the 7th
Battalion, who, accompanied by Sergt. J. Dryden, went down to the
shell-hole immediately.  Captain Gibson and the sergeant reached the
cramped shelter in safety in the face of a heavy fire.  They moved
Colonel Hart-McHarg into the ditch where Mathewson had first taken
shelter, and there dressed his wound.  They remained with him until
after dark, when the stretcher-bearers arrived and carried him back to
Battalion Headquarters; but the devotion and heroism of his friends
could not save his life.  The day after he passed away in a hospital at
Poperinghe.[7]  But his regiment endured, and, indeed, throughout the
second battle of Ypres fought greatly and suffered greatly.  Major
Odlum succeeded Colonel Hart-McHarg.  At one time the Battalion was
flanked, both right and left, by the enemy, through no fault of its
own; and it fell back when it had been reduced to about 100 men still
able to bear arms.  On the following day, strengthened by the remnants
of the 10th Battalion, the 7th was again sent in to hold a gap in our
line, which duty it performed until, again surrounded by the enemy, it
withdrew under cover of a dense mist.[8][9]

Every effort was made by General Alderson from first to last, to
reinforce the Canadian Division with the greatest possible speed, and
on Friday afternoon the left of the Canadian line was strengthened by
the 2nd King's Own Scottish Borderers and the 1st Royal West Kents, of
the 13th Infantry Brigade.  From this time forward the Division also
received further assistance on the left from a series of French
counter-attacks pushed in a north-easterly direction from the canal
bank.

[Illustration: Map--1st Canadian Division situation at 9 a.m. April
24th 1915]

But the artillery fire of the enemy continually grew in intensity, and
it became more and more evident that the Canadian salient could no
longer be maintained against the overwhelming superiority of numbers by
which it was assailed.  Slowly, stubbornly, and contesting every yard,
the defenders gave ground until the salient gradually receded from the
apex, near the point where it had originally aligned with the French,
and fell back upon St. Julien.  Soon it became evident that even St.
Julien, exposed to fire from right and left, was no longer tenable.[10]

The 3rd Brigade was therefore ordered to retreat further south, selling
every yard of ground as dearly as it had done since five o'clock on
Thursday.  But it was found impossible, without hazarding far larger
forces, to disentangle detachments of the Royal Highlanders of
Montreal, 13th Battalion, and of the Royal Montreal Regiment, 14th
Battalion.  The Brigade was ordered, and not a moment too soon, to move
back.

The retirement left these units with heavy hearts.  The German tide
rolled, indeed, over the deserted village; but for several hours after
the enemy had become master of the village, the sullen and persistent
rifle fire which survived, showed that they were not yet master of the
Canadian rearguard.  If they died, they died worthily of Canada.

The enforced retirement of the 3rd Brigade (and to have stayed longer
would have been madness) reproduced for the 2nd Brigade, commanded by
Brigadier-General Currie (now Major-General), in a singularly exact
fashion, the position of the 3rd Brigade itself at the moment of the
withdrawal of the French.  The 2nd Brigade, it must be remembered, had
retained the whole line of trenches, roughly 2,500 yards, which it was
holding at five o'clock on Thursday afternoon, supported by the
incomparable exertions of the 3rd Brigade, and by the highly hazardous
deployment in which necessity had involved that Brigade.

The 2nd Brigade had maintained its lines.  It now devolved on General
Currie, commanding this Brigade, to repeat the tactical manoeuvres with
which, earlier in the fight, the 3rd Brigade had adapted itself to the
flank movement of overwhelming numerical superiority.  He flung his
left flank round south; and his record is that, in the very crisis of
this immense struggle, he held his line of trenches from Thursday at
five o'clock till Sunday afternoon.  And on Sunday afternoon he had not
abandoned his trenches.  There were none left.  They had been
obliterated by artillery.

He withdrew his undefeated troops from the fragments of his field
fortifications, and the hearts of his men were as completely unbroken
as the parapets of his trenches were completely broken.  In such a
Brigade it is invidious to single out any battalion for special praise,
but it is perhaps necessary to the story to point out that
Lieut.-Colonel Lipsett, commanding the 8th Battalion (90th Winnipeg
Rifles) of the 2nd Brigade, held the extreme left of the Brigade
position at the most critical moment.

The Battalion was expelled from the trenches early on Friday morning by
an emission of poisonous gas; but, recovering, in three-quarters of an
hour it counter-attacked, retook the trenches it had abandoned, and
bayoneted the enemy.  And after the 3rd Brigade had been forced to
retire, Lieut.-Colonel Lipsett held his position, though his left was
in the air, until two British regiments, 8th Durham Light Infantry and
1st Hampshires, filled up the gap on Saturday night.

At daybreak on Sunday, April 25th, two companies of the 8th Battalion
(90th Winnipeg Rifles), holding the left of our line, were relieved by
the Durhams, and retired to reserve trenches.  The Durhams suffered
severely, and at 5 p.m. on Sunday afternoon, a Company of the 8th
Canadian Battalion took their place on our extreme left.  The Germans
entrenched in the rear of this Company, and German batteries on the
left flank enfiladed it.  The position became untenable, and the
Company was ordered to evacuate it, two platoons to retire and two
platoons to cover the retirement.  The retiring platoons were guided
back, under terrific fire, by Sergeant (now Captain) Knobel, with a
loss of about 45 per cent. of their strength.  They joined the
Battalion Reserve.  Of the platoons which covered this retirement,
every officer and man was either killed or taken prisoner.  All the
officers of the Company who were in action at the time the retirement
was ordered, remained with the covering platoons.

The individual fortunes of the 2nd and 3rd Brigades have brought us to
the events of Sunday afternoon, but it is necessary, to make the story
complete, to recur for a moment to the events of the morning.  After a
very formidable attack the enemy succeeded in capturing the village of
St. Julien, which has so often been referred to in describing the
fortunes of the Canadian left.  This success opened up a new and very
menacing line of advance, but by this time further reinforcements had
arrived.

[Illustration: Map--1st Canadian Division situation at noon, April 25th
1915]

Here, again, it became evident that the tactical necessities of the
situation dictated an offensive movement as the surest method of
arresting further progress.  General Alderson, who was also in command
of the reinforcements, accordingly directed that an advance should be
made by two British brigades (the 10th Brigade under Brigadier-General
Hull,[11] and the Northumberland Brigade), which had been brought up in
support.  The attack was thrust through the Canadian left and centre;
and as the troops making it swept on, many of them going to certain
death, they paused an instant, and, with ringing cheers for Canada,
gave the first indication to the Division of the warm admiration which
their exertions had excited in the British Army.[12]

The advance was indeed costly, but it was made with a devotion which
could not be denied.  The story is one of which the Brigades may be
proud, but it does not belong to the special account of the fortunes of
the Canadian contingent.  It is sufficient for our purpose to notice
that the attack succeeded in its object, and the German advance along
the line, momentarily threatened, was arrested.

We had reached, in describing the events of the afternoon, the points
at which the trenches of the 2nd Brigade had been completely destroyed.
This Brigade, the 3rd Brigade, and the considerable reinforcements
which by this time filled the gap between the two Brigades, were
gradually driven, fighting every yard, upon a line running roughly from
Fortuin, south of St. Julien, in a north-easterly direction towards
Passchendaele.  Here the two Brigades were relieved by two British
brigades, after exertions as glorious, as fruitful, and, alas! as
costly, as soldiers have ever been called upon to make.

Monday morning broke bright and clear and found the Canadians behind
the firing line.  But this day, too, was to bring its anxieties.  The
attack was still pressed, and it became necessary to ask
Brigadier-General Currie whether he could once more call on his
shrunken Brigade.

"The men are tired," this indomitable soldier replied, "but they are
ready and glad to go again to the trenches."  And so, once more, a hero
leading heroes, the General marched back the men of the 2nd Brigade,
reduced to a quarter of its strength, to the very apex of the line as
it existed at that moment.  The Brigade held this position throughout
Monday; on Tuesday it occupied reserve trenches, and on Wednesday it
was relieved and retired to billets in the rear.[13]

It is a fitting climax to the story of the Canadians at Ypres that the
last blows were struck by one who had borne himself throughout
gallantly and resourcefully.  Lieut.-Colonel Watson, on the evening of
Wednesday, April 28th, was ordered to advance with his Battalion and
dig a line of trenches which were to link up the French on the left and
a battalion of the Rifle Brigade on the right.  It was both a difficult
and a dangerous task, and Lieut.-Colonel Watson could only employ two
companies to dig, while two companies acted as cover.

They started out at 7 o'clock in the evening from the field in which
they had bivouacked all day west of Brielen, and made north, towards
St. Julien.  And, even as they started, there was such a hail of
shrapnel, intended either for the farm which served as the Battalion's
Headquarters, or for the road junction which they would have to cross,
that they were compelled to stand fast.

At 8 o'clock, however, Colonel Watson was able to move on again; and,
as the men marched north, terrible scenes _en route_ showed the fury of
the artillery duel which had been in progress since the Battalion had
moved out of the firing line on the morning of the 26th.

At the bridge crossing Ypres Canal, guides met the Regiment, and the
extraordinary precautions which were taken to hide its movements
indicated the seriousness of its errand.

The Battalion had suffered heavy losses at this very spot only a few
days before, and a draft of five officers and 112 men from England had
reinforced it only that morning.  And the officers and men of this
draft received an awful baptism of fire within practically a few hours
of their arrival at the front.  High explosives were bursting and
thundering; there were shells searching hedgerows and the avenue of
trees between which the Battalion marched, and falling in dozens into
every scrap of shelter where the enemy imagined horses or wagons might
be hidden.  Slowly and cautiously, the march continued until the
Battalion arrived behind the first line trench held by a battalion of
the King's Own Scottish Borderers.  Through this line Colonel Watson
and his men had to pass, and on every side were strewn the bodies of
scores of Ghurkas, the gallant little soldiers who had that morning
perished while attempting the almost impossible task of advancing to
the assault over nearly 700 yards of open ground.

When the Battalion reached the place where the trenches were to be dug,
two companies were led out by Colonel Watson himself, to act as cover
to the other two companies, which then began digging along the line
marked by the Engineers.  And if ever men worked with nervous energy,
these men did that night.  From enemy rifles on the ridge came the ping
of bullets, which mercifully passed overhead, although, judging from
the persistency and multitude of their flares, the enemy must have
known that work was being done.

It was two o'clock in the morning before the work was finished, and the
Battalion turned its back upon about as bad a situation as men have
ever worked in.

The return to the billets at Vlamertinghe was distressing in the
extreme.  Officers and men, alike worn out, slept on the march
oblivious of route and destination.

During the night of May 3rd[14] and the morning of the 4th, the 1st
Canadian Infantry Brigade withdrew to billets at Bailleul.  On the
night of May 4th Lieut.-General Alderson handed over the command of
this section of front to the General Officer Commanding the 4th
Division, and removed his headquarters to Nieppe, withdrawing the 3rd
Canadian Infantry Brigade on the night of the 4th, and the 2nd Canadian
Infantry Brigade on the 5th of May.[15]

Such, in the most general outline, is the story of a great and glorious
feat of arms.  A story told so soon after the event, while rendering
bare justice to units whose doings fell under the eyes of particular
observers, must do less than justice to others who played their
part--and all did--as gloriously as those whose special activities it
is possible, even at this stage, to describe.  But the friends of men
who fought in other battalions may be content in the knowledge that
they too will learn, when the historian has achieved the complete
correlation of diaries of all units, the exact part which each played
in these unforgettable days.  It is rather accident than special
distinction which has made it possible to select individual battalions
for mention.

It would not be right to close even this account without a word of
tribute to the auxiliary services.  The signallers were always cool and
resourceful.  The telegraph and telephone wires were being constantly
cut, and many belonging to this service rendered up their lives in the
discharge of their duty, carrying out repairs with the most complete
calmness in exposed positions.  The despatch carriers, as usual,
behaved with the greatest bravery.  Theirs is a lonely life, and very
often a lonely death.  One cycle messenger lay on the ground badly
wounded.  He stopped a passing officer and delivered his message, with
some verbal instructions.  These were coherently given, but he swooned
almost before the words were out of his mouth.

The Artillery never flagged in the sleepless struggle in which so much
depended upon its exertions.  Not a Canadian gun was lost in the long
battle of retreat.  And the nature of the position renders such a
record very remarkable.  One battery of four guns found itself in such
a situation that it was compelled to turn two of its guns directly
about and fire on the enemy in positions almost diametrically opposite.

The members of the Canadian Engineers, and of the Canadian Army Medical
Corps, rivalled in coolness, endurance and valour the men of the
battalions who were their comrades.  On more than one occasion during
that long battle of many desperate engagements, our Engineers held
positions, working with the infantry.  Lieut.-Colonel (now
Brigadier-General) Armstrong commanded our Engineers throughout the
battle.  A fighting force, a constructive force, and a destructive
force in the battle of Ypres, the Canadian Engineers plied their
rifles, entrenched, and mined bridges across the canal (the approaches
to which they held) in case of final necessity.

No attempt has been made in this description to explain the recent
operations except in so far as they spring from--or are connected
with--the fortunes of the Canadian Division.  The exertions of the
troops who reinforced, and later relieved, the Canadians, were not less
glorious, but the long-drawn-out struggle is a lesson to the whole
Empire--"Arise, O Israel!"  The Empire is engaged in a struggle,
without quarter and without compromise, against an enemy still superbly
organised, still immensely powerful, still confident that its strength
is the mate of its necessities.  To arms, then, and still to arms!  In
Great Britain, in Canada, in Australia, there is need, and there is
need now, of a community organised alike in military and industrial
co-operation.

The graveyard of Canada in Flanders is large.  It is very large.  Those
who lie there have left their mortal remains on alien soil.  To Canada
they have bequeathed their memories and their glory.

  "On Fame's eternal camping ground
    Their silent tents are spread,
  And Glory guards with solemn round
    The bivouac of the dead."



[1] Canadians owe a debt of gratitude to Lt.-Colonel Lamb for the
extreme care and detailed accuracy with which he has compiled the maps
and diaries of the 1st Canadian Division.

[2] The 2nd and 3rd Canadian Infantry Brigades took over the line from
the French 11th Division on April 17th.  It was perhaps true that the
French had not developed at this part of the line the elaborate system
of support trenches which had been a model to the British troops in the
south.  The Canadians had planned several supporting points which were
in a half-finished state when the gas attack developed.

[3] The great bombardment of Ypres began on April 20th, when the first
42 centimetre shell fell into the Grand Place of the little Flemish
city.  The only military purpose which the wanton destruction of Ypres
could serve was the blocking of our supply trains, and on the first day
alone 15 children were killed as they were playing in the streets,
while many other civilians perished in the ruined houses.

[4] The French troops, largely made up of Turcos and Zouaves, surged
wildly back over the canal and through the village of Vlamertinghe just
at dark.  The Canadian reserve battalions (of the 1st Brigade) were
amazed at the anguished faces of many of the French soldiers, twisted
and distorted by pain, who were gasping for breath and vainly trying to
gain relief by vomiting.  Traffic in the main streets of the village
was demoralised, and gun-carriages and ammunition wagons added to the
confusion.

The chaos in the main streets of the village was such that any coherent
movement of troops was, for the moment, impossible; gun-carriages and
ammunition wagons were inextricably mixed, while galloping gun-teams
without their guns were careering wildly in all directions.  When order
had been to some extent restored, Staff Officers learned from fugitives
who were in a condition to speak that the Algerians had left thousands
of their comrades dead and dying along the four-mile gap in our Ally's
lines through which the Germans were pouring behind their gas.

[5] Colonel Geddes was killed on the morning of April 28th in tragic
circumstances.  He had done magnificent work with his composite force,
and after five days' terrific fighting received orders to retire.  He
was just leaving his dug-out, after handing over his command, when a
shell ended his career.

[6] Although methods for resisting gas attacks were quickly developed
when the need was realised, the Canadians were, of course, at this time
unprovided with the proper means for withstanding them.  They
discovered that a wet handkerchief stuffed in the mouth gave relief.
To fall back before the gas attack merely meant that one kept pace with
it, while the effort of running, and the consequent heavy breathing,
simply increased the poison in the lungs.  The Canadians quickly
realised that it was best to face the cloud, and hold on in the hope
that the blindness would be temporary, and the cutting pain would pass
away.

[7] Col. Hart-McHarg and Col. Boyle--who fell on the same day that Col.
Hart-McHarg was wounded--lie in the same burial ground, the new
cemetery at Poperinghe.

[8] The losses of the 7th Battalion were heavy even for this time of
heavy losses.  Within a period of less than three days its colonel was
killed and 600 of its officers and men were either killed or wounded,
including every company commander.  Some companies lost every officer.

[9] Lieut. E. D. Bellew, machine-gun officer of the Battalion, hoisted
a loaf stuck on the point of his bayonet, in defiance of the enemy,
which drew upon him a perfect fury of fire; he fought his gun till it
was smashed to atoms, and then continued to use relays of loaded rifles
instead, until he was wounded and taken prisoner.

[10] The remarkable services rendered at St. Julien by the Commandant,
Lt.-Col. Loomis, of the 13th Batt., ought not to be forgotten.  This
officer remained at his post under constant and very heavy fire until
the moment of evacuation, and did much by the example of his
tranquillity to encourage the troops.

[11] Brig.-General Hull rendered distinguished services throughout this
trying time.  In addition to his own Brigade--the 10th--General Hull
commanded for a considerable period the York and Durham Brigade, the
2nd King's Own Yorkshire Light Infantry, the 9th Queen Victoria Rifles,
the 1st Suffolk Regiment, the 12th London Regiment, and the 4th
Canadian Battalion.

[12] The particular objective of the attack was the village of St.
Julien, the wood near by, and the enemy's trenches between these two
points.  Arrangements had been made with the Canadian Artillery for a
preparatory bombardment of the wood, and the St. Julien trenches, but
at the last moment the order to fire on St. Julien had to be cancelled
as it was found that some of the Canadians were still holding on in the
village although completely surrounded.

[13] On the morning of April 26th Lt.-Col. Kemis-Betty, Brigade Major,
and Major Mersereau, Staff Captain, were wounded by a shell.  Colonel
Kemis-Betty, though his wound was serious, discharged his duty all day.
Major Mersereau, however, who was grievously injured, was carried into
General Currie's dug-out; and there, as no ambulance was available, he
lay till late that night.  Lt.-Col. Mitchell, of the Canadian
Divisional Headquarters Staff, while on a general reconnaissance, heard
of the plight of the wounded officers, who were badly in need of
medical aid, and he determined to carry them to safety in his own car.
With very great difficulty, for the road was being heavily shelled,
Colonel Mitchell got his motor as far as Fortuin.  The rest of the way
had to be covered on foot, and when General Currie's dug-out was
reached it was found that only Colonel Kemis-Betty could be moved.
Major Mersereau's injuries were such that he had to be left in the
dug-out until it was practicable to bring up an ambulance.  Finally, he
was removed, and is now in Canada slowly recovering from his wounds.

[14] At 5 o'clock on the afternoon of May 2nd the 1st Canadian Infantry
Brigade moved up in support of the 10th and 12th Infantry Brigades
(British) on account of a gas attack along our whole front.  The gas
enveloped all our trenches except at our extreme right.  The 10th
Infantry Brigade held fast, but the 12th Infantry Brigade was compelled
to fall back, for the attack was so heavy that men were dazed and
reeling, and utterly incapable of any further fighting.  The 1st
Canadian Brigade was not called upon to resist the enemy, but the
movements of the troops show the effects of the gas, and how the men
who had to contend with it contrived to baffle the Germans.  At 5.40
p.m. the Reserve Battalion of the 12th Infantry Brigade was thrown into
the battle.  In the meantime the General Officer commanding the 10th
Infantry Brigade, observing the troops on his left retreating, very
judiciously sent up the 7th Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders to occupy
the vacated trenches, and arranged with the 3rd Cavalry Brigade to
assist them.  These two units arrived in time to catch the enemy
advancing in the open, and inflicted severe losses on him.  The manner
in which they went through the gas was worthy of great praise.  Each
Company of the 2nd Essex regiment of the 12th Brigade had one platoon
in support about 150 yards in the rear of the first line.  This platoon
waited until the gas had passed the front line trenches, and then,
advancing straight through the gas, occupied the front line trenches in
time to bring heavy fire to bear on the advancing Germans.  Some of the
French infantry closed to the right, thus strengthening the Essex line,
while the French artillery gave an intense and excellently directed
fire, which raked the German lines.  General Alderson says, "I
subsequently wrote to General Joppe thanking him for this help, and I
received a grateful acknowledgment of my letter."

[15] On General Alderson and the Staff of the 1st Canadian Division
there devolved during the battle the control of 47 Battalions, 2
Cavalry Brigades, Artillery, Engineers, &c.  No greater tribute can be
paid to the resources and energy of the General and of his Divisional
Staff than to record that they handled and fought an Army adequately
and intelligently through one of the longest and most
bitterly-contested battles of the Western War.




CHAPTER V

A WAVE OF BATTLE

Individual heroism--Canadian tenacity--Before the battle--The civilian
element--A wave of battle--New meaning of "Canada"--"Northern
Lights"--The fighting paymaster--Major serves as
lieutenant--Misfortunes of Hercule Barre--"Runners"--A messenger's
apology--Swimming a moat--Rescue of wounded--Colonel Watson's
bravery--His leadership--His heroic deed--Dash of Major Dyer and Capt.
Hilliam--Major Dyer shot--"I have crawled home"--Lieut. Whitehead's
endurance--Major King saves his guns--Corpl. Fisher, V.C.--The real
Canadian officer--Some delusions in England--German tricks--Sergt.
Richardson's good sense--"No surrender!"--Corpl. Baker's heroism--Bombs
from the dead--Holding a position single-handed--The brothers
McIvor--Daring of Sergt.-Major Hall--Sergt. Ferris, Roadmender--Heroism
of the sappers--Sergt. Ferris, Pathfinder--A sergeant in command--Brave
deeds of Pte. Irving--He vanishes--Absurdities in tragedy--Germans
murder wounded--Doctors under fire--The professional manner--Red
hours--Plight of refugees--Canadian colony in London--Unofficial
inquiries--Canada's destiny.


"It is by presence of mind in untried emergencies that the native metal
of a man is tested."--LOWELL.


In a battle of the extent and diversity of Ypres, there naturally arose
innumerable acts of individual heroism, to which reference could not be
made in the course of the narrative of the engagement without
disturbing its military balance as a whole.

I therefore propose to deal with a few of these incidents now, as they
form a record of unsurpassed valour and tenacity of which every
Canadian must be proud.

Quite apart, however, from incidents which occur in the actual
fighting, there is a time immediately before a battle, and a time
immediately after it, which provide a wealth of human interest too
poignant to be overlooked.  Our vision, narrowed a little by direct
concentration on the progress of the engagement, and our ears dulled a
little by the din of the conflict, we are prone to overlook the fact
that this war is waged amid scenes only a short time ago devoted to the
various avocations of peace, and that on the Western Front, especially,
the armies of the Allies are oftentimes inextricably mixed with the
civilian element and the civilian population.

A wave of battle is like a wave of the sea.  While it advances, one is
only conscious of its rush and roar, only concerned to measure how far
it may advance.  As it ebbs, the known landmarks show again, and we
have leisure to gather observations of comrades who were borne
backwards or forwards on the flood.

The wave that fell on us round Ypres has baptised the Dominion into
nationhood--the mere written word, "Canada," glows now with a new
meaning before all the civilised world.  Canada has proved herself, and
not unworthily; but those who survive of the men who have won us our
world-right to pride, are too busy to trouble their heads about
history.  That may come in days of peace.  The main outlines of the
battle have been dealt with already.  We know what troops took part in
it and how they bore themselves, but the thousand vivid and intimate
episodes, seen between two blasts of gunfire, or recounted by men met
by chance in some temporary shelter, can never all be told.  Yet they
are too characteristic in their unconsciousness to be left without an
attempt at a record; so I give a little handful from a great harvest.

In the days before the battle, when the Canadians lived for the most
part in and about Sailly, whence one saw, as I have already written,
the German trench-flares like Northern Lights on the horizon, Honorary
Captain C. T. Costigan, of Calgary, was the paymaster, and lived, as
the paymaster must, decently remote from the firing line.  Then came
the attack that proved Canada; and the German flares advanced, and
advanced, till they no longer resembled flickering auroras, but the
sizzling electric arc-lights of a great city.  Captain Costigan locked
up his paychest and abolished his office with the words: "There is no
paymaster."  Next, sinking his rank as honorary captain, he applied for
work in the trenches, and went off, a second lieutenant of the 10th
Canadians, who needed officers.  He was seen no more until Monday
morning, when he returned to search for his office, which had been
moved to a cellar at the rear and was, at the moment, in charge of a
sergeant.  But he had only returned to inveigle some officer with a
gift for accounts into the paymastership.  This arranged, he sped back
to his adopted Battalion.[1]  He was not the only one of his department
who served as a combatant on that day.  Honorary Captain McGregor, of
British Columbia, for example, had been paymaster in the Canadian
Scottish, 16th Battalion.  He, too, armed with a cane and a revolver,
went forward at his own desire to hand-to-hand fighting in the wood
where he was killed, fighting gallantly to the last.

The case of Major Guthrie, of New Brunswick, is somewhat similar.  He
was Major of the 12th Battalion, still in England, but was then at the
front in some legal-military capacity connected with courts-martial.
He, like Captain Costigan, had asked the General that Friday morning
for a commission in the sorely tried 10th.  There was some hesitation,
since Guthrie as a major might quite possibly find himself in command
of what was left of the 10th if, and when, he found it.  "I'll go as a
lieutenant, of course," said he; and as a lieutenant he went.[2]

The grim practical joking of Fate is illustrated by the adventures of
Major Hercule Barre--a young French Canadian who fought well and spoke
English imperfectly.  He had been ordered to get to his company in
haste, and on the way (it was dark) met some British officers, who
promptly declared him a spy.  The more he protested, the more certain
they were that his speech betrayed him.  So they had him back to the
nearest Headquarters, where he was identified by a brother officer, and
started off afresh--only to be held up a second time by some cyclists,
who treated him precisely as the British officers had done.  Once again
he reached Headquarters; once more the officer, who had identified him
before, guaranteed his good faith; and for the third time Barre set
out.  This time it was a bullet that stopped him.  He dragged himself
to the side of the road and waited for help.  Someone came at last, and
he hailed.  "Who is it?" said a voice.  "I, Barre!" he cried.  "What,
_you_, Barre?  What do you want this time?"  It was the officer who had
twice identified him within the last hour.  "Stretcher-bearers," said
Barre.  His friend in need summoned a stretcher-bearer, and Barre was
borne off--to tell the tale against himself afterwards.

There were many others who fell by the way in the discharge of their
duty.  Lieut.-Colonel Currie, commanding the 48th Highlanders, 15th
Battalion, had his telephone communication with his men in the trenches
cut by shrapnel.  He therefore moved his Battalion Headquarters into
the reserve trenches, and took with him there a little band of
"runners" to keep him in touch with the Brigade Headquarters, a couple
of miles in the rear.  A "runner" is a man on foot who, at every risk,
must bear the message entrusted to him to its destination over ground
cross-harrowed by shellfire and, possibly, in the enemy's occupation.
One such runner was despatched, and was no more heard of until, days
after the battle, the Lieut.-Colonel received a note from him in
hospital.  It ran: "My dear Colonel Currie,--I am so sorry that you
will be annoyed with me for not bringing back a receipt for the message
which you sent to Headquarters by me.  I delivered the message all
right, but on the way back with a receipt, I was hurt by a shell, and I
am taking this first opportunity of letting you know that the message
was delivered.  I am afraid that you will be angry with me.  I am now
in hospital.--Yours truly, (Sgd.) M. K. Kerr."  It is characteristic of
the Colonel, and our country, that he should always refer to the
private as M. K. Kerr; and, from the English point of view, equally
characteristic that M. K. Kerr's report should begin: "My dear Colonel
Currie."  And it marks the tone of the whole Battalion, that only two
hundred men and two officers should have come unscathed out of the
battle.

And here is a story of a Brigade Headquarters that lived in a house
surrounded by a moat over which there was only one road.  On Thursday
the enemy's artillery found the house, and later on, as the rush came,
their rifle fire found it also.  The staff went on with its work till
the end of the week, when incendiary shells set the place alight and
they were forced to move.  The road being impassable on account of
shrapnel, they swam the moat, but one of them was badly wounded, and
for him swimming was out of the question.  Captain Scrimger, medical
officer attached to the Royal Montreal Regiment, protected the wounded
man with his own body against the shrapnel that was coming through the
naked rafters, and carried him out of the blazing house into the
open.[3]  Two of the staff, Brig.-General Hughes (then Brigade Major of
the 3rd Infantry Brigade) and Lieut. Thompson (then Assistant Adjutant,
Royal Montreal Regiment) reswam the moat and, waiting for a lull in the
shell fire, got the wounded man across the road on to a stretcher and
into a dressing station, after which they went on with their official
duties.

On April 24th Colonel Watson, who was editor of the _Quebec Chronicle_
before he took command of the 2nd Battalion, was called on to perform
as difficult and dangerous a task as fell to the lot of any commander
during all these difficult and bloody days.  The operation was most
ably carried out, and Colonel Watson crowned his success, in the midst
of what appeared to be defeat, with a deed of personal heroism which,
but for his rank, would most assuredly have won for him the Victoria
Cross.  It may be said at once that Colonel Watson proved himself the
bravest of the brave.

About noon, the General Officer Commanding the 3rd Brigade telephoned
to Colonel Watson to ask whether, in his opinion, the line of which he
was in charge, could still be held.  Colonel Watson, though the
position was precarious, said that he could still hold on; and he was
then instructed to regard as cancelled an order which had been
telegraphed to him to retire.

Matters, however, grew worse, and at two o'clock the General Officer
Commanding sent Colonel Watson a peremptory order to fall back at once.
Unfortunately, this message was not received until about a quarter to
three, when the position had become desperate.

The Battalion, apart from many dead, had by this time upwards of 150
wounded, and the Colonel first saw to the removal of all these.  Then,
leaving his Battalion Headquarters, he went up to the front line, in
order that he might give, in person, his instructions to his company
commanders to retire.  When he reached the front line, Colonel Watson
made the most careful dispositions so as to avoid, even at that
terrible moment, any excuse for disorder and undue haste in the course
of the most perilous and intricate manoeuvre which had now to be
carried out.  He began by sending back all details, such as signallers
and pioneers, and then proceeded to get the companies out of the
trenches, one by one--first the company on the left, then the centre
company, and, lastly, the company on the right.

It was from the angle of a shattered house, which had been used as a
dressing station, that Colonel Watson and Colonel Rogers, the second in
command of the Battalion, watched the retirement of the three
companies, together with details of the 14th Battalion, which had been
attached to them since the morning.  The men were in extended order,
and as they passed the officers the enemy's fire was very heavy, and
men fell like wheat before a scythe.

When the last company was well on its way to safety, the two officers,
after a brief consultation, decided that it would be best for them to
take separate routes back to the Battalion Headquarters line.  The
reason for this was simple and poignant--it increased the chances of
one of them getting through; not, for that matter, that either had very
much hope of escaping the enemy's pitiless fire.  They never expected
to see each other again, and they shook hands in farewell before they
dashed out on their separate ways, which lay through a spray of bullets
and flying shrapnel.  When he had gone about 300 yards, Colonel Watson
paused for a moment under the cover of a tree to watch the further
retirement of the company he was following.  It was at this moment that
he noticed one of his officers, Lieut. A. H. Hugill, lying on the
ground about sixty yards to the left, in the direction of the enemy's
attack.  Without a moment's hesitation, Colonel Watson went back to
him, thinking that he was wounded; but on asking him what was the
matter, Lieut. Hugill told him that he had simply been compelled to
rest and recover his breath before he could make another rush.

Almost at the same moment, Private Wilson, also of the 2nd Battalion,
was passing near by when he was shot through the leg.  The man was so
close at hand that Colonel Watson felt impelled to endeavour to rescue
him, and suggested to Lieut. Hugill that, between them, they might be
able to carry the wounded man back over the eight or nine hundred
yards--nearly half a mile--which still separated them from a place of
comparative safety.  Lieut. Hugill immediately agreed, whereupon
Colonel Watson knelt down, and got Wilson on to his back, and carried
him several hundred yards until the original Battalion Headquarters was
reached; and all the time that Colonel Watson staggered along with his
load the air was alive with bullets, which drew thicker and thicker, as
the enemy was now rapidly advancing.

The various companies had already retired beyond what had been the
Battalion Headquarters, so that Colonel Watson and Lieut. Hugill had no
opportunity of calling for aid.  They rested for a few minutes and then
started off once more, and between them they managed to get the wounded
private across the 700 yards of fire-swept ground which still had to be
covered.  But, in spite of the fact that the ground was ploughed up
with shells all round them during their desperate and heroic retreat,
Colonel Watson and Lieutenant Hugill retrieved their man in safety.

What, again, could be more thrilling than the story of the dash of
Major H. M. Dyer, a farmer from Manitoba, and Captain (now Lieut.-Col.
25th Battalion) Edward Hilliam, a fruit farmer from British Columbia,
when in the face of almost certain death, after the trench telephones
were disabled, they set out to order the retirement of a battalion on
the point of being overwhelmed!

It was on April 25th that the position of the 5th Canadian Battalion on
the Gravenstafel Ridge became untenable; but the men in the fire trench
did not entertain any thought of retirement.  The telephones between
Headquarters and the trench were disabled, the wires having been cut
again and again by the enemy's shell fire.  General Currie saw the
immediate need of sending a positive order to the Battalion to fall
back, and Major Dyer and Captain Hilliam, both of the 5th Battalion,
undertook to carry up the word to the fire trench.  Each received a
copy of the order, for nothing but a written order signed by their
Brigade Commander would bring the men out.  The two officers advanced
with an interval of about twenty yards between them, for one or other
of them had to get through.  They were soon on the bald hill-top, where
there were no trenches and no cover of any description.  Machine gun
and rifle fire swept the ground.  They reached a little patch of
mustard, and laughed to each other at the thought of using these frail
plants as cover.  Still unhit, they reached a region of shell holes,
great and small.  These holes pitted the ground, irregularly, some
being only five yards apart, others ten or twelve; but to the officers,
each hole in their line of advance meant a little haven of dead ground,
and a brief breathing space.  So they went forward, scrambling and
dodging in and out of the pits.  When within 100 yards of our trench,
Captain Hilliam fell, shot through the side, and rolled into a ditch.
Major Dyer went on, and was shot through the chest when within a few
yards of the trench.  He delivered the message, and what was left of
the Battalion fell back.  Men who went to the ditch to assist Captain
Hilliam, found only a piece of board, on which the wounded officer had
written with clay, "I have crawled home."  It only remains to add that
both these officers returned to duty with their Battalion after
convalescence.

Though these two officers gave a very fine example of active courage,
it would be hard to find a more remarkable illustration of passive
endurance, nobly borne, than that afforded by Lieut. E. A. Whitehead on
April 24th.  On that day, Captain Victor Currie, with Lieut. Whitehead
and Lieut. (now Captain) W. D. Adams, was holding a company of the 14th
(Royal Montreal) Battalion, on the salient of which both flanks were
exposed to a merciless fire.  At 5 a.m. that morning, Lieut. Whitehead
was shot in the foot, but he remained in command of his platoon with
the bullet still in his ankle-bone until three o'clock in the
afternoon, when he swooned from pain and fatigue.  It is sad to record
that Sergeant Arundel, who tried to lift Lieut. Whitehead from the
trench, was shot and instantly killed.

On the previous day, the men of No. 2 Company of the same Battalion had
assisted Major (now Lieut.-Colonel) W. B. M. King, of the Canadian
Field Artillery, to perform one of the most astonishing and daring
feats of the campaign.  With superb audacity Major King kept his guns
in an advanced position, where he deliberately awaited the approach of
the Germans till they were within 200 yards.  Then, after he had fired
his guns into the massed ranks of the enemy, he succeeded, with the
assistance of the infantry, in getting the guns away.  It was during
the course of this part of the action that Lance-Corporal Fred Fisher,
of the 13th Battalion, won his V.C., but lost his life.  Being in
charge of a machine gun, he took it forward to cover the extrication of
Major King's battery.  All the four men of his gun crew were shot down,
but he obtained the services of four men of the 14th Battalion, and
continued to work his gun until the battery was clear.

No sooner were Major King's men in safety than Fisher pushed still
further forward to reinforce our front line, but while getting his men
into position in the face of a combined fire of shrapnel, machine
earns, and rifles, he was shot dead.

And here, I would say, that over and above the pleasure it naturally
gives a Canadian to record the splendid heroism of his
fellow-countrymen, the occasion has provided me with the welcome
opportunity of dissipating a delusion which at the outset prevailed in
England as to the capacity of our officers.  At the beginning of the
war it was a common saying in the British Army--I have never been able
to trace the saying to its source--that the Canadian troops were the
finest in the world, but that they carried their officers as mascots.

Nothing could be further from the truth; and nothing more ridiculous,
as the brilliant records of the war service of many of these officers
amply proves.  For ingenuity and daring in attack, for skill and
resource in extricating their men from positions where disaster seemed
inevitable, their ability as regimental officers has only been equalled
in this war by the experienced officers of the first Expeditionary
Force.  As for bravery, for heroic devotion and self-sacrifice, to
compile a full record of their incomparable deeds, would require a
chapter many times the length of this whole volume.  From generals
down, they have shown the world that, for sheer valour, Canadian
officers can proudly take their place beside any in the world, while
they have afforded an example and inspiration to their men which have
done much to make the splendid story of the Canadians in France and
Flanders what it is.

But if the deeds of the commissioned officers have been splendid, the
exploits of the non-commissioned officers and men have been not less
so.  The narrative of the Division consists of story after story of
coolness in danger, incentive daring, and unflinching courage which has
never been surpassed.

Take, for instance, the story of Sergeant J. Richardson, of the and
Canadian Battalion.  It is a tale of how shrewd common sense defeated
the wiles of the enemy.  On April 23rd Richardson was on the extreme
left of our line in command of a half-platoon, when the words,
"Lieutenant Scott orders you to surrender," were passed to him.  He
knew that there were three company commanders in the line between
himself and Lieutenant Scott, and, therefore, correctly concluded that
the order had nothing to do with any officer of his regiment, but was
of German origin.  He not only ignored the order, but discredited it
with his men by passing back "No surrender!"  It is impossible to say
how much ground, and how many lives, the sergeant saved that day by his
lively suspicion of German methods, his quick thought, and his absolute
faith in the sense and courage of his officers.  Sergeant Richardson
belongs to Coburg, Ontario, and is a veteran of the South African War.

Of a different order of courage was Corporal H. Baker, of the 10th
Battalion.  After the attack on the Wood and the occupation of a part
of the German trench by the 10th Canadian Battalion, on the night of
April 22nd-23rd, Corporal Baker, with sixteen bomb-throwers, moved to
the left along the German line, bombing the enemy out of the trench.
The Germans checked Baker's advance with bombs and rifle fire and put
nine of his men out of action during the night.  The enemy then
established a redoubt by digging a cross-trench.  Corporal Baker and
the six other survivors of his party maintained a position within ten
yards of the redoubt throughout the remaining hours of the night.
Early in the morning of the 23rd the Germans received a fresh supply of
bombs and renewed their efforts to dislodge the little party of
Canadians.  They threw over Baker, who was closer in to their position
than the others of his party, and killed his six companions.  Alone
among the dead, with the menace of death hemming him in, Baker
collected bombs from the still shapes behind him, and threw them into
the enemy's redoubt.  He threw with coolness and accuracy, and
slackened the German fire.  He held his position within ten yards of
the cross-trench all day and all night, and returned to his Battalion
just before the dawn of the 24th, over the bodies of dead and wounded
men who had fallen before the rain of bombs and rifle grenades.

And now we come to the story of two brothers, Privates N. and J.
McIvor, who were stretcher-bearers, of whom much is expected as a
matter of course.  On April 24th, they were attached to the 5th
Battalion (which held a position on the Gravenstafel Ridge), and
carried Major Sanderman, of their battalion, from the bombarded
cross-roads back to the dressing station over open fire-raked country.
Major Sanderman had been hit by shrapnel, and died soon after reaching
the dressing station.  Four days later, on April 28th, when the 5th
Battalion was in rear of the Yser Canal, the two McIvors volunteered to
attempt a rescue of the wounded from the Battalion dressing station
beyond Fortuin.  They discovered the station to be in the enemy's
hands, and J. McIvor was severely wounded.

Nor can one dwell without pride on the case of Company Sergeant-Major
F. W. Hall, V.C.  During the night of April 23rd-24th the 8th Battalion
took over a line of trenches from the 15th Battalion.  Close in rear of
the Canadian position at this point ran a high bank fully exposed to
the fire of the enemy; and while crossing this bank to occupy the
trench, several men of the 8th Battalion were wounded.  During the
early morning of Saturday, the 24th, Company Sergeant-Major F. W. Hall
brought two of these wounded into the trench.  A few hours later, at
about 9 a.m., groans of suffering drew attention to another wounded man
in the high ground behind the position.  Corporal Payne went back for
him, but was wounded.  Private Rogerson next attempted the rescue, and
was also wounded.  Then Sergeant-Major Hall made the attempt.  He
reached his objective without accident, though under heavy fire from
the German trenches in front.  This was deliberate, aimed fire,
delivered in broad daylight.  He managed to get his helpless comrade
into position on his back, but in raising himself a little to survey
the ground over which he had to return to shelter, he was shot fairly
through the head and instantly killed.  The man for whom he had given
his life was also killed.

For this gallant deed Sergeant-Major Hall was awarded a posthumous V.C.
He was originally from Belfast, but his Canadian home was in Winnipeg.
He joined the 8th Battalion at Valcartier, Quebec, in August, 1914, as
a private.

Sergeant C. B. Ferris, of the 2nd Field Company of the Canadian
Engineers, proved in the face of the enemy that he could keep a road
repaired faster than they could destroy it by shell fire.  From April
25th to the 29th, the road between Fortuin and the Yser Canal was under
the constant hammer of German shells.  It was of vital importance to
the Canadian and British troops in the neighbourhood that this road
should be kept open for all manner of transportation, and Captain
Irving, commanding the 2nd Field Company, Canadian Engineers, sent a
party under Sergeant Ferris and Corporal Rhodes to keep the highway in
repair.  Every shell-hole in the road-bed had to be filled with bricks
brought up in wagons from the nearest ruined houses; and at times it
seemed as if the German artillery would succeed in making new holes
faster than the little party of Canadian Engineers could fill in the
old ones.  Sergeant Ferris and his men stuck to their task day and
night, amid the dust and splinters and shock of bursting shells, and
their work of reconstruction was more rapid than the enemy's work of
destruction.  They kept the road open.

On a moonlit night, a month later, the Roadmender developed the talents
of a Pathfinder, when the 2nd Field Company of the Canadian Engineers
was ordered to link up a trench in the Canadian front line with the
attempted advance of a British division on our left, and establish a
defensive flank.  A pre-arranged signal was given, indicating that the
advance had reached, and was holding, a point where the connection was
to be made.  In response, Sapper Quin attempted to carry through the
tape, to mark the line for digging the linking trench, under a heavy
fire of shells, machine guns, and rifles.  He did not return, and
Sapper Connan went out and failed to come back; and neither of these
men has been seen or heard of since.  Then Sapper Low made an attempt
to carry the tape across, and failed to return.  Without a moment's
hesitation, Sergeant Ferris sprang over the parapet in the face of the
most severe tire, and, with the tape in one hand and revolver in the
other, cautiously crawled in the direction of the flaring signal.

Midway, he stumbled upon the wire entanglements of a German redoubt
fairly on the line which his section had thought to dig.  He followed
the wire entanglements of this redoubt completely round, and for a time
was exposed to rifle and machine gun fire from three sides.  At this
moment he was severely wounded through the lungs, but he persisted in
his effort.  He found out that a mistake had been made and that the
attack had not reached the point indicated, and staggered back to make
his report, bringing Sapper Low with him.  Sergeant Ferris's
information was eagerly listened to by Lieut. Matthewson and
Sergeant-Major Chetwynd, who was present as a volunteer.
Sergeant-Major Chetwynd quickly realised the nature of the difficulty,
and, encouraged by Lieut. Matthewson, he rallied the detachment and led
it to another point from which he successfully laid the line under very
heavy fire from the German trenches.

Now we come to the story of Private Irving, one of General Turner's
subordinate staff, who went out to do as brave a deed as a man might
endeavour, but never returned.  Irving had been up for forty-eight
hours helping to feed the wounded as they were brought in to Brigade
Headquarters, which had been turned into a temporary dressing station,
when he heard that a huge poplar tree had fallen across the road and
was holding up the ambulance wagons.

Though utterly weary, he at once offered to go out and cut the tree in
pieces and drag it from the path at the tail of an ambulance wagon.

Irving set forth with the ambulance, but, on nearing the place of which
he was in search, left it, an went forward on foot along the road,
which was being swept by heavy artillery fire and a cross rifle fire.
And then, even as, axe in hand, he tramped up this road, with shells
bursting all around him and bullets whistling past him, he disappeared
as completely as though the night had swallowed him up!  General
Turner, who appreciated the gallant work Irving had set out to do,
himself had all the lists of the Field Force checked over to see if he
had been brought in wounded.  But Irving was never traced.  He is
missing to this day--a strange and brave little mystery of this great
war.

In another portion of the field Sergeant W. Swindells, of the 7th
Battalion, when all the company officers had become casualties, and the
remnant of the company left their trench under stress of terrific fire,
rallied them and took them back; but this again is only one instance in
a record for cool daring which was later built up at Festubert and
Givenchy.  Swindells comes from Kamloops, and before the war was a
rancher on Vancouver Island.

Very similar was the action of Sergeant-Major P. Flinter, of the 2nd
Battalion, who displayed conspicuous gallantry at Langemarck on April
23rd while in command of a platoon on the left flank of the Battalion.
This position was under exceptionally heavy gun and rifle fire, and his
pure daring and bravery were such an inspiration to the men under his
command, that they withstood successfully all attacks upon them.  He
was wounded in the head, but gallantly cheered his men to renewed
attack.  By fortunate observation he discovered an enemy bomb depot in
the woods near at hand, and concentrating all available fire on it,
managed to blow it up.  Throughout his service at the front his example
has been an inspiration to all ranks.

It is difficult, where all men were brave, to select individual cases
of extreme courage, but it would be wrong to close this record without
mentioning Lance-Corporal F.  Williams, of the 3rd Canadian Battalion,
and Private J. K. Young, of the 2nd Battalion.  On April 25th, near St.
Julien, Williams volunteered to go out with Captain J. H. Lyne-Evans
from the shelter of a farm and bring in Captain Gerrard Muntz, who lay
wounded in a small hollow several hundred yards away.  The rescue,
which was carried out in broad daylight and in the midst of a heavy
rifle and machine gun fire, was successful, though Captain Muntz died
of his wounds five days later.  Again, at Festubert, just a month
later, Williams displayed great courage and resourcefulness in keeping
good the wires for communication between the signal station and other
centres.  The area was under continuous enemy rifle and shell fire, and
the repairs had to be made under other adverse conditions.

Indeed, the Canadian non-commissioned officers have proved beyond all
doubt their capacity to take the places of commissioned officers who
have been shot down.

Private Young was "mentioned" for handling his machine gun so well that
it was mainly through his efforts the German attack on the 2nd
Battalion was repulsed on April 24th.  Later, at Givenchy, on June
15th, he refused to leave his guns even when he was wounded, and
pluckily remained until the action was over.

These are but a few of a hundred other deeds, done on the spur of the
moment, of which there will never be any memorial except the moment's
cheer or the moment's laughter from those who had time to observe.  A
man can be both heroic and absurd in the same act, and human nature
under strain always leans to the comic.  What follows is not at all
comic, although it made men laugh at the time.  In one of the many
isolated bits of night work which had to be undertaken, it happened
that a German detachment was cut off by one of ours and its situation
became hopeless.  There was something like a gasp as the enemy realised
this, and then a silence broken by a voice crying, in unmistakable
German-American accents, "Have a heart!"  The detachment had just
recovered a dressing station which had been abandoned a few hours
before, and there they had found the bodies of their comrades with
their wounds dressed--dead of fresh wounds by the bayonet!  It is
unfortunate that the Canadians' first serious experience of the enemy
should have included asphyxiation by gas and the murder of wounded and
unconscious men, because Canadians, more even than the British, have
been accustomed to Germans in their midst, and till lately have looked
upon them as good citizens.  Now they will tell their children that
they were mistaken, and the end of that war may well be generations
distant.

The supply of ammunition and medical attendance continued unbroken and
unconcerned through all the phases of the Ypres engagement.  The
ammunition columns waited for hour after hour at their stated points,
ready to distribute supplies as needed.  Their business was to stay
where they could be found, and if the shrapnel caught them when lined
up by the roadside, that was part of the business too.  They stuck it
out the livelong days and nights, coming up full and going away empty
with no more fuss than is made by delivery wagons on Drummond Street.
The doctors had the distraction of incessant work, and it was curious
to see how they took their professional manner into the field.  Half
the cities and towns in the Dominion might have identified their own
doctors under the official uniforms as far as they could have seen
them.  Though they were working at high pressure, they were
unmistakably the same men.  Some were as polite as though each poor,
mangled case represented (which it might well have done) the love and
hopes of wealthy and well-known families.  Others employed the same
little phrases of encouragement, and the same tricks of tone and
gesture, at the beginning and end of their operations, as their
hospitals have known for years.

Others, again, switched off from English to French-Canadian _patois_ as
the cases changed under their hands; but not one of them had a thought
to waste on anything outside the cases.  Their professional habit
seemed to enwrap them like an armoured belt, to protect them from all
consciousness of the hurricanes of death all round.  This is difficult
to explain to anybody who has not seen a doctor's face pucker with a
slight impatience when one side of his temporary field ambulance
dressing station is knocked out by the blast of a shell, and he must
wait until someone finds an electric torch to show him where his
patient lies.  It would be inadequate to call such men heroic.

Each soul of those engaged--and Canada threw in all she had on the
ground--will take away in his mind pictures that time can never wipe
out.  For some the memory of that struggle in the wood where the guns
were will stand out clearest in the raw primitiveness of its fighting.
Others will recall only struggles among rubbish heaps that once were
villages; some wall-end or market square, inestimably valuable for a
few red hours, and then a useless and disregarded charnel-house.  Very
many will think most of the profiles of bare fields over which men
moved in silence from piles of stacked overcoats and equipment towards
the trench where they knew the fire was waiting that would sweep them
away.  There was one such attack in which six thousand troops, of whom
not more than a third were Canadians, made a charge.  Each little
company in the space felt itself alone in the world.  It is so with all
bodies and all individuals in war.  Only when night fell did the same
picture reveal itself to all.  Then it was war as the prints and
pictures in our houses at home show it--the horizon lighted all round
by the flame of burning villages, and the German flares pitching and
curving like the comets which are supposed to attend the death of
kings.  Morning light broke up all the connections, and we were each
alone once more--horribly visible or hidden.

During the bombardment refugees fled back from the villages while
shrapnel fell along the roads they took.  Amidst all the horrors of
this war there was nothing more heartrending than the misery of these
helpless victims.  They met our supports and reserves coming up, and
pressed aside from the _paves_ to give them room.  They had packed what
they could carry on their own backs and the backs of their horses and
cows, while prudent men hired out dog teams; for one noticed the same
busied dogs passing and repassing up and down the line, tugging hard in
front of the low-wheeled little carts.  Invalids, palsied old men and
women swathed in pillows and bolstered up by the affectionate care of
their middle-aged children, struggled in the procession.  Their fear
had overcome their infirmities, and they had been dragged away swiftly
as might be from that death which Time itself would have dealt them in
a little while.

Then, as you know, we buried our dead; the records began to be made,
and the terrible cables started to work on the list of names for home.
There is in London a colony of Canadians who have come across to be a
little nearer to their nearest.  They suffer the common lot, and live
from hour to hour in the hotels and lodging-houses, where every guest
and servant is as concerned as they.  Life is harder for them than for
the English, because they are not among their own surroundings, and
France is very far off.

The colony is divided now, as the English have been since war began,
into three classes--those who know the worst, those who fear it, and
those who for the time being have escaped any blow, and are therefore
at liberty to help the others.  The cables from the west are alive with
appeals, and as information is gathered it is flashed back to Canada.
A voice calls out of a remote township, asking for news of a certain
name.  It has no claim on the receiver, who may have been, perhaps, his
deadly rival in the little old days.  But it calls, and must be
answered.  Who has had news of this name?  Add it to your list that you
carry about and consult with your friends; and when you have made sure
of your own beloved, in your grief or your joy, remember to mention
this name.  Somebody identifies it as having come from his own
town--son of the minister or the lawyer.  He was probably with comrades
from the same neighbourhood, and that at least will be a clue.
Meantime a soothing cable must carry the message that inquiries are
being pursued.  There are men in hospitals back from the trenches who
may perhaps recall or remember him, or be able to refer one to other
wounded men.  The unofficial inquiry spreads and ramifies through all
sorts of unofficial channels, till at last some sure word can be sent
of the place of his death, or the nature of his wound, or the date on
which he was missing, or the moment when he was last seen going
forward.  The voice ceases.  Others take its place--clear, curt,
businesslike, or, as the broken words tell, distracted with grief.  The
Canadian colony does its best to deal with them all, and their
inquiries cut across those of the English, and sorrows and griefs are
exchanged.  It is all one family now, so closely knit by blood that
sympathy and service are taken for granted.  "Your case may be mine
to-morrow," people say to each other.  "My time, and what inquiries I
can make, are at your disposal if you will only tell me your need and
your name."

The grief that we suffer is more new to us than to the English, who
have paid the heavy tolls of Mons, the retreat, the battle of Neuve
Chapelle, and the first attack on Ypres, and, like ourselves, have
prepared and are preparing men to fill the gaps; but through their
grief and ours runs the unbreakable pride of a race that has called
itself Imperial before it knew what Empire signified, or had proved
itself within its own memory by long and open-handed sacrifice.  In
that pride we are full partners, and through the din and confusion of
battle Canada perceives how all that has gone before was but fit
preparation for the destiny upon which she enters and the history which
she opens from this hour.



[1] Captain Costigan has now combative rank in the 10th Battalion, and
is acting as Brigade Bombing Officer.

[2] During the progress of the battle Major Guthrie was, after all,
compelled to take command of the 10th after two commanding officers had
been killed and a third had been wounded.  He led his Battalion with
wisdom and great gallantry.

[3] For this action Captain Scrimger was awarded the V.C.




CHAPTER VI

FESTUBERT

Objective of Aubers and Festubert--Allies' co-operation--Great French
offensive--Terrific bombardment--British support--Endless German
fortresses--Shortage of munitions--Probable explanation--Effect of
_Times_ disclosures--Outcry in England--Coalition Government--After
Ypres--The Canadian advance--Disposition of Canadians--Attack on the
Orchard--Canadian Scottish--Sapper Harmon's exploits--Drawback to
drill-book tactics--A Canadian ruse--"Sam Slick"--The Orchard
won--Arrival of Second Brigade--The attempt on "Bexhill"--In the German
trenches--Strathcona's Horse--King Edward's Horse--Cavalry fight on
foot--Further attack on "Bexhill"--Redoubt taken--"Bexhill"
captured--"Dig in and hang on"--Attack on the "Well"--Heroic efforts
repulsed--General Seely assumes command--A critical moment--Heavy
officer casualties--The courage of the cavalry--Major Murray's good
work--Gallantry of Sergt. Morris and Corpl. Pym--Death of Sergt.
Hickey--Canadian Division withdrawn--Trench warfare till June.


"In records that defy the tooth of time."--THE STATESMAN'S CREED.


To many minds the battle of Festubert, sometimes called the battle of
Aubers, in which the Canadians played so gallant and glorious a part,
represents only a vast conflict which raged for a long period without
any definite objective, any clearly defined line of attack, and with no
decisive result from which clear conclusions can be drawn.

This unfortunate impression is largely due to the fact that it is
impossible at the opening of a great battle for the commander to give
any indication of his intentions; that newspaper correspondents are
debarred from discussing them; and that the official despatches which
reveal the purpose and the plan of a battle, are only issued when the
engagement has already passed into history and has been lost sight of
among newer feats of arms.

As a matter of fact, the battle of Festubert is, in all its aspects,
one of the most clearly defined of the war, notwithstanding the length
of time that it covered and the numerous and confused individual and
sectional engagements fought along its front.  Its aim was clear, and
it was a portion of a definite scheme on the part of the Allies.  The
actual fight is perfectly easy to follow, and the results are
important, not only from the military point of view (although in this
respect Festubert must be counted a failure), but from the political
changes they produced in England--changes designed for the better
conduct of the war.

As I have already explained, if we had completely broken the German
lines at the battle of Neuve Chapelle, we should have gained the Aubers
Ridge, which dominates Lille, the retaking of which would have
completely altered the whole aspect of the war on the Western front.

General Joffre had determined on a great offensive movement in Artois,
in May, for which purpose he concentrated the most overwhelming
artillery force up to this time assembled in the West.  It was on a par
with the terrific masses of guns with which von Mackensen was, about
the same time, blasting his way through Galicia.  The French made
wonderful progress, and only a few of the defences of Lens, the key of
the whole French objective, remained in German hands.  But the Germans
were pouring reinforcements into the south, and it was then that Sir
John French, in conjunction with General Joffre, moved his forces to
the attack.  This British offensive was designed to hold up the German
reinforcements destined for Lens, and at the same time to offer the
British a second opportunity for gaining the Aubers Ridge, from which
Lille and La Bassee could be dominated.  If the British could gain the
ridge, which they hoped to secure at the battle of Neuve Chapelle, and
if the French could win through to Lens, the Allies would then be in a
position to sweep on together towards the city which was their common
goal.

The attack on the German positions began on May 9th,[1] and continued
through several days and nights, and waned, only to be renewed with
redoubled fury on May 16th.  On May 19th, the 2nd and 7th Divisions,
which had suffered very severely, were withdrawn, and their places
taken by the Canadian Division and the 51st Highland Division
(Territorial).  With the share of the battle which fell to the lot of
the Canadians I will deal in detail directly.

The British attack failed to clear the way to Lille, which still
remains in German hands.  With the reasons which resulted in our check
at Neuve Chapelle I have already dealt, and it is now necessary to
consider the two principal reasons which may be assigned for our second
failure to secure the all-important Aubers Ridge.

The first reason is definite and explicable.  The second reason is
debatable.

At various points along this sector of the front, and on many
occasions, the German lines were pierced--pierced but not broken.
Again and again the British and Canadian troops took the first, the
second, and the third line German trenches.  This may have destroyed
the mathematical precision of the German line, but it only succeeded in
splitting it up into a series of absolutely impregnable _fortins_.  It
must be remembered that the Germans fought a defensive battle, and in
this they were greatly assisted by the nature of the ground, which was
dotted with considerable hummocks, cleft with ravines and indented with
chalk pits and quarries, and was, moreover, abundantly furnished with
pit-heads, mine-works, mills, farms, and the like, all transformed into
miniature fortresses, to approach which was certain death.  They had
constructed trenches reinforced by concrete-lined galleries, and linked
them up with underground tunnels.  The battle of the miniature
fortresses proved the triumph of the machine gun.  The Germans employed
the machine gun to an extent which turned even a pig-stye into a
Sebastopol.  Only overwhelming artillery fire could have shattered this
chain of forts, bound by barbed wire and everywhere covered by machine
guns.

Our artillery fire was not sufficient to reduce them, and the British
attack slowly weakened; and finally the battle died out on the 26th,
when Sir John French gave orders for the curtailment of our artillery
fire.

This brings me to the second reason which has been assigned for our
failure to clear the way to Lille at the battle of Festubert, and that
is the debatable one of "shortage of munitions."

The military correspondent of _The Times_, who had just returned from
the front, affirmed in his journal on May 14th that the first part of
the battle of Festubert had failed through lack of "high explosives."

The English public was profoundly disturbed at the failure of an
engagement on which it had set high hopes, and, rightly or wrongly, it
fastened on this accusation of _The Times_ as an indictment of the
Government at home.  Both the Press and the public settled down with a
grim tenacity to discover what was wrong.  They were alike determined
that the British Army in the future should lack nothing which it
required to achieve success.

Amid the hubbub to which _The Times_ disclosure gave rise, the
undercurrent of the reply of officials at home was never heard, and
certainly was never understood.  Probably the answer of Lord Kitchener
was this: that the requirements of those in command in the field, based
on the calculations of the artillery experts there, had been faithfully
fulfilled so far as our resources permitted.

In any case, Festubert led us to believe that high explosives must
determine the issue of similar battles in the future, and the outcry in
England against the "shortage of munitions" produced the crisis from
which emerged the Coalition Government.

It may therefore be said that the political effects of Festubert were
infinitely greater than its military results.  The munitions crisis
cleared the political atmosphere and gave England a better
understanding of the difficulties of the war and a steadier
determination to see it through.  It paved the way for the War
Committee, and, finally, for the Allies' Grand Council of War in Paris.

I will now proceed to deal with the battle of Festubert as it concerns
the fortunes of the Canadians.  The record is a bald one of work in the
trenches by our own people.  It is couched almost in official phrases,
but now and then I have interpolated some personal anecdote which may
help to show you what triumph and terror and tragedy lie behind the
smooth, impersonal stage directions of this war.

After the second battle of Ypres the Canadian Division, worn but not
shattered, retired into billets and rested until May 14th, when the
Headquarters moved to the southern section of the British line in
readiness for new operations.  During that time reinforcements had
poured in from the Canadian base in England, where were gathered the
Dominion troops, whose numbers we owe to the large vision and untiring
energy of the Minister of Militia and Defence.

On May 17th the remade infantry brigades advanced towards the firing
line once more.

It must be understood that on the afternoon of May 18th, the 3rd
Brigade occupied reserve trenches, two companies of the 14th (Royal
Montreal) Battalion, commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Meighen,[2] and two
companies of the 16th (Canadian Scottish), under Lieut.-Colonel (now
Brig.-General) Leckie, being ordered to make an immediate advance on La
Quinque Rue, north-west of an Orchard which had been placed in a state
of defence by the enemy.  One company of the 16th Canadian Scottish was
to make a flanking movement on the enemy's position in the Orchard by
way of an old German communicating trench, and this attack was to be
made; of course, in conjunction with a frontal one.

Little time was available to make dispositions, and as there was no
opportunity to reconnoitre the ground, it was very difficult to
determine the proper objective.  The flanking company of the 16th
Battalion reached its allotted position, but after the advance of the
remaining company of that regiment, and the 14th, under very heavy
shell fire, the proper direction was not maintained.  The detachments
reached part of their objective, but owing to the lack of covering fire
it was undesirable at the moment to make an attack on the Orchard.  The
companies were told to dig themselves in and connect up with the
Wiltshire Battalion on their right and the Coldstream Guards on their
left.  They had then gained 500 yards.  Lieut.-Colonel Leckie sent up
the other two companies of the 16th to assist in the digging and to
relieve the original two companies at daybreak.  During the night the
companies of the 14th Battalion (Royal Montreal) were also withdrawn,
and the trench occupied by these was taken over by stretching out the
Coldstream Guards on one flank and the 16th Canadian Scottish on the
other.[3]

On the morning of the 20th orders were issued for an attack on the
Orchard that night.  A reconnaissance of the position was made by Major
Leckie, brother of Lieut.-Colonel Leckie, when patrols were sent out,
one of which very neatly managed to escape being cut off by the enemy,
and another suffered a few casualties.  This showed the Germans were in
force, and that an attack on the Orchard would be no light work.  That
night the Canadian Scottish occupied a deserted house close to the
German lines, and succeeded in establishing there two machine guns and
a garrison of thirty men.  The enemy were evidently not aware that we
were in possession of this house, for although they bombarded all the
British trenches with great severity throughout the whole of the next
day, this little garrison was left untouched.  The attacking detachment
under Major Rae consisted of two companies of the Canadian Scottish,
one commanded by Captain Morison, the other by Major Peck.  The attack
was to take place at 7.45 p.m., and at the same time the 15th Battalion
(48th Highlanders) were directed to make an assault on a position
several hundred yards to the right.  During that afternoon the Orchard
was very heavily bombarded by our artillery, the bombardment increasing
in severity up to the delivery of the attack.  Promptly to the minute,
the guns ceased, and the two companies of the 16th Canadians climbed
out of their trenches to advance.  At the same instant the two machine
guns situated in the advanced post opened on the enemy.  As the advance
was carried out in broad daylight, the movements were at once seen by
the Germans, and immediately a torrent of machine gun, rifle fire, and
shrapnel was directed upon our troops.  Their steadiness and discipline
were remarkable, and were greatly praised by the officers of the
Coldstream Guards who were on our left.

[Illustration: Map--The Orchard and surroundings]


When they reached the edge of the Orchard an unexpected obstacle
presented itself in the form of a deep ditch, and on the further side a
wired hedge.  Without hesitation, however, the men plunged through the
ditch, in some places up to their necks in water, and made for
previously reconnoitred gaps in the hedge.  Not many Germans had stayed
in the Orchard during the bombardment.  The bulk of the garrison,
according to the usual German method under artillery fire, had
evidently retired to the support trenches in the rear.  A few had been
left behind to man a machine gun redoubt near to the centre of the
Orchard with the idea of holding up our advancing infantry till the
enemy, withdrawn during the bombardment, could return in full strength;
but these machine guns retreated when the Canadians came.  On the far
side of the Orchard, however, the Germans, following their system
indicated above, came up to contest the position, but the onset of the
Canadians forced them to beat a hasty retreat.  Although double our
numbers, they could not be induced to face a hand-to-hand fight.  Three
platoons cleared the Orchard, while a fourth platoon, advancing towards
the north side, were hampered by a very awkward ditch, which forced
them to make a wide detour, so that they did not reach the Orchard
until its occupation was complete.

One company did not enter the Orchard, but pushed forward and occupied
an abandoned German trench running in a south-westerly direction, to
prevent any flank counter-attack being made by the enemy.  They then
found themselves in a very exposed position, and consequently suffered
heavily.  The casualties, in proportion to the number of men employed
in the attack, were heavy for all engaged, but the position was a very
important one, and had twice repulsed assault by other regiments.

Had our advance been less rapid the enemy would no doubt have got back
into this position, and our task might have been impossible.  They
argued, as have said, that any attack might be held up by the machine
guns in the redoubt and in the fortified positions on the flank for
long enough to enable them to return to the Orchard after our
bombardment had ceased, and then throw us back.  The speed with which
our assault was carried out altogether checkmated this plan.

The 16th Battalion (Canadian Scottish) included detachments from the
72nd Seaforths of Vancouver, the 79th Camerons of Winnipeg, the 50th
Gordons of Victoria, and the 91st Highlanders of Hamilton; so all
Canada, from Lake Ontario to the Pacific Ocean, was represented in the
Orchard that night.

It was in the course of the struggle in the Orchard that Sapper Harmon,
of the 1st Field Company, C.E., performed one of those exploits which
have made Canadian arms shine in this war.  He was attached to a party
of twelve sappers and fifty infantrymen of the 3rd Canadian Battalion
which constructed a barricade of sandbags across the road leading to
the Orchard, in the face of heavy fire.  Later, this barricade was
partially demolished by a shell, and Harmon actually repaired it while
under fire from a machine gun only sixty yards away!  Of the party, in
whose company Harmon first went out, six of the twelve sappers were
wounded, and of the fifty infantrymen six were killed and twenty-four
wounded.  Later, he remained in the Orchard alone for thirty-six hours
constructing tunnels under a hedge, with a view to further operations.
Sapper B. W. Harmon is a native of Woodstock, New Brunswick, and a
graduate of the University of New Brunswick.

The drawback to drill-book tactics is that if one side does not keep
the rules the other suffers.  And a citizen army will not keep to the
rules.  For example, not long after the affair of the Orchard, a
Canadian battalion put up a little arrangement with the ever-adaptable
Canadian artillery in its rear.  The artillery opened heavy fire on a
section of German trenches while the battalion made ostentatious parade
of fixing bayonets, rigging trench ladders and whistling orders, as a
prelude to attack the instant the bombardment should cease.  The
Germans, who are experts in these matters, promptly retired to their
supporting trenches and left the storm to rage in front, ready to rush
forward the instant it stopped, to meet the Canadian attack.  So far
all went perfectly.  Our guns were lifted from the front trenches and
shelled the supporting trench, in the manner laid down by the best
authorities, to prevent the Germans coming up.  The Germans none the
less came, and crowded into the front trenches.  But there was no
infantry attack whatever.  That deceitful Canadian battalion had not
moved.  Only the guns shortened range once more, and the full blast of
their fire fell on the German front trench, now satisfactorily crowded
with men.  Next day's German wireless announced that "a desperate
attack had been heavily repulsed," but the general sense of the enemy
was more accurately represented by a "hyphenated" voice that cried out
peevishly next evening: "Say, Sam Slick, no dirty tricks to-night."
But to resume.

At seven o'clock in the evening of the 20th the 13th Battalion (Royal
Highlanders) of the 3rd Brigade, under Lieut.-Colonel Loomis, advanced
across the British trenches, under heavy shell fire and with severe
losses, in support of the 16th Battalion Canadian Scottish.

The attack on the Orchard having succeeded, three companies of the 13th
Battalion (Royal Highlanders) immediately marched forward.  As four
officers of one company, including the officer commanding, had been
severely wounded, the command was taken over by Major Buchanan, the
second in command of the regiment.

A fourth company marched to a support trench immediately in the rear.
The position was then consolidated, and the 16th Battalion, after its
hard work and brilliant triumph, withdrew.

Next afternoon the enemy in their trenches made a demonstration fifty
yards north of the Orchard, but our heavy fire soon drove them off the
parapets.  During the night the disputed ground between the trenches
was brightly lighted by the enemy's flares and enlivened by the rattle
of continuous musketry.  None the less, our working parties went on
with their improvements and left the position in good shape for the 3rd
(Toronto) Battalion of the 1st Brigade, which relieved the Royal
Highlanders on Saturday.

On the night of May 19th, the 2nd Canadian Infantry Brigade took over
some trenches which had recently been captured by the 21st Brigade
(British), and also a section of trenches from the 47th Division.  The
8th and 10th Battalions occupied the front-line trenches, the 5th
Battalion went into Brigade Reserve, with one company near Festubert,
and three companies bivouacked in the vicinity of Willow Road; and the
7th Battalion was posted in Divisional Reserve.

On May 20th, at 745 p.m., the 10th Canadian Battalion, under Major
Guthrie, who joined the Battalion at Ypres as a lieutenant after the
regiment had lost most of its officers, made an attempt to secure a
position known as "Bexhill."  This attack was a failure, as no previous
reconnaissance had been carried out, and the preliminary bombardment
had been quite ineffectual.  Moreover, our troops were in full view of
the enemy when crossing a gap in the fire trench, and as the only
approach to "Bexhill" was through an old communicating trench swept by
machine guns, the leading men of the front company were all shot down
and the 10th Battalion retired.[4]

During the night a further reconnaissance of the enemy's position was
carried out and repairs were effected in the gap in the fire trenches,
which assured covered communication to all parts of our line.

On the evening of May 21st an artillery bombardment opened under
direction of Brigadier-General Burstall, and went on intermittently
until 8.30, when our attack was launched.  The attacking force
consisted of the grenade company of the 1st Canadian Brigade and two
companies of the 10th Canadian Battalion.  This attack was met by
overwhelming fire from the "Bexhill" redoubt, and our force on the left
was practically annihilated by machine guns; indeed, against that
steady stream of death no man could advance.  On the right the
attackers succeeded in reaching the enemy's trench line running south
from "Bexhill," and, preceded by bombers, drove the enemy 400 paces
down the trench and erected a barricade to hold what they had won.
During the night the enemy made several attempts to counterattack, but
was successfully repulsed.[5]

In our attack, which was only partially successful, Major E. J. Ashton,
of Saskatoon, who was slightly wounded in the head on the previous
night, refused to leave his command.  He was again wounded, and
Privates Swan and Walpole tried to get him back to safety, and in so
doing Swan was also wounded.  During the same night Corporal W. R.
Brooks, one of the 10th Battalion snipers, went out from our trench
under heavy fire and brought in two men of the 47th Camerons who had
been lying wounded in the open for three days.

At daybreak of May 22nd the enemy opened a terrific bombardment on the
captured trench, which continued without ceasing through the whole day
and practically wiped the trench out.[6]  After very heavy casualties
the southern end of the captured trench was abandoned, and a second
barricade was erected across the portion that remained in our hands.

In the afternoon the enemy's infantry prepared for an attack, but
retired after coming under our artillery and machine gun fire.  During
the night the trenches were taken over by a detachment of British
troops and a detachment of the 1st Canadian Infantry Brigade, and by
2nd King Edward's Horse and Strathcona's Horse.  These latter served,
of course, as infantry, and it was their first introduction to this
war, though Strathcona's Horse took part in the South African campaign.

The 2nd King Edward's Horse took over the trench held up to that time
by the 8th[7] Battalion.  On the right of Strathcona's Horse were the
Post Office Rifles, of the 47th Division; but the Post Office Rifles'
machine guns were manned by the machine gun detachment of the
Strathconas.

May 23rd passed without incident, although the enemy threatened an
attack upon 2nd King Edward's Horse, but broke back in the face of a
heavy artillery fire searchingly directed by the Canadian artillery
brigades.[8]

At 11 p.m. on the night of May 23rd the 5th Canadian Battalion received
orders from the General Officer Commanding the 2nd Canadian Infantry
Brigade to take the "Bexhill" salient and redoubt, on which our
previous attack had failed.  The force detailed for the fresh attack
then consisted of two companies of the Battalion, numbering about 500
men, under Major Edgar, together with an additional 100 men furnished
by the 7th (British Columbia) Battalion, divided into two
parties--fifty to construct bridges before the attack, and fifty to
consolidate whatever positions were gained.  The bridging party was
commanded by Lieut. (now Captain) R. Murdie, and he took his men out at
2.30 a.m. on the morning of May 24th.  In bright moonlight, and under
machine gun and rifle fire, he managed to throw twelve bridges across a
ditch 10 ft. in width and full of water, which lay between our line and
the objective of the attack.  This party naturally suffered heavy
casualties.  The attack itself went over at 2.45, and in it many of the
bridging party joined; at the same time the battalion bombers under
Lieut. Tozer forced their way up a German communication trench leading
to the redoubt.  Extremely stiff fighting followed, but in the face of
heavy machine gun fire the redoubt was occupied shortly after four in
the morning.  In addition to the redoubt, the attacking party gained
and held 200 yards of trenches to the left of it, and a short piece to
the right, driving the Germans out and back with heavy losses.

"Bexhill" proper, however, had still to be taken, and to that end the
two companies of the 5th Battalion, which were in reality inadequate to
capture so strong a position, were reinforced by a company from the 7th
Battalion and a squadron of Strathcona's Horse.[9]  With this
reinforcement the attack was immediately pressed home, and "Bexhill"
and 130 yards of trenches towards the north fell into our hands at 5.49
a.m.

Further progress, however, was impossible owing to the unbreakable
positions of the enemy.  Forty minutes later, at about 6.30 a.m.,
further reinforcements were received in the form of a platoon from the
5th Battalion, and with their arrival came orders to "dig in and hang
on," but not to attempt the taking of any more ground.  It was about
this time that Major Odlum, commanding the 7th Battalion, took charge
of the 5th, as Colonel Tuxford was ill and Major Edgar had been wounded
soon after the launching of the attack.  The losses among the officers
of Major Edgar's little force had been terrible.  Major Tenaille and
Captain Hopkins, who commanded the two companies, were killed, as were
also Captains Maikle, Currie, McGee, and Mundell, while Major Thornton,
Captain S. J. Anderson, Captain Endicott, Major Morris, Lieut. Quinan,
and Lieut. Davis were wounded.  Matters were made worse by the fact
that Major Powley was wounded just as he came up with his reinforcing
company from the 7th.  All through the morning the enemy's artillery
was exceedingly active, although the Canadian artillery surrounded our
troops, who were holding on in the redoubt, with a saving ring of
shrapnel, and, at the same time, distracted the enemy's guns with
accurate fire upon their positions.  Canada had good reason to be proud
of her gunners that day.

The captured trenches were held all day, but only at great cost, by the
forces which had won them; and at night the Royal Canadian Dragoons and
the 2nd Battalion of the 1st Brigade arrived, and took them over.

The total losses of the 2nd Brigade amounted to 55 officers and 980 men.

The hostile shelling was the most severe that the Brigade ever
experienced, but the ordeal was borne unshakenly.

On the night of May 24th, at 11.30 p.m., while the troops which had
taken "Bexhill" were still hanging on to what they had won, the 3rd
Battalion, commanded by Lieut.-Colonel (now Brigadier-General) Rennie,
attacked a machine-gun redoubt known as "The Well," which was a very
strongly fortified position.  The attacking force gained a section of
trench in the position with fine dash; but to take the redoubt, or to
hold their line under the pounding of bombs and the pitiless fire of
the machine guns in the redoubt, was more than flesh and blood could
accomplish.  To remain would have been to die to a man--and win
nothing.  This heroic attack was repulsed with heavy losses.

On the following day (May 25th) at noon, Brigadier-General Seely, M.P.,
assumed command of the troops which had won "Bexhill."  General Seely
had already endeared himself to the Canadians by his personality, and
now he was to win their confidence as a leader in the field.  He
arrived at a perilous and critical moment, and he at once fastened on
the situation with understanding and vigour.  He remained in command
until noon on May 27th, and through two extremely trying and hazardous
days and nights, displayed soldierly qualities and a gift for
leadership.  Some idea of the severity of the fighting may be gathered
from the fact that the losses among officers of General Seely's Brigade
included, Lieut. W. G. Tennant, Strathcona's Horse, killed; Major D. D.
Young, Royal Canadian Dragoons, Major J. A. Hesketh, Strathcona's
Horse, Lieuts. A. D. Cameron, D. C. McDonald, J. A. Sparkes,
Strathcona's Horse, Major C. Harding and Lieuts. C. Brook and R. C.
Everett, 2nd King Edward's Horse, wounded.  The casualties in other
ranks, killed, wounded, and missing, were also very heavy.

An inspiring feature of the fighting at this particular period was the
dash, gallantry, and steadiness of the regiments of horse which, to
relieve the terrible pressure of the moment, were called on to serve as
infantry, without any fighting experience, and flung into the forefront
of a desperate and bloody battle.

It is impossible to record all the acts of heroism performed by
officers and men, but the narrative would be incomplete without a few
of them.

Major Arthur Cecil Murray, M.P., of 2nd King Edward's Horse, for
instance, distinguished himself by the determined and gallant manner in
which he led his squadron, held his ground, and worked at the
construction of a parapet under heavy machine gun fire.  The
considerable advance made on the left of the position was in a large
measure due to his efforts.  Lieut. (now Captain) J. A. Critchley, of
Strathcona's Horse, armed with bombs, led his men in the assault on an
enemy machine gun redoubt with notable spirit.  Corporal W. Legge, of
the Royal Canadian Dragoons, went out on the night of May 25th and
located a German machine gun which had been causing us heavy losses
during the day, and so enabled his regiment to silence it with
converging fire.

It was on May 25th, too, that Sergeant Morris, of 2nd King Edward's
Horse, accompanied the Brigade grenade company, who were sent to assist
the Post Office Rifles of the 47th London Division in an attack on a
certain position on the evening of that day.

Morris led the attack down the German communication trench, and all the
members of his party, with the exception of himself, were either killed
or wounded.  He got to a point at the end of the trench and there
maintained himself--to use the cold official phrase--by throwing bombs
and by the work of his single rifle and bayonet.  By fighting
single-handed he managed to hold out until the extreme left of the Post
Office Rifles came up to his relief.

On the following day, the 26th, Corporal Pym, Royal Canadian Dragoons,
exhibited a self-sacrifice and contempt for danger which can seldom
have been excelled on any battlefield.  Hearing cries for help in
English between the British and German lines, which were only sixty
yards apart, he resolved to go in search of the sufferer.  The space
between the lines was swept with incessant rifle and machine gun fire,
but Pym crept out and found the man, who had been wounded in both
thigh-bones and had been lying there for three days and nights.  Pym
was unable to move him without causing him pain which he was not in a
state to bear.  Pym therefore called back to the trench for help, and
Sergeant Hollowell, Royal Canadian Dragoons, crept out and joined him,
but was shot dead just as he reached Pym and the wounded man.

Pym thereupon crept back across the fire-swept space to see if he could
get a stretcher, but having regained the trench he came to the
conclusion that the ground was too rough to drag the stretcher across
it.

Once more, therefore, he recrossed the deadly space between the
trenches, and at last, with the utmost difficulty, brought the wounded
man in alive.

Those were days of splendid deeds, and this chapter cannot be closed
without recording the most splendid of all--that of Sergeant Hickey, of
the 4th Canadian Battalion,[10] which won for him the recommendation
for the Victoria Cross.  Hickey had joined the Battalion at Valcartier
from the 36th Peel Regiment, and on May 24th he volunteered to go out
and recover two trench mortars belonging to the Battalion which had
been abandoned in a ditch the previous day.  The excursion promised
Hickey certain death, but he seemed to consider that rather an
inducement than a deterrent.  After perilous adventures under hells of
fire he found the mortars and brought them in.  But he also found what
was of infinitely greater value--the shortest and safest route by which
to bring up men from the reserve trenches to the firing line.  It was a
discovery which saved many lives at a moment when every life was of the
greatest value, and time and time again, at the risk of his own as he
went back and forth, he guided party after party up to the trenches by
this route.

Hickey's devotion to duty had been remarkable throughout, and at
Pilckem Ridge, on April 23rd, he had voluntarily run forward in front
of the line to assist five wounded comrades.  How he survived the shell
and rifle fire which the enemy, who had an uninterrupted view of his
heroic efforts, did not scruple to turn upon him, it is impossible to
say: but he succeeded in dressing the wounds of all the five and
conveying them back to cover.

Hickey, who was a cheery and a modest soul, and as brave as any of our
brave Canadians, did not live to receive the honour for which he had
been recommended.  On May 30th a stray bullet hit him in the neck and
killed him.  And so there went home to the God of Battles a man to whom
battle had been joy.

On May 31st the Canadian Division was withdrawn from the territory it
had seized from the enemy and moved to the extreme south of the British
line.  Here the routine of ordinary trench warfare was resumed until
the middle of June.[11]



[1] The detailed plan of the engagement was as follows:--Sir Herbert
Plumer with the 2nd Army was to protect Ypres while the 3rd Corps held
Armentieres.  The 1st Army under Sir Douglas Haig was to carry the
entrenchments and redoubts on the right of the Crown Prince Rupprecht's
Army.  Sir John French had arranged for the 4th Corps to attack the
German position at Rouges-Bancs, to the north-west of Fromelles.  The
1st Corps and the Indian Corps were first to occupy the plain between
Neuve Chapelle and Givenchy, and afterwards take the Aubers Ridge.

[2] Lt.-Colonel Meighen led his troops with capacity and judgment.  He
had already won distinction at Ypres.  In accordance with the English
custom of recalling men who have acquired experience in the field for
training purposes at home, Colonel Meighen has been sent to Canada, and
given charge of the instructional scheme of the Canadian Forces from
the Atlantic to the Pacific, with the temporary rank of
Brigadier-General.

[3] Our men were very anxious to get to grips with the enemy on this
day (May 18th), as it was the birthday of Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria,
who had issued an order that no prisoners were to be taken.  Some idea
of the efforts made to incite the enemy's forces to further outrages
against the conventions of war may be gathered from the following
paragraph extracted from the _Lille War News_, an official journal
issued to the German troops:--"Comrades, if the enemy were to invade
our land, do you think he would leave one stone upon another of our
fathers' houses, our churches, and all the works of a thousand years of
love and toil? ... and if your strong arms did not hold back the
English (God damn them!) and the French (God annihilate them!) do you
think they would spare your homes and your loved ones?  What would
these pirates from the Isles do to you if they were to set foot on
German soil?"

[4] The casualties of the 10th Battalion during the fighting in April
and May were 809.  The casualties at Ypres alone were 600 of all ranks.

[5] Coy. Sergt.-Major G. R. Turner (now Lieutenant), of the 3rd Field
Company, Canadian Engineers, who served with courage and coolness
throughout the second battle of Ypres, and particularly distinguished
himself on the nights of April 22nd and 27th by bringing in wounded
under severe artillery and rifle fire, again attracted the attention of
his superior officers by his courageous conduct at Festubert.  From May
18th to 22nd he was in command of detachments of sappers employed in
digging advanced lines of trenches, and generally constructing
defences.  This work was carried through most efficiently, although
under fire from field guns, machine guns, and rifles.

[6] It was during this bombardment that Captain McMeans, Lieut.
Smith-Rewse, and Lieut. Passmore were killed, and Lieut. Denison was
wounded.  The fate of Captain McMeans was particularly regrettable as
he had on all occasions borne himself most gallantly.  Such was the
force of his example that, when he himself, and all the other officers,
as well as half the men of the Company, had been killed or wounded, the
remainder clung doggedly to the position.  The conduct of Captain J. M.
Prower also calls for mention.  He was wounded, but returned to his
command as soon as his wounds were dressed, and though again buried
under the parapet, continued to do his duty.  He is now Brigade Major
of the 2nd Infantry Brigade.  On the same day Coy. Sergt.-Major John
Hay steadied and most ably controlled the men of his Company after all
the officers and 70 men out of the 140 had been put out of action.

[7] _Casualties of 8th Battalion_.--About 90 per cent. of the original
officers and men of the 8th Battalion have been casualties.  Only three
of the original officers of the battalion have escaped wounds or death.

[8] This was an attack made by the 7th Prussian Army Corps which had
been very strongly reinforced.  The German efforts to break through the
Canadian lines were very determined, and they advanced in masses,
which, however, melted away before our fire.

[9] Casualties of 5th Battalion during Ypres, Festubert, and Givenchy
about 60 per cent.  Casualties at Festubert alone, 380, all ranks.

[10] The 4th Canadian Battalion was under continuous fire at Festubert
through ten days and eleven nights.  On the morning of May 27th all
communication wires between the fire-trench and the Battalion and
Brigade Headquarters were cut by enemy fire, and at nine o'clock Pte.
(now Lieutenant) W. E. F. Hart volunteered to mend the wires.  Hart was
with Major (now Lieut.-Colonel) M. J. Colquhoun at the time, and they
had together twice been partially buried by shell fire earlier in the
morning.  Pte. Hart mended eleven breaks in the wires, and
re-established communication with both Battalion and Brigade
Headquarters.  He was at work in the Orchard, under shrapnel,
machine-gun, and rifle fire, without any cover, for an hour and thirty
minutes.  Hart, who is now signalling officer of the 4th Battalion, is
a young man, and the owner of a farm near Brantford, Ontario.  He has
been with the Battalion since August, 1914.

[11] The following is Sir John French's official reason for bringing
the battle of Festubert to a close:--"I had now reasons to consider
that the battle which was commenced by the 1st Army on May 9th and
renewed on the 16th, having attained for the moment the immediate
object I had in view, should not be further actively proceeded
with...."  "In the battle of Festubert the enemy was driven from a
position which was strongly entrenched and fortified, and ground was
won on a front of four miles to an average depth of 600 yards."




CHAPTER VII

GIVENCHY

Minor engagements--A sanguinary battle--Attacks on "Stony Mountain" and
"Dorchester"--Disposition of Canadian troops--An enemy
bombardment--"Duck's Bill"--A mine mishap--"Dorchester" taken--A
bombing party--Coy.-Sergt.-Major Owen's bravery--Lieut. Campbell mounts
machine-gun on Private Vincent's back--How Private Smith replenished
the bombers--Fighting the enemy with bricks--British Division unable to
advance--Canadians hang on--"I can crawl"--General Mercer's
leadership--Private Clark's gallantry--Dominion Day.


  "Of fifteen hundred Englishmen,
    Went home but fifty-three;
  The rest were slain in Chevy-Chace,
    Under the greenwood tree."
                      OLD SCOTCH BALLAD.


Between the close of the battle of Festubert, on May 26th, and the
beginning of the great conflict at Loos, on September 25th, there was a
series of minor engagements along the whole British front, in which
Givenchy stands out as another red milestone on Canada's road to glory.

The brief mention of Givenchy in the official despatch in which Sir
John French reviewed the operations of the British Army between
Festubert and Loos, conveys no idea of the desperate fury or the scope
of the fighting in which the Canadians again did all, and more than
all, that was asked of them.

That in the end they were forced to fall back from the fortified
positions they had won with so much heroism and at so much cost, was
due to difficulties in other portions of the field, which prevented the
7th British Division from coming up in time.

Givenchy may appear but an incident in a long chain of operations when
one is taking a bird's-eye view of the campaign on the Western Front as
a whole, but it was in reality a very considerable and sanguinary
battle, the story of which should appeal to every Canadian heart.

The 7th British Division had been directed to make a frontal attack on
a fortified place in the enemy's entrenched position known to our
troops as "Stony Mountain," and the 1st Canadian (Ontario) Battalion,
commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Hill, of the 1st Brigade, was detailed to
secure the right flank of the British Division by seizing two lines of
German trenches extending from "Stony Mountain" 150 yards south to
another fortified point known to us as "Dorchester."  Working parties
from the 2nd and 3rd Canadian Battalions were detailed to secure the
lines of trenches taken by the 1st Battalion, to connect these with our
trenches, and finally to form the defensive flank wherever it might be
required.

After a few days of preparation the 1st Canadian Battalion (Ontario
Regiment) moved up, and at three o'clock on the afternoon of June 15th,
the Battalion reached our line of trenches opposite the position to be
attacked, when the 2nd Canadian Battalion, under Lieut.-Colonel Watson,
which was holding the trench position, withdrew to the right to make
room for them.

The trench line on the right of the attacking Battalion was held by the
2nd and 4th Canadian Battalions as far as the La Bassee Canal, with the
3rd Canadian Toronto Regiment in support.  The left was held by the
East Yorks.

[Illustration: Map--ATTACK MADE BY 1ST CANADIAN BATTALION JUNE 15TH
1915]

From three o'clock until six in the evening, the Ontario Regiment
awaited the command to charge, and sung their chosen songs--all popular
but all unprintable.  The enemy bombarded our position heartily, though
our artillery had the better of them.  Fifteen minutes before the
attack was timed to take place, two 18-pounder guns, which had been
placed in the infantry trenches under the cover of darkness on the
instructions of Brigadier-General Burstall, opened fire upon the
parapets of the enemy trenches.  One gun, under Lieut. C. S. Craig,
fired over 100 rounds, sweeping the ground clear of wire and destroying
two machine-guns.  Lieut. Craig, who was wounded at Ypres early in May
and again while observing near Givenchy, was seriously wounded after
completing his task here.  Lieut. L. S. Kelly, who was in command of
the other gun, succeeded in destroying a machine-gun, when his own gun
was wrecked by an enemy shell, and he was wounded.  The gun shields
themselves were tattered and twisted like paper by the mere force of
musketry fire.[1]

Just before six o'clock a mine, previously prepared by the sappers, was
exploded.  Owing to the discovery of water under the German trenches,
its tunnel could not be carried far enough forward, and the Canadian
troops had accordingly been withdrawn from a salient in the Canadian
line, known as "Duck's Bill," to guard against casualties in our own
trenches, when it went off.  However, to make sure that the explosion
would reach the German line, so heavy a charge had to be used that the
effects upon the Canadian trench line were somewhat serious.  Several
of our own bombers were killed and wounded, and a reserve depot of
bombs was buried under the _debris_.  Another bomb-depot was blown up
by an enemy shell about this time.  These two accidents made us short
of bombs when we needed them later on, and we had to rely entirely on
the supply of bombs which the bombers carried themselves.

Lieut.-Colonel Beecher, second in command, who escaped injury from the
first explosion in our trench, was killed by a splinter from a high
explosive shell at this moment.

The leading company, under Major G. J. L. Smith, rushed forward, with
the smoke and flying dirt of the mine explosion for a screen, and met a
withering fire from the German machine-guns placed in "Stony Mountain."
But their dash was irresistible, and almost immediately the company was
in possession of the German front trench and "Dorchester"; but those
who were opposite to "Stony Mountain" were stopped by fire from that
fort, all being killed or wounded.

The leading company was followed by bombing parties on the right and
left flanks, and by a blocking party of eight sappers of the 1st Field
Company Canadian Engineers.  Lieut. C. A. James, who was in charge of
the right bombing party, was killed at the time of the explosion of the
mine.  Those who remained advanced without a leader.  Lieut. G. N.
Gordon, in charge of the bomb party on the left, advanced in die
direction of "Stony Mountain," but his bombers were almost all shot
down.  A few reached the first-line trench, including Lieut. Gordon.
He was soon wounded, and was afterwards killed by a German bomb party
while lying in the German first-line trench with two other comrades who
had exhausted their supply of bombs.  They were almost the only
survivors of the bombing party.  The members of the blocking party,
too, had all been killed or wounded, save Sapper Harmon, who, being
unable to follow his vocation single-handed, loaded himself with bombs
which he hurriedly collected from the dead and dying and wounded
bombers and set out to bomb his way along the trench alone.  He
retired, with ten bullet wounds in his body, only after he had thrown
his last bomb.

The second company, under Captain G. L. Wilkinson, at once followed the
leading company and the bombers, and both companies charged forward to
the second-line trench, where the enemy presented a firm front,
although stragglers were retreating through the tall grass in the rear.
The bombers went to work from right to left to clear the trench.  Many
resisting Germans were bayoneted, and some prisoners were taken and
sent back, and later, with some of their escort, were killed by
machine-gun and rifle fire from "Stony Mountain" itself.

Captain Wilkinson's company was followed almost immediately by the
third company under Lieut. T. C. Sims, as the other company officers,
Captain F. W. Robinson and Lieut. P. W. Pick, had been killed by a
shell at the moment our mine blew up.  This company began to
consolidate the first-line German trench which had been captured--that
is to say, it reversed the sandbag parapet and turned the trench facing
enemy-wards.  It had suffered heavily in its advance across the open
space between the opposing lines, and Captain Delamere's company was
the fourth sent forward to support.  Captain Delamere had been wounded
and the command devolved upon Lieut. J. C. L. Young, who was wounded at
our parapet.  Lieut. Tranter took command, and was killed in a moment.
Company-Sergeant-Major Owen then assumed command, and led the company
with bravery and good sense.

Lieut. F. W. Campbell, with two machine-guns, had advanced in the rear
of Captain Wilkinson's company.  The entire crew of one gun was killed
or wounded in the advance, but a portion of the other crew gained the
enemy's front trench, and then advanced along the trench in the
direction of "Stony Mountain."  The advance was most difficult, and,
although subjected to constant heavy rifle and machine-gun fire, the
bombers led the way until further advance was impossible owing to a
barricade across the trench which had been hurriedly erected by the
enemy.  The bomb and the machine-gun bear the brunt of the day's work
more and more as time goes on, till one almost begins to think that the
rifle may come to be superseded by the shot-gun.  The machine-gun crew
which reached the trench was reduced to Lieut. Campbell and Private
Vincent (a lumberjack from Bracebridge, Ontario), the machine-gun and
the tripod.  In default of a base, Lieut. Campbell set up the
machine-gun on the broad back of Private Vincent and fired
continuously.  Afterwards, during the retreat, German bombers entered
the trench, and Lieut. Campbell fell wounded.  Private Vincent then cut
away the cartridge belt, and, abandoning the tripod, dragged the gun
away to safety because it was too hot to handle.  Lieut. Campbell
crawled out of the enemy trench, and was carried into our trench in a
dying condition by Company-Sergeant-Major Owen.  In the words of
Kinglake, "And no man died that night with more glory, yet many died
and there was much glory."

The working parties detailed for the construction of the line adjoining
our trenches with the hostile line which had been captured, moved out
according to arrangement, but the heavy machine-gun fire from "Stony
Mountain" forced them back to the cover of our trench, and all further
attempts to continue work while daylight lasted came to nothing.  The
efforts of the Battalion were now confined to erecting barricades just
south of "Stony Mountain" and north of "Dorchester," and to holding the
second-line trench.

The supply of bombs ran short, and Private Smith, of Southampton,
Ontario, son of a Methodist Minister, and not much more than nineteen,
was almost the only source of replenishment.  He was, till Armageddon,
a student at the Listowell Business College.  History relates he was
singing the trench version of "I wonder how the old folks are at home,"
when the mine exploded and he was buried.  By the time he had dug
himself out he discovered that all his world, including his rifle, had
disappeared.  But his business training told him that there was an
active demand for bombs for the German trenches a few score yards away.
So Private Smith festooned himself with bombs from dead and wounded
bomb-throwers around him, and set out, mainly on all-fours, to supply
that demand.  He did it five times.  He was not himself a bomb-thrower
but a mere middleman.  Twice he went up to the trenches and handed over
his load to the busy men.  Thrice, so hot was the fire, that he had to
lie down and toss the bombs (they do not explode till the safety pin is
withdrawn) into the trench to the men who needed them most.  His
clothes were literally shot into rags and ravels, but he himself was
untouched in all his hazardous speculations, and he explains his escape
by saying, "I kept moving."

So through all these hells the spirit of man endured and rejoiced,
indomitable.

But, after all, the supply of bombs ran out, and the casualties
resulting from heavy machine-gun and rifle fire from "Stony Mountain"
considerably increased the difficulties of holding the line.  The
bombers could fight no more.  One unknown wounded man was seen standing
on the parapet of the German front-line trench.  He had thrown every
bomb he carried, and, weeping with rage, continued to hurl bricks and
stones at the advancing enemy till his end came.

Every effort was made to clear out the wounded, and reinforcements from
the 3rd Battalion were sent forward.[2]  But still no work could be
done, and a further supply of bombs was not yet available.  Bombs were
absolutely necessary.  At one point four volunteers who went to get
more were killed, one after the other; upon that, Sergeant Kranz, of
London, England, by way of Vermillion, Alberta, and at one time a
private of the Argyll and Sutherland Regiment, went back, and,
fortunately, returned with a load.  He was followed by Sergeant Newell,
a cheese-maker from Watford, near Sarnia, and Sergeant-Major Cuddy, a
druggist from Strathroy.  Gradually our men in the second German line
were forced back along the German communication trench, and the loss of
practically all of our officers hampered the fight.  The volunteers who
were bringing forward a supply of bombs were nearly all killed, and the
supply died out with them.

The British Division had been unable to advance on the left owing to
the strength of the fortified position at "Stony Mountain," and the
German line north of that fort.  The Canadians held their ground,
however, hoping for the ultimate success of the attack on the left, in
the face of heavy pressure on their exposed left flank.

The enemy meanwhile had been accumulating strong forces, and finally,
at about half-past nine, the remnants of the Battalion were forced to
evacuate all the ground that had been gained.  The withdrawal was
conducted with deliberation, through a hail of bullets, but it cost us
heavily.

One splendid incident among many may perhaps explain the reason.
Private Gledhill is eighteen years of age.  His grandfather owns a
woollen mill in Ben Miller, near Goderich, Ontario.  Ben Miller was,
till lately, celebrated as the home of the fattest man in the world,
for there lived Mr. Jonathan Miller, who weighed 400 lbs., and moved
about in a special carriage of his own.  Private Gledhill, destined
perhaps to confer fresh fame on Ben Miller, saw Germans advancing down
the trench; saw also that only three Canadians were left in the trench,
two with the machine-gun, and himself, as he said, "running a rifle."
Before he had time to observe more, an invader's bomb most literally
gave him a lift home, and landed him uninjured outside the trench with
his rifle broken.  He found another rifle and fired awhile from the
knee till it became necessary to join the retreat.  During that
manoeuvre, which required caution, he fell over Lieut. Brown wounded,
and offered to convoy him home.  "Thanks, no," said the lieutenant, "I
can crawl."  Then Private Frank Ullock, late a livery stable keeper at
Chatham, New Brunswick, but now with one leg missing, said, "Will you
take _me_?"  "Sure," replied Gledhill.  But Frank Ullock is a heavy man
and could not well be lifted.  So Gledhill got down on hands and knees,
and Ullock took good hold of his web equipment and was hauled gingerly
along the ground towards the home trench.  Presently Gledhill left
Ullock under some cover while he crawled forward, cut a strand of wire
from our entanglements and threw the looped end back, lassoo fashion,
to Ullock, who wrapped it round his body.  Gledhill then hauled him to
the parapet, where the stretcher-bearers came out and took charge.  All
this, of course, from first to last and at every pace, under a tempest
of fire.  It is pleasant to think that Frank Ullock fell to the charge
of Dr. Murray Maclaren, also of New Brunswick, who watched over him
with tender care in a hospital under canvas, of 1,080 beds--a hospital
that is larger than the General, the Royal Victoria, and the Western of
Montreal combined.  Gledhill was not touched, and in spite of his
experiences prefers life at the front to work in his grandfather's
woollen mills at Ben Miller, near Goderich, Ontario.

Out of twenty-three combatant officers who went into this action only
three missed death or wounding.  They are Colonel Hill, who fought his
men to the bitter end with high judgment and courage; Lieut. S. A.
Creighton and Lieut. (now Captain) T. C. Sims, who did their work
soldierly and well.

Although the whole plan of attack was prepared by the Corps Commander,
the operations of the 1st Canadian Battalion (Ontario Regiment) were
brilliantly directed by General Mercer, who commanded the Brigade.  He
is a man of mature years, a philosopher by nature and a lawyer by
profession, always calm and even-tempered, and not given to too many
words.

For twenty-five years he took an active part in Canadian Militia
affairs, and the 2nd Queen's Own of Toronto held him in high esteem as
their Commanding Officer.

As a soldier, in the face of the enemy, he has gained vast experience
since he set foot in France, But, in addition, he has the inestimable
possession of shrewd common sense, great courage, and an instinctive
knowledge of military operations.  There can be no finer tribute to his
personality than the respect and affection of the men about him.

On the day following the attack, a wounded man was seen lying in the
open between the British and the German lines.  Lance-Corporal E. A.
Barrett, of the 4th Battalion, and at one time the steward of the
Edmonton Club, at once went out in broad daylight under heavy shell and
rifle fire and brought the wounded man in.

Two days later, on the 18th, Private G. F. Clark, of the 8th Battalion
(Winnipeg Rifles), displayed even greater coolness and daring.

About midday, in the neighbourhood of "Duck's Bill," Lieut. E. H.
Houghton, of Winnipeg, machine-gun officer of the 8th Battalion, saw a
wounded British soldier lying near the German trench.  As soon as dusk
fell he and Private Clark, of the machine-gun section, dug a hole in
the parapet, through which Clark went out and brought in the wounded
man, who proved to be a private of the East Yorks.  The trenches at
this point were only thirty-five yards apart.  Private Clark had
received a bullet through his cap during his rescue of the wounded
Englishman, but he crawled through the hole in the parapet again and
went after a Canadian machine-gun which had been abandoned within a few
yards of the German trench during the recent attack.  He brought the
gun safely into our trench, and the tripod to within a few feet of our
parapet.  He wished to keep the gun to add to the battery of his own
section, but the General Officer Commanding ruled that it was to be
returned to its original battalion, and promised Clark something in its
place which he would find less awkward to carry.  Private Clark comes
from Port Arthur, Ontario, and, before the war, earned his living by
working in the lumber-woods.

After several days of heavy artillery fire our troops were relieved and
the Headquarters moved to the north.  Here a trench line was taken over
from a British Division.

When Dominion Day came they remembered with pride that they were the
Army of a Nation, and those who were in the trenches displayed the
Dominion flag, decorated with the flowers of France, to the annoyance
of the barbarians, who riddled it with bullets.  Behind the lines the
Day was celebrated with sports and games, while the pipers of the
Scottish Canadian Battalions played a "selection of National Airs."

But the shouting baseball teams and minstrel shows, with their
outrageous personal allusions, the skirl of the pipes and the choruses
of the well-known ragtimes, moved men to the depths of their souls.
For this was the first Dominion Day that Canada had spent with the red
sword in her hand.



[1] On June 12th the 4th Battery, Canadian Field Artillery, commanded
by Major Geo. H. Ralston, received orders to place two guns in our
front-line trench, at "Duck's Bill," and to have them dug in and
protected by sandbags by the morning of the 15th.  The German trench
was only 75 yards away at this point, and the purpose of the two guns
was to cut wire, level parapets, and destroy machine-gun emplacements
on a front of 200 yards.

The positions for the field guns in our trench were ready by the night
of the 14th, and at 9.30 of the same night the two guns, their wheels
muffled with old motor tyres, left the battery's position near the
canal, and, in charge of Captain Stockwell and Sergeant-Major Kerry,
passed through Givenchy.  At this point the horses were unhooked, and
the guns were hauled to their places in our front-line trench by hand.
Shells were also drawn in by hand, in small armoured wagons.  The guns
were protected by one-quarter-inch armour plate, and their crews
remained with them throughout the night.

The Right Section gun was commanded by Lieut. C. S. Craig, with
Sergeant Miller as No. 1, and the Left Section gun by Lieut. L. S.
Kelly, with Sergeant E. G. MacDougall as No. 1.

On the afternoon of the 15th, the batteries of the Division commenced
firing on certain selected points of the enemy's front.  At 5.45 the
infantry, working to the minute on advance orders, knocked down our
parapet in front of the two entrenched guns and so uncovered their
field of fire.  The guns opened fire instantly on the German position,
and by six o'clock had disposed of six machine-gun emplacements,
levelled the German parapets and cut the wire to pieces.  Our infantry
attacked immediately after the firing of the last shot, and just as the
German batteries began to range on our two guns.  A shell burst over
and behind the Right Section gun, killing three of its crew and
wounding Lieut. Craig and Corporal King, who died of his wounds.
Lieut. Kelly was wounded a few minutes later.  Sergeant MacDougall
found Lieut. Craig lying helpless among the dead and wounded, and
carried him back to a dressing station.  Later, the Right Section gun
was smashed by a direct hit.

Sergeant MacDougall, who comes from Moncton, New Brunswick, and is a
graduate of McGill University in Electrical Engineering, again did
valuable work on the following night in removing the two guns from the
trench back to safety.

[2] The 3rd (Toronto) Battalion has now only five of its original
officers serving with it; 85 officers have been on the strength of the
Battalion at one time and another since its organisation.  Of other
ranks, about 240 of the original members of the Battalion are still
with it.




CHAPTER VIII

PRINCESS PATRICIA'S LIGHT INFANTRY

Review in Lansdowne Park--Princess Patricia presents the Colours--South
African veterans and reservists--Princess Patricias in the
trenches--St. Eloi--Major Hamilton Gault--A dangerous
reconnaissance--Attack on a sap--A German onslaught--Lessons from the
enemy--A march to battle--Voormezeele--Death of Colonel
Farquhar--Polygone Wood--Regiment's work admired--A move towards
Ypres--Heavily shelled--A new line--Arrival of Major Gault--Regiment
sadly reduced--Gas shells--A German rush--Major Gault wounded--Lieut.
Niven in command--A critical position--Corporal Dover's heroism--A
terrible day--Shortage of small arms ammunition--Germans' third
attack--Enemy repulsed--Regiment reduced to 150 rifles--Relieved--A
service for the dead--In bivouac--A trench line at
Armentieres--Regiment at full strength again--Moved to the south--Back
in billets--Princess Patricias instruct new troops--Rejoin Canadians--A
glorious record.


  "Fair lord, whose name I know not--noble it is,
  I well believe, the noblest--will you wear
  My favour at this tourney?"
                        --TENNYSON.


On Sunday, August 23rd, 1914, on a grey and gloomy day, immense numbers
of people assembled in Lansdowne Park, in the City of Ottawa, to attend
divine service with the Princess Patricia's Canadian Light Infantry,
and to witness the presentation to the Battalion of the Colours which
she had worked with her own hand.  The Regiment, composed very largely
of South African Veterans and Reservists, paraded with bands and
pipers, and then formed three sides of a square in front of the grand
stand.  Between the Regiment and the stand were the Duchess of
Connaught, Princess Patricia, and their Ladies-in-Waiting.  The
Princess Patricia, on presenting the Colours to Colonel Farquhar, the
Commanding Officer of the Regiment, said: "I have great pleasure in
presenting you with these Colours which I have worked myself; I hope
they will be associated with what I believe will be a distinguished
corps; I shall follow the fortunes of you all with the deepest
interest, and I heartily wish every man good luck and a safe return."

Not even the good wishes of this beautiful and gracious Princess have
availed to safeguard the lives of the splendid Battalion which carried
her Colours to the battlefields of Flanders; but every member of the
Battalion resolved, as simply and as finely as the knights of mediaeval
days, that he would justify the belief in its future so proudly
expressed by the lady whose name he was honoured to bear.

It is now intended to give some account of the fortunes of the
Battalion since the day, which seems so long ago, when with all the
pride and circumstance of military display, it received the regimental
colours amid the cheers of the citizens of Ottawa.

The Princess Patricias, containing a far larger proportion of
experienced soldiers than any other unit in the Canadian Division, was
not called upon to endure so long a period of preparation as the rest
of the Canadian Expeditionary Force; and at the close of the year 1914
they sailed from England at a moment when reinforcements were greatly
needed in France, to strengthen the 80th Brigade of the 27th Division,
and to take their part in a line thinly held and very fiercely
assailed.  For the months of January and February the Regiment took its
turn in the trenches, learning the hard lessons of the unpitying winter
war.  A considerable length of trenches in front of the village of St.
Eloi was committed to its charge.  Its machine-guns were planted upon a
mound which rose abruptly from the centre of the trenches.

The early days were uneventful and the casualties not more than normal,
although some very valuable officers were lost.  On February 28th,
1915, the Germans completed a sap, from which the Battalion became
constantly subject to annoyance, danger, and loss.  It was therefore
determined by the Battalion Commander to dispose of the menace.  Major
Hamilton Gault and Lieut. Colquhoun carried out by night a dangerous
reconnaissance of the German position, and returned with much
information.  Lieut. Colquhoun went out a second time, alone, to
supplement it, but never returned.  He is to-day a prisoner of war in
Germany.

The attack was organised under Lieut. Crabbe; the bomb-throwers were
commanded by Lieut. Papineau.  The last-named officer, a very brave
soldier, is a lineal descendant of the rebel of 1837.  He is himself
loyal to his family traditions except when dangers and wars menace the
Empire.  At such moments, in spite of himself, his hand flies to the
sword.  The snipers were under Corporal Ross.  Troops were organised in
support with shovels ready to demolish the parapet of the enemy trench.
The ground to be traversed was short enough, for the sappers' nearest
point was only fifteen yards from the Canadian trench.  The attacking
party rushed this space and threw themselves into the sap.  Corporal
Ross, who was first in the race, was killed immediately.  Lieut. Crabbe
then led the detachment down the trench while Lieut. Papineau ran down
the outside of the parapet throwing bombs into the trench.  Lieut.
Crabbe made his way through the trench, followed by his men, until his
progress was arrested by a barrier which the Germans had constructed.

In the meantime, troops had occupied the rear face of the sap to guard
against a counter-attack.  A platoon under Sergeant-Major Lloyd, who
was killed, attacked and demolished the enemy parapet for a
considerable distance.  The trench was occupied long enough to complete
the work of demolishing the parapet.  With dawn, orders were given for
the attackers to withdraw, and as the grey morning light began to
break, they made their way to their own trenches, with a difficult task
well and successfully performed.  Major Gault was wounded in the course
of the engagement, in which all ranks behaved with dash and gallantry,
although the men had been for six weeks employed in trench warfare
under the most depressing conditions of cold and damp.

On March 1st the enemy made a vigorous attack on the Princess Patricias
with bombs and shell fire.  Between the 1st and the 6th, a fierce
contest was continually waged for the site of the sap which the
Battalion had destroyed.  Sometimes the Princess Patricias defended it;
sometimes the British battalions, with whom they were brigaded and
whose staunch and faithful comrades they had become.

On March 6th, carrying out a carefully concerted plan, our men withdrew
from the trench lines, which were still only twenty or thirty yards
from the German trenches; and our artillery, making very successful
practice, obliterated the sap and the trench which the enemy had used
for the purpose of creating it.  The enemy were blown out of the
forward trenches, and fragments of dead Germans were thrown into the
air, in some cases as high as sixty feet.  The bombardment was carried
out with high explosive shells.

The Canadian soldier is always adaptable, and the Battalion learned,
when they captured the sap on February 28th, that the German trenches
were five feet deep with parapets two feet high, and yet that every day
they were pumped and kept dry.  This knowledge resulted in a
considerable improvement in the trenches occupied by the Regiment.  The
experience was welcome, for the men had been standing in water all
through the winter months and the Regiment had suffered much from
frostbite.

On March 13th, while the Princess Patricias were in billets, the
Germans, perhaps in reply to our offensive at Neuve Chapelle, made a
vigorous attack in overwhelming numbers upon the trenches and mound at
St. Eloi.  The attack, which was preceded by a heavy artillery
bombardment, was successful, and it became necessary to attempt by a
counterattack to arrest any further development.

The Battalion was billeted in Westoutre, where, at 5.30 on March 14th,
peremptory orders were received to prepare for departure.  At 7 p.m.
the march was begun.  At Zevecoten the Princess Patricias met a
battalion of the King's Royal Rifle Corps, and marched to Dickebush.
At 9.30 it reached the cross roads of Kruistraathoek.  Here a short
halt was made, after which the Battalion reached Voormezeele, where it
was drawn up on the roadside.  While it was in this position reports
were brought in that the Germans were advancing in large numbers
towards the eastern end of Voormezeele.  The Battalion Commander,
therefore, as a precaution against surprise, detailed Number 4 Company
of the Battalion to occupy the position on the east.  Soon after 2 a.m.
orders were received to co-operate with a battalion of the Rifle
Brigade in an attack on the St. Eloi mound, which had been lost early
in the day.  The zone of the operations of the Battalion was to the
east of the Voormezeele-Warneton road.

The following rough diagram may make the position clear:--

[Illustration: Map--the Voormezeele-St. Eloi area]

The actual situation in the front line was still obscure.  It was known
that the mound and certain trenches to the west of it, were in German
hands.  It was also known that towards the east we had lost certain
trenches known to our Intelligence Staff as P and A.  It was uncertain
whether the trench T was still held by our troops.  It was decided, in
a matter in which certainty was unattainable, to proceed towards a farm
building which was an easily recognised objective.  This course at
least promised information, for if trench T had fallen it was certain
that the Battalion would at once be heavily attacked.  If it was still
intact the Battalion would, it was hoped, cover the commencement of an
assault along the German line against trenches A and P and the mound,
successively.

The alternative was to advance southwards with the Battalion right on
the Ypres-St. Eloi road.  The adoption of this plan would have meant
slow progress through the enclosures round St. Eloi, and the subsequent
attack would have been exposed to heavy flanking fire from trenches A
and P.

The progress of the Battalion was necessarily slow; the street in
Voormezeele was full of stragglers.  Touch was difficult to maintain
across country without constant short halts.  It was necessary always
to advance with a screen of scouts thrown out.

It was ascertained in St. Eloi that trench A had been retaken by
British troops.  This knowledge modified the plan provisionally
adopted.  The Battalion altered its objective from the farm building to
a breastwork 200 yards to the west of it.  This point was reached about
twenty minutes before daylight, and an attack was immediately organised
by Number 2 Company against trench P, approaching it from the back of
trench A.  The attack was made in three parties.

The advance was made with coolness and resolution, but the attackers
were met by heavy machine-gun fire from the mound.  No soldiers in the
world could have forced their way through, for the fire swept
everything before it.  It was clear that no hope of a surprise existed,
and to have spent another company upon reinforcement would have been a
useless and bloody sacrifice.  Three platoons were, therefore, detailed
to hold the right of the breastwork in immediate proximity to the
mound, and the rest of the Battalion was withdrawn to Voormezeele,
reaching Dickebush about 8 a.m.[1]

The forces engaged behaved with great steadiness throughout a trying
and unsuccessful night, and at daylight withdrew over open ground
without Voormezeele, reaching Dickebush about 8 a.m.

On March 20th the Battalion sustained a severe loss in the death, by a
stray bullet, of its Commanding Officer, Colonel Farquhar.  He had been
Military Secretary to the Duke of Connaught.  This distinguished
officer had done more for the Battalion than it would be possible in a
short chapter to record.  The Regiment, in fact, was his creation.  A
strict disciplinarian, he was nevertheless deeply beloved in an army
not always patient of discipline tactlessly asserted; he was always
cheerful, always unruffled, and always resourceful.  Lieut.-Colonel H.
C. Buller succeeded him in command of the Regiment.

After the death of Lieut.-Colonel Farquhar, the Battalion again retired
to rest, and it has not since returned to the scene of its earliest
experience in trench warfare.  On April 9th it took up a line on the
Polygone Wood, in the Ypres salient, and there did its round of duty
with the customary relief in billets.  By this time the men were
becoming familiar with their surroundings, and gave play to their
native ingenuity.  Near the trenches they built log huts from trees in
the woods, and it was a common thing for French, Belgian, and British
officers to visit the camp to admire the work of the Regiment.
Breastworks were built also behind the trenches under cover of the
woods, and the trenches themselves were greatly improved.

The Battalion presently moved into billets in the neighbourhood of
Ypres, and on April 20th, during the heavy bombardment of that unhappy
town which preceded the immortal stand of the Canadian Division, it was
ordered to leave billets, and on the evening of that day moved once
again to the trenches.

From April 21st and through the following days of the second battle of
Ypres the Regiment remained in trenches some distance south and west of
the trenches occupied by the Canadian Division They were constantly
shelled with varying intensity, and all through those critical days
waited, with ever-growing impatience, for the order that never came to
take part in the battle to the north, where their kinsmen were
undergoing so cruel an ordeal.

On May 3rd, after the modification of the line to the north, the
Battalion was withdrawn to a subsidiary line some distance in the rear.
From eight in the evening to midnight small parties were silently
withdrawn, until the trenches were held with a rearguard of fifteen men
commanded by Lieut. Lane.  Rapid fire was maintained for more than an
hour, and the rear-guard then withdrew without casualties.

On May 4th the Regiment occupied the new line.  On the morning of that
day a strong enemy attack developed.  This was repulsed with
considerable loss to the assailants, and was followed by a heavy
bombardment throughout the day, which demolished several of the
trenches.  At night the Regiment was relieved by the King's Shropshire
Light Infantry and withdrawn to reserve trenches.  In this unhealthy
neighbourhood no place, by this time, was safe, and on May 5th,
Lieut.-Colonel Buller was unfortunate enough to lose an eye from the
splinter of a shell which exploded 100 yards away.  Major Gault arrived
during the day and took over command.  The Battalion was still in high
spirits, and cheered the arrival of an officer to whom all ranks were
attached.

Just after dark on the night of May 6th, the Battalion returned to the
trenches and relieved the 2nd King's Shropshire Light Infantry.
Throughout the night, and all the following day, it was assailed by a
constant and heavy bombardment.  The roll call on the night of the 7th
showed the strength of the Battalion as 635.

The day that followed was at once the most critical and the most costly
in the history of the Battalion.  Early in the morning, particularly
heavy shelling began on the right flank, soon enfilading the fire
trenches.  At 5.30 it grew in intensity, and gas shells began to fall.
At the same time a number of Germans were observed coming at the double
from the hill in front of the trench.  This movement was arrested by a
heavy rifle fire.

By 6 a.m. every telephone-wire, both to the Brigade Headquarters and
also to the trenches, had been cut.  All signallers, pioneers,
orderlies, and servants at Battalion Headquarters were ordered into the
support trenches, for the needs of the moment left no place for
supernumeraries.  Every single Canadian upon the strength was from that
time forward in one or other of the trenches.  A short and fierce
struggle decided the issue for the time being.  The advance of the
Germans was checked, and those of the enemy who were not either
sheltered by buildings, dead or wounded, crawled back over the crest of
the ridge to their own trenches.  By this time the enemy had two, and
perhaps three, machine-guns in adjacent buildings, and were sweeping
the parapets of both the fire and support trenches.  An orderly took a
note to Brigade Headquarters informing them exactly of the situation of
the Battalion.

About 7 a.m., Major Gault, who had sustained his men by his coolness
and example, was severely hit by a shell in the left arm and thigh.  It
was impossible to move him, and he lay in the trench, as did many of
his wounded companions, in great anguish but without a murmur, for over
ten hours.

The command was taken over by Lieut. Niven, the next senior officer who
was still unwounded.  Heavy Howitzers using high explosives, combined
with field-guns from this moment in a most trying bombardment both on
the fire and support trenches.  The fire trench on the right was blown
to pieces at several points.[2]

At 9 o'clock the shelling decreased in intensity; but it was the lull
before the storm, for the enemy immediately attempted a second infantry
advance.  This attack was received with undiminished resolution.  A
storm of machine-gun and rifle fire checked the assailants, who were
forced, after a few indecisive moments, to retire and take cover.  The
Battalion accounted for large numbers of the enemy in the course of
this attack, but it suffered seriously itself.  Captain Hill, Lieuts.
Martin, Triggs, and De Bay were all wounded at this time.

At half-past nine, Lieut. Niven established contact with the King's Own
Yorkshire Light Infantry on the left, and with the 4th Rifle Brigade on
the right.  Both were suffering heavy casualties from enfilade fire;
and neither, of course, could afford any assistance.  At this time the
bombardment recommenced with great intensity.  The range of our
machine-guns was taken with extreme precision.  All, without exception,
were buried.  Those who served them behaved with the most admirable
coolness and gallantry.  Two were dug out, mounted and used again.  One
was actually disinterred three times and kept in action till a shell
annihilated the whole section.  Corporal Dover stuck to his gun
throughout and, although wounded, continued to discharge his duties
with as much coolness as if on parade.  In the explosion that ended his
ill-fated gun, he lost a leg and an arm, and was completely buried in
the _debris_.  Conscious or unconscious, he lay there in that condition
until dusk, when he crawled out of all that was left of the obliterated
trench, and moaned for help.  Two of his comrades sprang from the
support trench--by this time the fire trench--and succeeded in carrying
in his mangled and bleeding body.  But as all that remained of this
brave soldier was being lowered into the trench a bullet put an end to
his sufferings.  No bullet could put an end to his glory.

At half-past ten the left half of the right fire trench was completely
destroyed; and Lieut.  Denison ordered Lieut. Clarke to withdraw the
remnant of his command into the right communicating trench.  He
himself, with Lieut. Lane, was still holding all that was tenable of
the right fire trench with a few men still available for that purpose.
Lieut. Edwards had been killed.  The right half of the left fire trench
suffered cruelly.  The trench was blown in and the machine-gun put out
of action.  Sergeant Scott, and the few survivors who still answered
the call, made their way to the communication trench, and clung
tenaciously to it, until that, too, was blown in.  Lieut. Crawford,
whose spirits never failed him throughout this terrible day, was
severely wounded.  Captain Adamson, who was handing out small arms
ammunition, was hit in the shoulder, but continued to work with a
single arm.  Sergeant-Major Fraser, who was similarly engaged feeding
the support trenches with ammunition, was killed instantly by a bullet
in the head.  At this time only four officers were left, Lieuts.
Papineau, Vandenberg, Niven, and Clark, of whom the last two began the
war in the ranks.

By 12 a.m. the supply of small arms ammunition badly needed
replenishment.  In this necessity the snipers of the Battalion were
most assiduous in the dangerous task of carrying requests to the
Brigade Headquarters and to the Reserve Battalion, which was in the
rear at Belle-Waarde Lake.  The work was most dangerous, for the ground
which had to be covered was continually and most heavily shelled.  From
12 a.m. to 1.30 p.m.  the Battalion held on under the most desperate
difficulties until a detachment of the 4th Rifle Brigade was sent up in
reinforcement The battered defenders of the support trench recognised
old friends coming to their aid in their moment of extreme trial, and
gave them a loud cheer as they advanced in support.  Lieut. Niven
placed them on the extreme right, in order to protect the Battalion's
flanks.  They remained in line with the Canadian support trenches,
protected by trees and hedges.  They also sent a machine-gun and
section, which rendered invaluable service.

At 2 p.m. Lieut. Niven went with an orderly to the Headquarters, in
obedience to Brigade orders, to telephone to the General Officer
Commanding the Brigade, complete details of the situation.  He returned
at 2.30 p.m.  The orderlies who accompanied him both coming and going
were hit by high explosive shells.

At 3 p.m. a detachment of the 2nd King's Shropshire Light Infantry, who
were also old comrades in arms of the Princess Patricias, reached the
support line with twenty boxes of small arms ammunition.  These were
distributed, and the party bringing them came into line as a
reinforcement, occupying the left end of the support trench.  At four
o'clock the support trenches were inspected, and it was found that
contact was no longer maintained with the regiment on the left, the gap
extending for fifty yards.  A few men (as many as could be spared) were
placed in the gap to do the best they could.  Shortly afterwards news
was brought that the battalions on the left had been compelled to
withdraw, after a stubborn resistance, to a line of trenches a short
distance in the rear.

At this moment the Germans made their third and last attack.  It was
arrested by rifle fire, although some individuals penetrated into the
fire trench on the right.  At this point all the Princess Patricias had
been killed, so that this part of the trench was actually tenantless.
Those who established a footing were few in number, and they were
gradually dislodged; and so the third and last attack was routed as
successfully as those which had preceded it.

The afternoon dragged on, the tale of casualties constantly growing;
and at ten o'clock at night, the company commanders being all dead or
wounded, Lieuts. Niven and Papineau took a roll call.  It disclosed a
strength of 150 rifles and some stretcher-bearers.

At 11.30 at night the Battalion was relieved by the 3rd King's Royal
Rifle Corps.  The relieving unit helped those whom they replaced, in
the last sorrowful duty of burying those of their dead who lay in the
support and communicating trenches.  Those who had fallen in the fire
trenches needed no grave, for the obliteration of their shelter had
afforded a decent burial to their bodies.  Behind the damaged trenches,
by the light of the German flares and amid the unceasing rattle of
musketry, relievers and relieved combined in the last service which one
soldier can render another.  Beside the open graves, with heads
uncovered, all that was left of the Regiment stood, while Lieut. Niven,
holding the Colours of Princess Patricia, battered, bloody, but still
intact, tightly in his hand, recalled all he could remember of the
Church of England service for the dead.  Long after the service was
over the remnant of the Battalion stood in solemn reverie, unable it
seemed to leave their comrades, until the Colonel of the 3rd King's
Royal Rifle Corps gave them positive orders to retire, when, led by
Lieut. Papineau, they marched back, 150 strong, to reserve trenches.
On arrival they were instructed to proceed to another part of the
position, where during the day they were shelled, and lost five killed
and three wounded.

In the evening of the 10th the Battalion furnished a carrying party of
fifty men and one officer for small arms ammunition, and delivered
twenty-five boxes at Belle-Waarde Lake.  One man was killed and two
wounded.  It furnished also a digging party of 100 men, under Lieut.
Clarke, who constructed part of an additional support trench.

On May 13th the Regiment was in bivouac at the rear.  The news arrived
that the 4th Rifle Brigade, their old and trusty comrades in arms, was
being desperately pressed.  Asked to go to the relief, the Princess
Patricias formed a composite Battalion with the 4th King's Royal Rifle
Corps, and successfully made the last exertion which was asked of them
at this period of the war.

On May 15th Major Pelly arrived from England, where he had been
invalided on March 15th, and took over the command from Lieut. Niven,
who, during his period of command, had shown qualities worthy of a
regimental commander of any experience in any army in the world.

At the beginning of June the Princess Patricias took up a trench line
at Armentieres and remained there until the end of August.  In the
middle of July Lieut. C. J. T. Stewart, a brave officer who had been
severely wounded in the early days of the Spring, rejoined the
Battalion.  Other officers returning after wounds, and reinforcements
from Canada, brought the Battalion up to full strength again.

Trench work and digging then alternated with rest.  About the middle of
September the Battalion moved with the 27th Division to occupy a line
of trenches held by the 3rd Army in the south.

When the 27th Division was withdrawn from this line the Princess
Patricias were moved into billets far back from the battle zone, and
for a while the Battalion was detailed to instruct troops arriving for
the 3rd Army.

On November 27th, 1915, they were once again happily reunited with the
Canadian Corps after a long separation.

Such, told purposely in the baldest language, and without attempting
any artifice in rhetoric, is the history of Princess Patricia's Light
Infantry Regiment from the time it reached Flanders till the present
day.

Few, indeed, are left of the men who met in Lansdowne Park to receive
the regimental Colours nearly a year ago; but those who survive, and
the friends of those who have died, may draw solace from the thought
that never in the history of arms have Soldiers more valiantly
sustained the gift and trust of a Lady.



[1] Commenting on the Princess Patricias at St. Eloi, in Nelson's
"History of the War," Mr. John Buchan says:--"Princess Patricia's
Regiment was the first of the overseas troops to be engaged in an
action of first-rate importance, and their deeds were a pride to the
whole Empire--a pride to be infinitely heightened by the glorious
record of the Canadian Division in the desperate battles of April.
This Regiment five days later suffered an irreparable loss in the death
of its Commanding Officer, Col. Francis Farquhar, kindest of friends,
most whimsical and delightful of comrades, and bravest of men."

[2] The German bombardment had been so heavy since May 4th that a wood
which the Regiment had used in part for cover was completely demolished.




CHAPTER IX

THE PRIME MINISTER

The Prime Minister's visit--Passing of Politics--End to domestic
dissensions--The Imperial idea--Sir Robert's foresight--Arrival in
England--At Shorncliffe--Meeting with General Hughes--Review of
Canadian troops--The tour in France--A Canadian base hospital--A
British hospital--Canadian graves--Wounded under canvas--Prince Arthur
of Connaught--Visiting battle scenes--Received by General
Alderson--General Turner's Brigade--Speech to the men--First and Second
Brigades--Sir Robert in the trenches--Cheered by Princess
Patricias--Enemy aeroplanes--Meeting with Sir John French--The Prince
of Wales--With the French Army--General Joffre--A conference in
French--The French trenches--The stricken city of Albert--To Paris--The
French President--Conference with the French War Minister--Shorncliffe
again--Canadian convalescent home--A thousand convalescents--Sir
Robert's emotion--His wonderful speech--End of journey.


"I think I can trace the calamities of this country to the single
source of our not having had steadily before our eyes a general,
comprehensive, well-connected, and well-proportioned view of the whole
of our dominions, and a just sense of their true bearings and
relations."--BURKE.

  "And statesmen at her council met
  Who knew the seasons when to take
  Occasion by the hand, and make
  The bounds of freedom wider yet."
                      --TENNYSON.


The news that the Prime Minister had arranged a visit to England and to
the battlefield in France aroused great and general interest.  Since
the commencement of the titanic struggle which is now convulsing the
world, the standards by which we used to measure statesmen have
undergone great modification.  The gifts of brilliant platform
rhetoric, the arts of partisan debate, the instinct for a conquering
election issue, all these have dwindled before the cruel perspective of
war into their true insignificance.  It is felt here in England to-day,
and not least by some of us who are ourselves chargeable in the matter,
that it will be long before the politicians at home clear themselves at
the inquest of the nation from the charge of having endangered the
safety of the Empire by their absorption in those domestic dissensions
which now seem at once so remote and so paltry.

And there is already at work a tendency to adopt wholly different
standards in measuring men who, in the wasted years which lie behind
us, kept steadfast and undeluded eyes upon the Imperial position; who
thought of it and dreamed of it, and worked for it, when so many others
were preaching disarmament in an armed world, sustaining meanwhile the
combative instinct by the fury with which they flung themselves into
insane domestic quarrels.

Sir Robert Borden's was not, perhaps, a personality which was likely to
make a swift or facile appeal to that collective Imperial opinion whose
conclusions matter so much more than the conclusions of any individual
part of the Empire.  Modest, unassuming, superior to the arts of
advertisement, he never courted a large stage on which to exhibit the
services which he well knew he could render to the Empire.  To-day it
is none the less recognised that Borden has won his place by the side
of Rhodes and Chamberlain and Botha, in that charmed circle of
clear-sighted statesmen whose exertions, we may hope, have saved the
Empire in our generation as surely as Chatham and Pitt and Clive and
Hastings saved it in the crisis of an earlier convulsion.

Sir Robert Borden is the first Colonial statesman who has attended a
British Cabinet, a precedent which may be fruitful in immense
Constitutional developments hereafter.

I wonder whether any of those whose deliberations he assisted recalled
the prescience, and the grave and even noble eloquence, with which Sir
Robert closed his great speech--delivered how short a time ago!--upon
the proposed Canadian contribution to the British Fleet.  The passage
is worth recalling:--


    "The next ten or twenty years will be pregnant with great results
    for this Empire, and it is of infinite importance that questions of
    purely domestic concern, however urgent, shall not prevent any of
    us from rising to the height of this great argument.  But to-day,
    while the clouds are heavy, and we hear the booming of the distant
    thunder, and see the lightning flash above the horizon, we cannot,
    and we will not, wait and deliberate until any impending storm
    shall have burst upon us in fury and with disaster.  Almost
    unaided, the Motherland, not for herself alone, but for us as well,
    is sustaining the burden of a vital Imperial duty, and confronting
    an overmastering necessity of national existence.  Bringing the
    best assistance that we may in the urgency of the moment, we come
    thus to her aid in token of our determination to protect and ensure
    the safety and integrity of this Empire, and of our resolve to
    defend on sea as well as on land our flag, our honour, and our
    heritage."


This gift of wise and spacious speech has been used more than once with
extreme impressiveness--notably at the Guildhall--during the Prime
Minister's recent visit.  "All that," he said, "for which our fathers
fought and bled, all our liberties and institutions, all the influences
for good which penetrate humanity, are in the balance to-day.
Therefore we cannot, because we must not, fail in this war."

It was my duty to accompany Sir Robert Borden on the visit which he
paid to the front, and I gladly embrace this opportunity of
substituting for the stories of bloodshed and glory, which have engaged
my pen so much, the record of a mission which, though peaceful, was of
profound and often of most moving interest.

Sir Robert Borden arrived in England in the middle of July.  On Friday,
the 16th, he motored to Shorncliffe, accompanied by Sir George Parley
and Mr. R. B. Bennett, M.P.  There he met General Hughes.  At nine
o'clock on the morning of the 17th the Canadian troops of the 2nd
Division marched past the Prime Minister.  It was impossible to watch
without emotion, if one came from Canada, this superb body of men
gathered from every part of the Dominion, and animated in all ranks by
the desire to take their place side by side with the 1st Division, and,
if possible, to wrest from the war laurels as glorious as theirs.
Certainly, on the view, no finer body of men could be imagined, and if
to a critical eye it seemed that the tactical efficiency of the Western
regiments was a shade higher than that of the Eastern, the reflection
readily occurred that the whole of the 1st Division was criticised, on
this very ground, and that this war, of all wars, is not to be
determined on the parade ground.

Sir Robert Borden's tour began on Tuesday, July 20th.  Accompanied by
Mr. R. B. Bennett and a military staff, he embarked for France.
Colonel Wilberforce, the Camp Commandant, who had served on the staff
of a former Governor-General of Canada, met him at the pier on his
arrival.  After lunch he visited a Canadian base hospital, commanded by
Colonel McKee, of Montreal.  It was pathetic to see the pleasure of the
wounded at his presence, and the plainness with which they showed it,
in spite of the pain which many of them were suffering.

The next visit was paid to a British hospital, where Sir Robert saw
Captain George Bennett, of the Princess Patricias, who was just
fighting his way back to consciousness after one hundred and
twenty-five days of burning fever.[1]

From the hospital the Prime Minister went to the graveyard, where he
planted seeds of the maple tree on the graves of our dead officers and
men.  The scene was touching, and Sir Robert was deeply moved.  Side by
side with the British dead, lie Captain Muntz, of the 3rd Battalion
Toronto Regiment, Major Ward, of the Princess Patricias, whose fruit
farm in the Okanagan Valley lies fallow, and Lieutenant Campbell, of
the 1st Battalion Ontario Regiment, who won the Victoria Cross and yet
did not live to know it.  How he won it, against what odds, and facing
how certain a death, has been fully told in another chapter.

Sir Robert then visited the McGill College Hospital, commanded by
Colonel Birkett, the Canadian Base Hospital, in charge of Colonel
Shillington, and Colonel Murray MacLaren's Hospital, under canvas, in
the sand dunes fringing the sea.  Everywhere one noticed the same
patience under suffering, the same gratitude for all done to relieve
pain, and the same sincere and simple pleasure that the Prime Minister
of Canada had wished to see them and to thank them.

Perhaps the long corridor tents in the sand dunes impressed themselves
most upon the memory.  The convalescents stood to attention to receive
the Colonial Prime Minister.  Some would not be denied whom the medical
staff would perhaps rather have seen sitting.  Nor was it less moving
to notice how illustrious in private life were many members of the
brilliant staff which had assembled to meet the first citizen of
Canada.  Colonel Murray MacLaren, Colonel Finlay, Colonel Cameron, and
many others, if they ever reflect upon the immense private sacrifices
they have made, would draw rich compensation from the knowledge that
their skill and science have in countless cases brought comfort in the
midst of suffering to the heroic soldiers of Canada.  Sir Robert, in a
few sentences of farewell, made himself the mouthpiece of Canada in
rendering to them a high tribute of respect and gratitude.

Early on Wednesday morning the Prime Minister set forth to visit the
Canadian troops at the front.  He was joined in the course of his
journey by Prince Arthur of Connaught, who came to represent the
Governor-General of Canada.

The road followed took the party near to where Canada, at the second
battle of Ypres, held the left of the British line.  The Prime Minister
examined the position with the greatest care and interest, and looked
upon the ruined city of Ypres, and far in the horizon identified the
shattered remnants of Messines.  And before he left he spoke to those
about him, with deep pride and thankfulness, of those who stood and
died for the honour of Canada in that great critical day in the Western
Campaign.

At noon Sir Robert reached the Canadian Divisional Headquarters, where
he was received by General Alderson.  Two familiar faces were missing
from the number of those who had made the staff dispositions in the
great battle.  Colonel Romer, then Chief General Staff Officer, always
cool, always lucid, always resourceful, had become a Brigadier.  He is
an extremely able officer, and if a layman may hazard a prediction as
to a soldier's future, he has in front of him a very brilliant and
perhaps a very high career.  However brilliant and however long it may
prove, he will never, I think, forget the second battle of Ypres, or
the brave comrades whose exertions it was his duty, under the General,
to co-ordinate and direct.

And we missed, too, the quiet but friendly personality of Colonel Wood
(now Brigadier-General), who had been transferred to Shorncliffe to
organise the Corps Staff.  He has returned again to the front, and is
now in charge of our "Administration."  General Wood spent some years
at the Royal Military College at Kingston, Ontario, and there acquired
a great knowledge of, and sympathy with, the Canadian point of view.
He is devoted to the Canadian troops, of whom he is intensely proud,
and they on their part understand and trust him.

General Alderson accompanied Sir Robert on his visit to the units of
the Division not on duty in the trenches.  The Brigade of General
Turner was commanded for the last time by that officer, for his
soldierly merits have won for him the command of the 2nd Canadian
Division.  The command of his Brigade has been given to
Brigadier-General Leckie, of whom I have frequently written.

Sir Robert addressed the men in a few ringing sentences which excited
the greatest enthusiasm in all ranks.  The men ran after the moving
motor, and the last to desist was Captain Ralph Markham, a gallant
officer, who was unhappily killed a few days after by a chance shell as
he was returning to billets along a communication trench.

The 2nd Brigade, under the command of General Currie, who has since
been given the command of the 1st Division, and the 1st Brigade
(General Mercer) were also visited.  Here it was that Colonel Watson,
of Quebec, marched past at the head of the 2nd Battalion, leading his
men to the trenches.  A capable, brave, and very modest officer, he now
commands a Brigade in the 2nd Canadian Division.

Sir Robert then visited the trenches accompanied by General Alderson
and Brigadier-General Burstall, and after a visit to the Army Service
Corps, under Colonel Simpson, he parted from General Alderson and his
fine command.[2]

His next visit was neither less important nor less interesting, for it
was to the Princess Patricia's Canadian Light Infantry.  The Regiment,
which assembled 500 strong in a field five miles from Canadian
Headquarters, received with cheers, which broke out again and again,
the Prime Minister and the brother of the Princess, under whose name
and favour the Battalion has so bravely fought.  Major Pelly was in
command, the second-in-command being Lieutenant (now Captain) Niven, of
whose deeds I attempted to give some account in the preceding chapter.

The Regiment was formed in three sides of a square and as the Prime
Minister and the Prince advanced, the colours, presented by the
Princess in Lansdowne Park on that great day which seems so long ago,
were ceremoniously unfurled.  And, as the tattered folds spread before
a light breeze, the clouds broke, and there was a moment or two of
bright sunshine.  Overhead two enemy aeroplanes flew, and there
followed them persistently through the sky bursting shells of shrapnel.

The Prime Minister conveyed in simple words a message from the
Governor-General.  The Prince, in plain and soldierly language, spoke
in deep affection of the Regiment whose glory, he said, was so dear to
his sister's heart.  The men were deeply moved.

On his return to Headquarters the Prime Minister was invited to take
part in a conference with the Field-Marshal Commanding-in-Chief and his
Staff.  Among those present was his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales.

It had been arranged that Sir Robert's visit to the French armies--a
visit most courteously and even pressingly suggested by the French
Government--should take place on the conclusion of the conference at
General Headquarters.

Sir Robert was received at a small town, which it would be indiscreet
to name, by General Joffre.  The famous General, who was full of
confidence and hope, was surrounded by one of the most brilliant staffs
which any army in the world could boast.  For a long time he discussed
with the most charming frankness, and the most lucid explanations, the
position and the prospects of the Allied forces in the field.

The French Staff was most anxious to enlarge upon their plans in
conversation with the Prime Minister.  It was interesting, indeed, to
an observer of Canadian birth, to listen to the animated conversation
carried on entirely in French.  What reflections did the interview not
suggest?  The Commander-in-Chief of the Grand Army of France in
conference with the Prime Minister of Canada in the throes of a mighty
war!  Jacques Cartier, Frontenac, De Levis, De Salaberry, Wolfe,
Montcalm, the Heights of Abraham, the far-flung antagonism of the great
French and British nations--how many memories crowded the mind as one
silently watched this historic interview!  And, of all reflections,
perhaps the most insistent was that the bitterest antagonisms of
mankind may be composed in a period relatively very brief.

After a long day in the French trenches, varied by visits to advanced
observation posts, from which the Prime Minister could plainly see the
German front-line trenches, the party returned through the stricken
city of Albert.  The majestic fabric of its ancient cathedral has been
smitten with a heavy hand.  There remain only a scarred and desolate
ruin, and the figure of the Madonna--a true Mater Dolorosa--hung
suspended in mid-air from the mutilated spire.

And so to Paris, with minds saddened indeed by all the misery and the
havoc and the horror, but still full of confidence that right shall yet
conquer wrong, that a period shall yet be assigned to that bloody and
calculated savagery which has swept ever so many fair provinces in
Europe, and has not yet abandoned the hope of dominating the world.

The rest of the week was spent with the Government in Paris and in
discussion with the French President and the Minister of War.  Here
again Sir Robert met with the most distinguished kindness.  Nothing
promising or unpromising in the prospects of the Allies was concealed
from him, and on his departure from Paris the First Citizen of France
conferred upon the First Citizen of Canada the highest order of the
Legion of Honour.

After a visit on the way home to the great Canadian Base Hospital, over
which Colonel Bridges, an officer of the Permanent Force, presides, and
in which Major Keenan, of Montreal and of the Princess Patricias, gives
his services, the party reached Boulogne on Sunday, and were carried
back to English soil again.

Monday morning was spent in visiting the great hospital at Shorncliffe,
which is under the direction of Colonel Scott, of Toronto.  Everywhere
one noticed in the hospitals the same cheerfulness, the same patience
under suffering, and the same unaffected pleasure at the visit of the
Prime Minister.

In the late afternoon the Prime Minister arrived at the Canadian
Convalescent Home, where troops are gathered from all the hospitals in
England, either to return in due course to duty or leave for ever the
military service.  This wonderful organisation is under the direction
of Captain McCombe.  The institution--so largely his creation--is a
shining example of what such a home can become under intelligent and
humane direction.

The convalescents here were over a thousand strong.  Those physically
fit stood to attention.  Others in the blue and white uniform of the
hospital leaned heavily upon their crutches.  Others lay upon their
couches unable to move, but watching and listening intently.  All
Canada was represented, from Halifax to Vancouver.  Here were the
survivors of the battle for the Wood; there a remnant of the heroes who
charged to save the British left.  Here were those brave men who
gloriously assaulted the Orchard; there the veterans of the 1st Ontario
Regiment who attacked on June 15th.

The Prime Minister was profoundly moved.  Flanders had moved him too.
Nor had he escaped deep feeling when he saw the Canadian troops
marching to the trenches.  But not until he came face to face with the
shattered survivors of four glorious battles, did he openly show that
deep spring of emotion and affection which those who saw him will
always cherish as their fondest recollection of him.

The warmth and sincerity of his nature found expression in one of the
most wonderful speeches which he or anyone else has ever made.  It has
not been reported; it cannot be reported, for those who heard him were
themselves too much moved to recollect the words.  But it was a speech
vital with humanity; it was the speech of a father who mourned over
stricken sons, and, closing in a sterner note, it was the speech of one
who foresaw and promised a day of retribution for the conscienceless
race which, with cold calculation, had planned this outrage on humanity.

And so ended the memorable journey.  The narrative attempted here
cannot, of course, be too explicit.  But the writer has not altogether
failed in his purpose if he has shown the dignity, the restraint, the
eloquence, and the wisdom with which the Prime Minister of Canada has
represented our great Dominion among the leading soldiers and statesmen
of Europe.



[1] Since that time Captain Bennett has been brought to England, but
even now he is in a convalescent home and only slowly recovering.

[2] Before returning to England, Sir Robert Borden sent the following
message to General Alderson, which was circulated in Orders of July
30th:--"The fine spirit of the Canadian Division, and their evident
efficiency for the great task in which they are engaged, very deeply
impressed me.  It was a great privilege to have the opportunity of
seeing them, and of conveying to them, from the people of Canada, a
message of pride and appreciation.  As I said on more than one occasion
in addressing the officers and men, they can hardly realise how
intensely all Canada has been thrilled by the tidings of their
achievements.  The President of the French Republic, as well as General
Joffre and Sir John French, spoke of the troops under your command in
terms of the highest praise.  I bid you God speed in the great task in
which you are engaged."




CHAPTER X

THE CANADIAN CORPS

Tranquil Canadian lines---German reconnaissance--Incident at "Plug
Street"--Pte. Bruno saves Capt. Tidy--A sniper's month--Sharpshooters'
compact--Sergt. Ballendine--The Ross rifle--"No Man's Land"--Our
bombers--Sergt. William Tabernacle--His new profession--General Sir Sam
Hughes' visit--Canadian patriotism--Civilian armies--"Last Word of
Kings"--Art of the "soldier's speech"--Lord Kitchener's
inspiration--Lord Roberts and the Indians--General Hughes arrives in
France--At British Headquarters--Consultation with King Albert--Meeting
with Prince Alexander of Teck--Conference with General Alderson--The
second Canadian Contingent--In the firing line--Many friends--General
Burstall's artillery--Inspection of cavalry--Meeting with Prince of
Wales--The Princess Patricias--Conference with Sir Douglas
Haig--General Hughes' suggestions--Meeting with General Foch--Impressed
with General Joffre--The ruin at Rheims--General Hughes' message on
departure--A quiet August--The Canadian Corps--General Alderson's New
Command--An appreciation of a gallant Commander--Conclusion.


    "Fortes a fortibus creantur."
  Brave men are created by brave men.


Save for the great interest aroused by the visit of the Prime Minister,
Sir Robert Borden, an almost uncanny tranquillity reigned along the
whole Canadian front during the month of July.

The enemy soon became aware that new troops had taken up the position,
and reconnaissance parties were very active in endeavouring to
ascertain precisely what troops they now had opposite them.  They had
probably caught a few words from our trenches which were sufficient to
tell them that they were now opposed to Canadians, and they were no
doubt anxious to discover whether they were confronted by the
experienced veterans who had proved their qualities at Ypres, or
whether their opponents were the soldiers of the 2nd Division, as yet
fresh to the field of war.

We, for our part, had a similar curiosity.  We, too, were anxious to
discover the identity and, therefore, the quality, of the men whose
trenches it was our lot to watch by night and by day.

Knowing, however, that their reconnaissance parties were moving about,
we were content to bide our time--to await the opportunity of seizing
upon one of their detachments when they were either careless, ill-led,
or over-bold.

That opportunity came at "Plug Street" at half-past eight on the
morning of July 27th.  One of the observers of the 3rd Battalion
(Toronto Regiment) reported a party of the enemy in the wild wheat,
never to be garnered, growing between the British and German lines.  It
was then that Captain Tidy, with Private Bruno, who had joined the
Battalion at Valcartier from the Queen's Own of Toronto, and two other
privates of the names of Candlish and Subervitch, left the trenches and
crawled out to take the enemy by surprise.  In this they were
successful.  Two of the Germans surrendered the moment they were
covered by Captain Tidy's pistol; but the third, though putting up his
hands at first, lowered them again and fired at the officer.  At this,
Bruno, who was in a crouching position among the wheat, fired two shots
from the hip and killed the treacherous German.  The party returned
safely with their two prisoners, though the whole affair had taken
place in full view of the German trenches.  The prisoners, when
questioned, stated that they had been sent out during the night in the
hope that they would be able to identify our troops.

July was a sniper's month.  True, every month is a sniper's month; the
great game of sniping never wanes, but the inactivity in other methods
of fighting left the field entirely free for the sharpshooter in July.

It was during the fighting at Givenchy in June, 1915, that four snipers
of the 8th Canadian Battalion (Winnipeg Rifles) agreed to record their
professional achievements from that time forward on the wood of their
rifles.

Private Ballendine, one of the four, is from Battleford.  He is tall
and loosely built.  In his swarthy cheeks, black eyes, and straight
black hair, he shows his right to claim Canadian citizenship by many
generations of black-haired, sniping ancestors.  He learned to handle a
rifle with some degree of skill at the age of ten years, and he has
been shooting ever since.  At the present time he carries thirty-six
notches on the butt of his rifle.  Each notch stands for a dead
German--to the best of Ballendine's belief.  One notch, cut longer and
deeper into the brown wood than me others, means an officer.

To date, Private Smith, of Roblin, Manitoba, has scratched the wood of
his rifle only fourteen times; but he is a good shot, has faith in his
weapon, and looks hopefully to the future.

Private McDonald, of Port Arthur, displays no unseemly elation over his
score of twenty-six.

Private Patrick Riel makes a strong appeal to the imagination, though
his tally is less than McDonald's by two or three.  He is a descendant
of the late Louis Riel, and when he enlisted in the 90th Winnipeg
Rifles at the outbreak of the war, and was told by one of his officers
that his regiment had done battle against his cousin Louis at Fish
Creek and Batoche, he showed only a mild interest in this trick of
Time.  Riel, like McDonald, comes from Port Arthur way.  Before the war
he earned his daily bacon and tobacco as a foreman of lumber-jacks on
the Kaministiquia River.

The weapons used by these four snipers are Ross rifles, remodelled to
suit their peculiar and particular needs.  Each is mounted with a
telescopic sight, and from beneath the barrel of each much of the wood
of the casing has been cut away.  The men do their work by day, as the
telescopic sight is not good for shooting in a poor light.  They are
excused all fatigues while in the trenches and go about their grim
tasks without hint or hindrance from their superiors.  They choose
their own positions from which to observe the enemy and to fire upon
him--sometimes in leafy covers behind our front-line trench, sometimes
behind our parapet.  Very little of their work is done in the "No Man's
Land" between the hostile lines, for there danger from the enemy is
augmented by the chance of a shot from some zealous but mistaken
comrade.  The mention of "No Man's Land" reminds me that, on the
Canadian front, this desolate and perilous strip of land is now called
"Canada."  The idea is that our patrols have the upper hand here, night
and day--that we govern the region, though we have not stationed any
Governor or Resident Magistrate there as yet.

Our bombers, too, are an interesting and peculiar body of men, evolved
by the needs of this warfare from all classes.  Sergeant William
Tabernacle is a bomber.  He has lived for so long in an environment of
cramped quarters, alternating five days and five nights of narrow
trenches and low dug-outs, with five days and five nights of
circumscribed huts in the reserve lines, week after week, month after
month, that he sometimes wonders if the pictures in the back of his
mind--pictures of dry-floored houses, wide beds, and secure
streets--are memories or only dreams.  At first, for a little while, he
fretted after the soft things of the old, soft life in far-away Canada;
but now he is content to shape his life and live it only from day to
day, to question the future as little as to review the past.  The
things that matter to William now are the things of the moment--the
trench mortars behind the opposite parapet, the guns screened in the
wood behind our own lines, food, and his ration of rum.

William loves bombs, though he had never heard of such things before
the war and had never believed in them until two exploded near him, in
the first trench of his experience--long ago, before the Second Battle
of Ypres.  It seems that he brought to France with him, all unknown to
himself or his comrades, an instinctive understanding of and affection
for every variety of explosive missile.  He grasped the idea and
intention of this phase of warfare in a flash--in the flash of his
first hostile grenade.  He was told to be a bomber; so he became a
bomber, and everything he threw exploded with precision.  His Colonel
made a Corporal of him.  As Corporal he added to his duties of throwing
bombs the work of overhauling the bombs of others and of manufacturing
a few on his own account.  He became a Sergeant--and now he is an
accepted authority on bombs.  He makes them, repairs them, assembles
them, takes care of them, issues them to his men, and sometimes heaves
a few himself, just to show the youngsters how the trick is done.

Nothing comes amiss to William.  Bombs and grenades that enter his
trench and fail to explode are quickly investigated, and, sooner or
later, are returned to their original owners in working order.  Rifle
grenades that explode in William's vicinity never fail to attract his
attention, and while others attend to the wounded he looks for the
stick.  Finding the stick, he immediately welds it to the base of a
small, cone-shaped bomb from his own stores--and, behold, a rifle
grenade of superior quality all ready to be fired against the enemy's
loopholes.

William is considered by some to have grown peculiar in his habits.
His dug-out is hung and cluttered with the materials and tools and
weapons of his trade.  He fondles specimens of British, French, and
German bombs, even as old ladies back in Canada fondle their
grandchildren.  He expatiates on their good points and their defects.
He has his favourites, of course, and should anyone venture to belittle
the fuse, the detonating charge, or the explosive quality of one of his
favourites, he becomes arrogant, ill-mannered, and quarrelsome.

William lives to-day for the explosion of to-morrow.  If he were Lord
Kitchener doubtless this war would end very suddenly, some fine day, in
a rending crash that would split and rip these fair lands from the sea
to the high hills.

William is a Canadian.  Before the war his fellow-countrymen believed
that he lacked ambition and smoked too many cigarettes.  But here he is
doing his queer work, in his own queer way, in a trench in the Low
Countries--one of the hardest rivets to break or bend in that long
barrier which the fighting legions of Germany can neither bend nor
break.

One cannot help wondering what William will do for excitement when he
returns to that little town in Ontario--if ever he does return.
Perhaps, an Uncle Toby of the New World, he will tell, "with
remembrances," the story of how he "fought in Flanders" on the old soil
and with the old weapons.

      *      *      *      *      *

At the beginning of August the men were cheered by a welcome visitor
from home--Major-General Sir Sam Hughes, K.C.B., whom the men naturally
regard as the father of the Canadian Contingent.

The passionate love of country, the lofty, if inarticulate, patriotism
which called men from the lumber camp and the mine, the desk and the
store, was expressed in the formation of great armies, by the guiding
hand of the Minister of Militia.

At that supreme moment in our country's history, when Canada was at the
cross roads of her destiny, she was indeed happy in the possession of
the man who gathered in and marshalled, with a speed and noble energy
seldom, if ever, equalled, the hosts of willing but untrained civilians
who came rushing from the Pacific Coast, the Rockies, the grain-belt,
the Western Prairie, and the fields and forests and cities of the East,
to offer themselves to the Empire in her hour of need.

It is unnecessary to dwell upon the efforts which in a few weeks
assembled the first armies of Canada, armies which were in a brief
period to prove that they were able to meet on equal terms the military
brood of the great Frederick.  Indeed, properly to enforce the true
spirit and meaning of Canada's great arming, one cannot insist too
strongly on the wonderful fact that by a supreme effort of
organisation, men who had, in the main, passed their lives in peaceful
pursuits, were forged into an army fitted to face with honour and
success the highly trained hordes of a nation steeped for centuries in
the traditions of militarism.

These gallant men of ours have displayed a valour which has never been
surpassed; they have become versed in the arts of war with a
thoroughness and swiftness which gives them a superb confidence, even
when faced by overwhelming numbers of the Kaiser's hosts.  And they are
full of a great joy and a great pride when they consider that new-born
civilian armies have done so much.

Every Canadian soldier, too, is heartened by an appreciation of the
fact that in every detail of arms, equipment, and supply, the
organisation behind him works ceaselessly to make every Canadian unit
as perfect a fighting machine as can be.  They know that, thanks to
Major-General Carson, the Agent of the Militia Department in England,
all their requirements for fighting purposes are thought out in
advance, and provided to the last detail in more than good time.  Such
confidence makes for material well-being, and a spirit of intuitive
military flair does the rest.

General Hughes is a business soldier, though he possesses a true
soldier's heart.  A soldier is popularly supposed to be a silent man.
When the statesmen and the politicians have ceased talking, when all
their speeches have been of no avail and it is left to the guns to
speak "the last word of Kings," the civilian believes that his military
leaders are not in the habit of speechmaking.  That idea, however, is
profoundly mistaken.  A study of military history shows that all great
leaders who have inspired troops to resist to the death when disaster
appeared to be certain, and all great leaders who have victoriously led
assaults which seemed the very children of despair, have had the
capacity of making what in armies is known as a "soldier's speech."

It is an art which cannot be cultivated.  It is the instinctive
knowledge of precisely the right road to the soldier's heart at the
supreme moment when an appeal may make all the difference between
success or failure.[1]

War makes men's minds simple and sentimental.  Without sentiment,
armies could never, in free communities, be got together, and armies
could never be led.  Lord Kitchener proved that he had a very great
understanding of the art of the "soldier's speech" when he issued his
message to the Expeditionary Force on the eve of its sailing for
France.  It made an ineffaceable impression on the men, and its
inspiration saw them through the bitter hours of the long retreat from
Mons.

Just before his death Lord Roberts made a speech to the Indian troops,
from which they drew a fervour which carried them through many a bloody
welter, in which the best soldiers in the world might have succumbed.

The Military Correspondent of _The Times_, too, has borne witness to
the fact that Sir John French knows precisely what to say to reach and
stir the soldier's heart.

And General Hughes has the same gift.  He employed it well when he
spoke to the troops he had come to visit.  He did not say much, but his
words had an electrical effect upon the men's patriotism, and
strengthened them to fight even more sternly than they had already done
for freedom; while, in the contemplation of soldierly glory, he made
them forget the horrors and losses of the preceding months.

It was on Thursday, August 5th, that the Minister for War crossed from
Folkestone to Boulogne on a British destroyer, accompanied by
Brigadier-General Lord Brooke, acting A.D.C. to Lord Kitchener, and
Lieut.-Colonel Carrick, M.P., the Canadian representative at the
General Headquarters of the British Army in France.  At Boulogne the
party was met by Captain Frederick Guest, M.P., A.D.C. to Sir John
French.

Early the following morning Sir Sam Hughes motored to the British
Headquarters, where he was received by the Commander-in-Chief.  After a
brief meeting, the party motored to Belgian Headquarters, whence they
made a tour of the Belgian lines and inspected the Belgian trenches.

Later, the Minister met King Albert in a little cottage on the
seashore, and there, with the King, he went thoroughly into the whole
Belgian position, and in particular the Belgian defences, while shells
were whistling unceasingly overhead.  That night he returned to the
British Headquarters, where he met Prince Alexander of Teck, who, until
the outbreak of the war, was Governor-General Designate of Canada.

The next day, accompanied by Prince Alexander, the Minister met General
Alderson and his Staff near Armentieres.  And it was deeply interesting
to watch the meeting between these two men--the man who had called the
Canadian Army into being, and the man who commanded it in the field.

It was at this time that discussions took place and decisions were
reached in regard to sending the 2nd Canadian Division to join the Army
in France.

From that meeting the two Generals went straight into the firing line,
and General Hughes made an inspection of the men he had come so far to
see.  He noted how cheerful, fit, and well the men were, in spite of
the perils and hardships they had undergone.

Along the line of trenches the General met many officers and men he
knew.  All of them knew him.  There were delighted greetings, quick
handclasps, and brief exchanges of conversation, from which radiated
pride, heartiness, and good sense.

Later, the Minister went up to the main artillery observation post, and
here General Burstall gave a very effective exhibition of what Canadian
guns can do.  But it was a demonstration which called forth a reply
from the German trenches, and soon enemy shells were screaming inwards.

Next the General inspected Strathcona's Horse, the Royal Canadian
Dragoons, and 2nd King Edward's Horse, under Brigadier-General the
Right Hon. J. C. Seely, M.P., with whose soldierly mind and strangely
similar personality the Minister found himself in accord.

That evening, on his return to the British Headquarters, he dined with
Sir John French and the Prince of Wales.

On the Sunday morning the General inspected the Princess Patricias, and
later in the day he spent some time with General Sir Douglas Haig.  Sir
Douglas realised at once General Hughes' gift for the appreciation of
military positions, and went very fully with him into the defences of
the 1st Army.  It must afford Canadians not only satisfaction, but
pride, to know that their Minister was able to make suggestions of
great value.  Then the General set out for Festubert and Givenchy.
Afterwards came the inspection of the Royal Canadian Horse Artillery
under Colonel Panet.

On Monday morning the Minister motored to the Headquarters of General
Foch, and the meeting was a pleasant one because the two men were old
friends.  They had been companions on three successive years at British
and French Army manoeuvres, and they had much to discuss as, during the
afternoon, they traversed the French lines.  Major-General Hughes spent
the evening with the French Generalissimo, with whose clear, bold
thinking and kindly but robust personality he was much impressed.

On Tuesday he went to Rheims, where he was met by General D'Espere, of
the French 1st Army, in whose company he witnessed the terrible traces
of recent heavy fighting--shattered caissons, splintered gun carriages,
and ruined buildings, and, above all, that towering monument to German
"frightfulness"--the shattered mass of the great cathedral.

The next day Major-General Hughes proceeded to Paris, where he was
entertained by Lord Bertie, the British Ambassador, and met the
President of the Republic and the French Minister of War.

He returned to England as he had come, in a destroyer.

Before sailing from Liverpool, the Minister wrote the following
farewell, which was made known to the troops through Orders of the
Day:--


    "In departing for Canada, it is my desire to thank all the splendid
    forces--Canadians of whom we are so justly proud--at the front, for
    their splendid services to King, country, and the glorious cause of
    Liberty.

    "When these troops left Valcartier last year and sailed from
    Canadian shores, I took the liberty of predicting that when they
    met the foe they would give an account of themselves that would
    reflect honour upon the glorious Empire whose liberties we are all
    endeavouring to maintain.

    "The highest predictions have been more than fulfilled.

    "I am leaving you all more than ever proud of our gallant boys.

    "They have already earned the recognition of a grateful country.
    Throughout whatever trials these valiant soldiers may pass, they
    will be encouraged and strengthened by the thought that behind
    them, in Canada, those near and dear to them realise that their
    duty will be done fearlessly and well.

    "May kind heaven guard and prosper these brave fellows in their
    great struggle.

    "(Sgd.) SAM HUGHES, Major-General,
   "Minister of Militia and Defence."


      *      *      *      *      *

August passed quietly by.[2]  The enemy sometimes shelled our trenches,
but never heavily, and the Canadians enjoyed a comparatively peaceful
summer month.

In the early days of September the Canadian Government determined, in
response to the requirements and necessities of the Empire, to furnish
another Division, thus placing a complete Army Corps in the field.

It was a matter of intense gratification to the Canadians that General
Alderson, who had so brilliantly led the 1st Division in the terrible
and hard-fought battles in Flanders, was appointed to command the Corps.

General Alderson is a soldier with great experience and with great
military gifts, and, above all, a genius for the leadership of men.

Apart from his qualities as a soldier, however, a simple and noble
personality illumines his character.  It is not too much to say that
every officer and man under his command loves and trusts him.  Not
only, however, have they confidence in his military leadership, but
they know that in his personality, and in his whole outlook upon
humanity, he is to be respected and trusted too.

With the arrival in France of the 2nd Division,[3] and the formation of
the Canadian Army Corps, a point is reached which clearly marks the end
of the first phase of Canada's part in the world war.

Henceforth we shall be represented in the field by an Army Corps, a
noble contribution to the necessity of the Empire.  When we
contemplate, quite apart from their moral value, the immense material
contributions which the Dominions have made to this campaign, we may
reflect with irony upon the strange errors of which many brilliant men
are capable.

Professor Goldwin Smith wrote of the Canadians:--"Judge whether these
men are likely to pour out their blood without stint for the British
connection; see at least first, whether they are ready to pour out a
little money or to reduce their duties on your goods."  And he joyfully
quoted Cobden.  "Loyalty is an ironical term to apply to people who
neither obey our orders nor hold themselves liable to fight our
battles."

We may perhaps be permitted to hope that the study of the past is
sometimes more helpful to those who presume to foretell the future.

The 2nd Division cannot fail to be inspired by the superb example of
that with which it is linked.  It has the advantage of being commanded
by a most distinguished and experienced officer, Major-General Turner,
V.C., the Brigadier-General Turner who held the left at Ypres in the
great days of April.

Of all the officers of high rank fighting to-day in Flanders, none is
more modest, none more resourceful, none more chivalrous.  He is in
Canada a great national figure.  Conspicuous among the heroes of Ypres,
he will in his new position write his record in Flanders, in letters
not indeed more glorious, but upon a larger slate.

And here for the present we take leave of the Canadians in Flanders.
After incredible hardships patiently supported, after desperate battles
stubbornly contested, their work is still incomplete.  But they will
complete it, meeting new necessities with fresh exertions, for it is
the work of Civilisation and of Liberty.



[1] The classic example of this form of eloquence is contained in
Napoleon's address to the Army of Italy, made on April 26th, 1796.

"Soldiers!  In fifteen days you have won six victories, captured
twenty-one flags, fifty-five guns, several fortresses, conquered the
richest part of Piedmont: you have made 15,000 prisoners: you have
killed or wounded nearly 10,000 men.

"Until now you have fought for barren rocks.  Lacking everything, you
have accomplished everything.  You have won battles without cannon,
crossed rivers without bridges, made forced marches without boots,
bivouacked without brandy, and often without bread.  Only the phalanx
of the Republic, only the soldiers of Liberty, could endure the things
that you have suffered.

"There are more battles before you, more cities to capture, more rivers
to cross.  You all burn to carry forward the glory of the French
people; to dictate a glorious peace; and to be able when you return to
your villages to exclaim with pride, 'I belonged to the conquering army
of Italy.'"

[2] It was on August 1st that the enemy carried out a severe
bombardment of a location known as "Ration Farm," opposite Messines,
which drove the men of Major Hesketh's squadron of Strathcona's Horse,
who were in reserve, into their dug-outs.  The farm was hit repeatedly,
and suddenly sounds as of heavy machine-gun fire were heard coming from
the midst of the shattered buildings.  Major Hesketh left his dug-out
and entered the farm to investigate.  He saw that the magazine,
containing 100,000 rounds of ammunition with the reserve supply of
bombs and grenades, had been pierced and set on fire by a high
explosive shell.  In spite of the fact that the position was still
under persistent shell fire, that the small-arms ammunition was
exploding rapidly under the influence of the heat, and that the entire
contents of the magazine was likely to explode at any moment, Major
Hesketh fought the fire with sacks and extinguished it.

[3] Prior to its departure for France the 2nd Division was commanded by
General Sam Steele, C.B., M.V.O., a distinguished Canadian soldier and
a distinguished Canadian citizen.  General Steele's military experience
dates from the days of the Red River Expedition, and his appointment
was much appreciated by the officers and troops of the 2nd Division
during their period of training.  He has since joined the Imperial
Service, and is now the General Officer Commanding at Shorncliffe.




APPENDIX I

THE KING'S MESSAGE TO THE CANADIANS.

To the First Division.

On February 4th, 1915, His Majesty the King inspected the 1st Canadian
Division on Salisbury Plain, and afterwards wrote a message to the
troops, which was read to all units on board ship after their
embarkation for France.  The full text of the message is as follows:--


    Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers, and Men:

    At the beginning of November I had the pleasure of welcoming to the
    Mother Country this fine contingent from the Dominion of Canada,
    and now, after three months' training, I bid you Godspeed on your
    way to assist my Army in the field.

    I am well aware of the discomforts that you have experienced from
    the inclement weather and abnormal rain, and I admire the cheerful
    spirit displayed by all ranks in facing and overcoming all
    difficulties.

    From all I have heard, and from what I have been able to see at
    to-day's inspection and march-past, I am satisfied that you have
    made good use of the time spent on Salisbury Plain.

    By your willing and prompt rally to our common flag you have
    already earned the gratitude of the Motherland.

    By your deeds and achievements on the field of battle I am
    confident that you will emulate the example of your
    fellow-countrymen in the South African War, and thus help to secure
    the triumph of our arms.

    I shall follow with pride and interest all your movements.  I pray
    that God may bless you and watch over you.



To the Second Division.

On September 2nd, 1915, the King, accompanied by Lord Kitchener,
inspected the 2nd Division in Beachborough Park, Shorncliffe.  Before
leaving, His Majesty directed General Turner to inform all Commanding
Officers that he considered the Division one of the finest he had
inspected since the beginning of the war.  Subsequently the following
message from the King was published in Orders:--


    Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers, and Men of the 2nd Canadian
    Division--six months ago I inspected the 1st Canadian Division
    before their departure for the front.  The heroism they have since
    shown upon the field of battle has won for them undying fame.  You
    are now leaving to join them, and I am glad to have an opportunity
    of seeing you to-day, for it has convinced me that the same spirit
    that animated them inspires you also.  The past weeks at
    Shorncliffe have been for you a period of severe and rigorous
    training; and your appearance at this inspection testifies to the
    thoroughness and devotion to duty with which your work has been
    performed.  You are going to meet hardships and dangers, but the
    steadiness and discipline which have marked your bearing on parade
    to-day will carry you through all difficulties.  History will never
    forget the loyalty and readiness with which you rallied to the aid
    of your Mother Country in the hour of danger.  My thoughts will
    always be with you.  May God bless you and bring you victory.





APPENDIX II

CANADIANS IN DESPATCHES.

The following are extracts from the official despatches of
Field-Marshal Sir John French, Commander-in-Chief of the British Forces
in France, dealing with the battles and other fighting in which the
Canadian troops have taken part:--


PRINCESS PATRICIA'S REGIMENT.

With regard to these inspections, I may mention in particular the fine
appearance presented by the 27th and 28th Divisions, composed
principally of battalions which had come from India.

Included in the former Division was the Princess Patricia's Royal
Canadian Regiment.  They are a magnificent set of men, and have since
done excellent work in the trenches.

Sir John French's Despatch, February 2nd, 1915.


  PRINCESS PATRICIAS' ATTACK AT
  ST. ELOI, FEBRUARY 28th, 1915.

On February 28th a successful minor attack was made on the enemy's
trenches near St. Eloi by small parties of the Princess Patricia's
Canadian Light Infantry.  The attack was divided into three small
groups, the whole under the command of Lieutenant Crabbe: No. 1 group
under Lieutenant Papineau, No. 2 group under Sergeant Patterson, and
No. 3 group under Company Sergeant-Major Lloyd.

The head of the party got within fifteen or twenty yards of the German
trench and charged; it was dark at the time (about 5.15 a.m.).

Lieutenant Crabbe, who showed the greatest dash and _elan_, took his
party over everything in the trench until they had gone down it about
eighty yards, when they were stopped by a barricade of sandbags and
timber.  This party, as well as the others, then pulled down the front
face of the German parapet.  A number of Germans were killed and
wounded, and a few prisoners were taken.

The services performed by this distinguished corps have continued to be
very valuable since I had occasion to refer to them in my last
despatch.  They have been most ably organised, trained, and commanded
by Lieut.-Colonel F. D. Farquhar, D.S.O., who, I deeply regret to say,
was killed while superintending some trench work on March 20th.  His
loss will be deeply felt.

Sir John French's Despatch, April 5th, 1915.


  PRINCESS PATRICIA'S REGIMENT
  --ATTACK ON ST. ELOI,
  MARCH 14th, 1915.

It is satisfactory to be able to record that, though the troops
occupying the first line of trenches were at first overwhelmed, they
afterwards behaved very gallantly in the counter-attack for the
recovery of the lost ground, and the following units earned and
received the special commendation of the Army Commander.  The 2nd Royal
Irish Fusiliers, the 2nd Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry, the 1st
Leinster Regiment, the 4th Rifle Brigade, and the Princess Patricia's
Canadian Light Infantry.

Sir John French's Despatch, April 5th, 1915.


  ARRIVAL OF CANADIAN DIVISION--
  NEUVE CHAPELLE.

On February 15th the Canadian Division began to arrive in this country.
I inspected the Division, which was under the command of Lieut.-General
E. A. H. Alderson, C.B., on February 20th.

They presented a splendid and most soldier-like appearance on parade.
The men were of good physique, hard, and fit.  I judged by what I saw
of them that they were well trained, and quite able to take their
places in the line of battle.

Since then the Division has thoroughly justified the good opinion I
formed of it.

The troops of the Canadian Division were first attached for a few days
by brigades for training in the 3rd Corps trenches under Lieut.-General
Sir William Pulteney, who gave me such an excellent report of their
efficiency that I was able to employ them in the trenches early in
March.

During the battle of Neuve Chapelle they held a part of the line
allotted to the 1st Army, and although they were not actually engaged
in the main attack, they rendered valuable help by keeping the enemy
actively employed in front of their trenches.

All the soldiers of Canada serving in the army under my command have so
far splendidly upheld the traditions of the Empire, and will, I feel
sure, prove to be a great source of additional strength to the forces
in this country.

Sir John French's Despatch, April 5th, 1915.


SECOND BATTLE OF YPRES.

It was at the commencement of the second battle of Ypres, on the
evening of April 22nd, referred to in Paragraph 1 of this report, that
the enemy first made use of asphyxiating gas.

Some days previously I had complied with General Joffre's request to
take over the trenches occupied by the French, and on the evening of
the 22nd the troops holding the line east of Ypres were posted as
follows:--

From Steenstraate to the east of Langemarck, as far as the Poelcappelle
road, a French division.

Thence, in a south-easterly direction towards the
Passchendaele-Becelaere road, the Canadian Division.

Thence a division took up the line in a southerly direction east of
Zonnebeke to a point west of Becelaere, whence another division
continued the line south-east to the northern limit of the corps on its
right.

Of the 5th Corps there were four battalions in divisional reserve about
Ypres; the Canadian Division had one battalion in divisional reserve,
and the 1st Canadian Brigade in army reserve.  An infantry brigade,
which had just been withdrawn after suffering heavy losses on Hill 60,
was resting about Vlamertinghe.

Following a heavy bombardment, the enemy attacked the French Division
about 5 p.m., using asphyxiating gases for the first time.  Aircraft
reported that at about 5 p.m. thick yellow smoke had been seen issuing
from the German trenches between Langemarck and Bixschoote.  The French
reported that two simultaneous attacks had been made east of the
Ypres-Staden railway, in which these asphyxiating gases had been
employed.

What followed almost defies description.  The effect of these poisonous
gases was so virulent as to render the whole of the line held by the
French Division mentioned above practically incapable of any action at
all.  It was at first impossible for anyone to realise what had
actually happened.  The smoke and fumes hid everything from sight, and
hundreds of men were thrown into a comatose or dying condition, and
within an hour the whole position had to be abandoned, together with
about fifty guns.

I wish particularly to repudiate any idea of attaching the least blame
to the French Division for this unfortunate incident.

After all the examples our gallant Allies have shown of dogged and
tenacious courage in the many trying situations in which they have been
placed throughout the course of this campaign, it is quite superfluous
for me to dwell on this aspect of the incident, and I would only
express my firm conviction that if any troops in the world had been
able to hold their trenches in the face of such a treacherous and
altogether unexpected onslaught, the French Division would have stood
firm.

The left flank of the Canadian Division was thus left dangerously
exposed to serious attack in flank, and there appeared to be a prospect
of their being overwhelmed and of a successful attempt by the Germans
to cut off the British troops occupying the salient to the east.

In spite of the danger to which they were exposed, the Canadians held
their ground with a magnificent display of tenacity and courage; and it
is not too much to say that the bearing and conduct of these splendid
troops averted a disaster which might have been attended with the most
serious consequences.

They were supported with great promptitude by the reserves of the
Divisions holding the salient and by a Brigade which had been resting
in billets.

Throughout the night the enemy's attacks were repulsed, effective
counter-attacks were delivered, and at length touch was gained with the
French right, and a new line was formed.

      *      *      *      *      *

The 2nd London Heavy Battery, which had been attached to the Canadian
Division, was posted behind the right of the French Division, and,
being involved in their retreat, fell into the enemy's hands.  It was
recaptured by the Canadians in their counter-attack, but the guns could
not be withdrawn before the Canadians were again driven back.

During the night I directed the Cavalry Corps and the Northumbrian
Division, which was then in general reserve, to move to the west of
Ypres, and placed these troops at the disposal of the General Officer
Commanding the 2nd Army.  I also directed other reserve troops from the
3rd Corps and the 1st Army to be held in readiness to meet
eventualities.

In the confusion of the gas and smoke the Germans succeeded in
capturing the bridge at Steenstraate and some works south of Lizerne,
all of which were in occupation by the French.

The enemy having thus established himself to the west of the Ypres
Canal, I was somewhat apprehensive of his succeeding in driving a wedge
between the French and Belgian troops at this point.

I directed, therefore, that some of the reinforcements sent north
should be used to support and assist General Putz, should he find
difficulty in preventing any further advance of the Germans west of the
canal.

At about ten o'clock on the morning of the 23rd connection was finally
ensured between the left of the Canadian Division and the French right,
about eight hundred yards east of the canal; but as this entailed the
maintenance by the British troops of a much longer line than that which
they had held before the attack commenced on the previous night, there
were no reserves available for counter-attack until reinforcements
which were ordered up from the Second Army were able to deploy to the
east of Ypres.

      *      *      *      *      *

Early on the morning of the 23rd I went to see General Foch, and from
him I received a detailed account of what had happened, as reported by
General Putz.  General Foch informed me that it was his intention to
make good the original line and regain the trenches which the French
Division had lost.  He expressed the desire that I should maintain my
present line, assuring me that the original position would be
re-established in a few days.  General Foch further informed me that he
had ordered up large French reinforcements, which were now on their
way, and that troops from the north had already arrived to reinforce
General Putz.

I fully concurred in the wisdom of the General's wish to re-establish
our old line, and agreed to co-operate in the way he desired,
stipulating, however, that if the position was not re-established
within a limited time I could not allow the British troops to remain in
so exposed a situation as that which the action of the previous
twenty-four hours had compelled them to occupy.

During the whole of the 23rd the enemy's artillery was very active, and
his attacks all along the front were supported by some heavy guns which
had been brought down from the coast in the neighbourhood of Ostend.

The loss of the guns on the night of the 22nd prevented this fire from
being kept down, and much aggravated the situation.  Our positions,
however, were well maintained by the vigorous counter-attacks made by
the 5th Corps.

During the day I directed two Brigades of the 3rd Corps and the Lahore
Division of the Indian Corps to be moved up to the Ypres area and
placed at the disposal of the 2nd Army.

In the course of these two or three days many circumstances combined to
render the situation east of the Ypres Canal very critical and most
difficult to deal with.

The confusion caused by the sudden retirement of the French Division,
and the necessity for closing up the gap and checking the enemy's
advance at all costs, led to a mixing-up of units and a sudden shifting
of the areas of command, which was quite unavoidable.  Fresh units, as
they came up from the south, had to be pushed into the firing line in
an area swept by artillery fire, which, owing to the capture of the
French guns, we were unable to keep down.

All this led to very heavy casualties, and I wish to place on record
the deep admiration which I feel for the resource and presence of mind
evinced by the leaders actually on the spot.

The parts taken by Major-General Snow and Brigadier-General Hull were
reported to me as being particularly marked in this respect.

An instance of this occurred on the afternoon of the 24th, when the
enemy succeeded in breaking through the line at St. Julien.

Brigadier-General Hull, acting under the orders of Lieut.-General
Alderson, organised a powerful counter-attack--on the 24th--with his
own Brigade and some of the nearest available units.  He was called
upon to control, with only his Brigade Staff, parts of battalions from
six separate Divisions which were quite new to the ground.  Although
the attack did not succeed in retaking St. Julien, it effectually
checked the enemy's further advance.

It was only on the morning of the 25th that the enemy were able to
force back the left of the Canadian Division from the point where it
had originally joined the French line.

During the night and the early morning of the 25th the enemy directed a
heavy attack against the Division at Broodseiende cross-roads, which
was supported by a powerful shell fire, but he failed to make any
progress.

During the whole of this time the town of Ypres and all the roads to
the east and west were uninterruptedly subjected to a violent artillery
fire, but in spite of this the supply of both food and ammunition was
maintained throughout with order and efficiency.

During the afternoon of the 25th many German prisoners were taken,
including some officers.  The hand-to-hand fighting was very severe,
and the enemy suffered heavy loss.

      *      *      *      *      *

BATTLE OF FESTUBERT.

On May 15th I moved the Canadian Division into the 1st Corps area and
placed them at the disposal of Sir Douglas Haig.

      *      *      *      *      *

On May 19th the 7th and 2nd Divisions were drawn out of the line to
rest.  The 7th Division was relieved by the Canadian Division and the
2nd Division by the 51st (Highland) Division.

Sir Douglas Haig placed the Canadian and 51st Divisions, together with
the artillery of the 2nd and 7th Divisions, under the command of
Lieut.-General Alderson, whom he directed to conduct the operations
which had hitherto been carried on by the General Officer Commanding
1st Corps; and he directed the 7th Division to remain in Army Reserve.

During the night of the 19th-20th a small post of the enemy in front of
La Quinque Rue was captured.

During the night of the 20th-21st the Canadian Division brilliantly
carried on the excellent progress made by the 7th Division by seizing
several of the enemy's trenches and pushing forward their whole line
several hundred yards.  A number of prisoners and some machine-guns
were captured.

On the 22nd instant the 51st (Highland) Division was attached to the
Indian Corps, and the General Officer Commanding the Indian Corps took
charge of the operations at La Quinque Rue, Lieut.-General Alderson
with the Canadians conducting the operations to the north of that place.

On this day the Canadian Division extended their line slightly to the
right and repulsed three very severe hostile counter-attacks.


GIVENCHY.

After the conclusion of the battle of Festubert the troops of the 1st
Army were engaged in several minor operations.  By an attack delivered
on the evening of June 15th, after a prolonged bombardment, the 1st
Canadian Brigade obtained possession of the German front-line trenches
north-east of Givenchy, but were unable to retain them owing to their
flanks being too much exposed.

Sir John French's Despatch, October 15th.




APPENDIX III

THE PRIME MINISTER AND THE WAR.

  _Speeches of the Right Hon. Sir Robert Laird
  Borden, G.C.M.G., M.P._


FUTURE OF THE EMPIRE.

_At the Canadian Club, Winnipeg, on December 29th, 1914._

It is within the bounds of probability that the four free nations of
the Overseas Dominions will have put into the fighting line 250,000 men
if the war should continue another year.  That result, or even the
results which have already been obtained, must mark a great epoch in
the history of inter-Imperial relations.  There are those, within sound
of my voice, who will see the Oversea Dominions surpass in wealth and
population the British Isles.  There are children playing in your
streets who may see Canada alone attain that eminence.  Thus it is
impossible to believe that the existing status, so far as concerns the
control of foreign policy and extra-Imperial relations, can remain as
it is to-day.  All are conscious of the complexity of the problem thus
presented, but no one need despair of a satisfactory solution, and no
one can doubt the profound influence which the tremendous events of the
past few months and those in the immediate future must exercise upon
one of the most interesting and far-reaching questions ever presented
for the consideration of statesmen.



  RESOURCES OF EMPIRE.

  _At a meeting of the United Kingdom Branch of
  the Empire Parliamentary Association, House
  of Commons, July 13th, 1915._

I appreciate very sincerely, and very warmly as well, what Mr. Bonar
Law said with regard to the part which Canada has played in this great
contest.  There was no doubt in my own mind as to what that part would
be, and I took the responsibility four days before the actual
declaration of war of sending a message to His Majesty's Government
stating that, if war should unhappily supervene, they might be assured
that Canada would regard the quarrel as her own, and would do her part
in maintaining the integrity of this Empire and all that this war means
to us.  We are not a military nation in Canada; we are a peace-loving
and peace-pursuing people with great tasks of development within our
own Dominions lying before us.  Thus, for a struggle such as this, upon
so gigantic a scale, we were naturally unprepared.  But even so,
relatively unprepared as we were, the Minister of Militia and Defence
in Canada succeeded in placing upon the Plain of Valcartier, within six
weeks of the outbreak of war, a force of 33,000 men, thoroughly armed
and equipped in every branch of the Service--artillery, commissariat,
Army Service Corps, and all the vast organisation that is necessary in
war as carried on in the present day.

We have sent overseas up to the present time nearly 75,000 men,
including troops which are doing garrison duty in the West Indies.  We
have in Canada to-day 75,000 men in training, with organisation being
prepared as rapidly as possible for their advent to the front when
needed.  The response from every province in Canada, indeed, has been
so warm, so impressive, so inspiring, that our difficulty has been to
secure arms and equipment and material and all that is necessary to
enable our men to go to the front.  So far as the men were concerned
they were there in abundance.  So far as the other preparations were
concerned we have been very much in the same condition as yourselves,
unprepared for war upon so tremendous a scale.  In this conflict we are
engaged with great nations whose military preparation has extended over
nearly half a century, and whose aim, as far as we can comprehend it,
has been world-wide supremacy by force of arms.  Naturally in the
opening months, and the opening year, of such a struggle we could not
accomplish all that might be expected at first, but I take comfort in
this thought, that for purposes of war, or for any other purposes, the
resources of this Empire are not only abundant, but almost unlimited,
and there is yet time for that preparation which perhaps ought to have
been made at an earlier day.  The day of peril came before our day of
preparation had been fully reached.

Looking back on what we had to face and upon what we had to contend
with, I venture to think that the condition of affairs to-day is one
upon which we should rather congratulate ourselves than otherwise.  I
have no fear for the future, although the struggle may be a long one
and may entail sacrifices which we did not anticipate at first.  I
think I may bring to you from the people of Canada this message, that
in whatever is necessary to bring this war to an honourable and
triumphal conclusion, Canada is prepared to take her part.  And I am
sure that is true of every Dominion of the Empire.  Last autumn, in
speaking before a Canadian club in the west of Canada, I said that if
this war should continue for a year it was reasonably probable that the
oversea Dominions would have in the field 250,000 men.  I venture to
think that to-day, if you estimate what Australia has done and is
doing, what New Zealand has done and is doing, what South Africa has
done and is doing, and what Canada has done and is doing, the oversea
Dominions of this Empire have, either in the field, or in training as
organised troops, no less than 350,000 men.

Mr. Bonar Law has spoken of the courage and resourcefulness of the
Canadian troops.  They went to the front as men taken from civil
avocations of life, with no prolonged military training, but with the
habit of overcoming obstacles, with a certain resourcefulness, with all
the traditions of the great races from which they spring, and in such a
manner as made us sure that their record would be worthy of the great
Dominion which they represented.  I would not speak the truth if I did
not confess to you that I am proud, very proud indeed, of the part
which they have played.  I am equally proud of the splendid valour
shown by the men of these islands in that great retreat against
overwhelming numbers, under difficulties which I think were greater
than those which ever attended a great retreat before; and I desire to
pay my tribute to the splendid valour and heroism of the British Army
at that time, worthy of the highest traditions of the race from which
we all spring.  It is almost superfluous to speak of the splendid
valour which has distinguished the troops of Australia and New Zealand
at the Dardanelles.  I had the pleasure of sending telegrams to the
Governments of these two Commonwealths and of congratulating them upon
the part which their men are taking in these very dangerous operations.

What a fantastic picture it was that Prussian militarism made for
itself before the outbreak of this war.  It pictured Canada, Australia,
and New Zealand standing aloof and indifferent, or seeking an
opportunity to cut themselves aloof from this Empire.  What is the
actual picture to-day?  They are bound to the Empire by stronger ties
than ever before, and are prepared to fight to the death for the
maintenance of its integrity and for the preservation of our common
civilisation throughout the world.  What of South Africa?  The Prussian
picture was that it should flare into rebellion at once, cut itself off
from the Empire, and proclaim its independence.  What is the actual
picture?  The heroic figure of General Louis Botha receiving the
surrender of German South-West Africa--territory larger than the German
Empire itself.

We have nothing to fear as the outcome of this war.  We do not and dare
not doubt the success of the cause for which the British Empire and the
Allied nations are fighting to-day.  It is impossible to believe that
the democracies of the British Empire, even though unprepared on so
tremendous a scale as our opponents for such a war as this, will not
prove their efficiency in this day of peril.  They have proved it, and
I think they will prove it in the future.  In the later days when peace
comes to be proclaimed, and after the conclusion of peace, it is beyond
question that large matters will come up for consideration by the
statesmen of the United Kingdom and the Overseas Dominions.  It is not
desirable, nor perhaps becoming, that I should dwell upon these
considerations to-day.  I said what I had to say on the subject with
considerable frankness and some emphasis three years ago when I had the
pleasure of addressing you.  What I said then represents my convictions
now.  I do not doubt the problems which will be presented, exceedingly
difficult and complex as they are, will find a wise and just solution,
and in thanking you for the reception which you have accorded me
to-day, and for the honour which you have done to the Dominion which I
represent as its Prime Minister, let me express the hope and aspiration
that in confronting the immense responsibilities which devolve upon
those inheriting so great an Empire as ours, and one which must
necessarily command so profound an influence on the future of
civilisation and the destiny of the world, we shall so bear ourselves,
whether in these mother islands or in the Overseas Dominions, that the
future shall hold in store no reproach for us for lack of vision, want
of courage, or failure of duty.



  WORTHY OF THEIR ANCESTORS.

  _At the Canadian Matinee at the Queen's Theatre,
  London, July 15th, 1915._

All Canada is thrilled by the part the Canadians have played, and their
achievements have brought to Canada a vivid realisation of the meaning
of the war.  They are worthy of their traditions and their ancestors.



  OVERSEAS DOMINIONS' DESTINY.

  _At the Guildhall, on being presented with the
  Freedom of the City of London, July 19th, 1915._

I appreciate the honour which has been conferred upon me, coming as it
does from a city which may be described as a great Imperial City, in a
fashion which is perhaps not known elsewhere throughout the world
to-day.  Through the march of civilisation across the centuries, the
progress and development of London have kept time with the march.  That
it is a great Imperial City to-day is due to the great achievement of
our race.  While it may not be fitting that one of our kindred should
speak of the British people as a great race, I may be permitted to say
that it has wrought great things, and that the greatest of all its
achievements is the up-building of an Empire bound together by such
ties as those which unite ours.

In the beginning, in the founding of the nation within these islands,
there was need for orderly government, and that made necessary a strong
and autocratic system of government.  But, as the years rolled on,
there came to the people the right to govern themselves.  Orderly
government, individual liberty, equal rights before the people--upon
these secure foundations the fabric of the national life was erected,
and in these later days has come the not less noble ideal of a
democracy founded upon equality of opportunity for all the people
before the conditions of modern life.

In the Dominions beyond the seas, the same ideals of liberty and of
justice have led inevitably to the establishment of self-governing
institutions.  Their development there has been very much the same as
within your own islands, and those short-sighted ones who believed that
the right to govern themselves would drive the far-flung nations of our
Empire asunder, have found that that very circumstance, and that free
development, have united them by ties stronger than would be possible
under any system of autocratic government.

I have listened with the deepest possible appreciation to the words
which have been spoken of the action of Canada in this war.  That
action was due to no Government, to no statesman or group of statesmen.
It was due to the spirit of the Canadian people, a spirit which will
make the cause for which we are contending victorious, and which will
pervade the Dominions to the end.  I do not need to tell you of the
part that Canada has played and the part she proposes to play.  But it
might not be amiss for a moment to allude to the remarkable
circumstance that four great Overseas Dominions, self-governing
Dominions of the Empire, have been actuated by a common impulse at this
juncture--Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Canada!  Why have all
these great free nations sent their men from the remotest corners of
the earth to fight side by side with you of this island home in this
quarrel?  Why in Canada do we see those who are the descendants of
those who fought under Wolfe, and of those who fought under Montcalm,
standing side by side in the battle-line of the Empire?  Why, coming
down to later days, do we see the grandson of a Durham, and the
grandson of a Papineau, standing shoulder to shoulder beyond the
Channel in France or Belgium?  When the historian of the future comes
to analyse the events which made it possible for the Empire to stand
like this, he will see that there must have been some overmastering
impulse contributing to this wonderful result.

One such impulse is to be found in the love of liberty, the pursuit of
ideals of democracy, and the desire and determination to preserve the
spirit of unity founded on those ideals, which make the whole Empire
united in aim and single in purpose.  But there was, also, in all the
Overseas Dominions, the intense conviction that this war was forced
upon the Empire--that we could not with honour stand aside and see
trampled underfoot the liberties and independence of a weak and
unoffending nation whose independence we had guaranteed.  And, above
and beyond all that, was the realisation of the supreme truth--that the
quarrel in which we are engaged transcends even the destinies of our
own Empire and involves the future of civilisation and of the world.

We must not forget that in this war we are confronting the power of a
military autocracy more highly organised, and more formidable, perhaps
than was ever nation before in history.  I am sure that the military
strength which has been developed by our chief antagonists, has
surprised the whole world; and I think that this war will bring to us a
very vital question as to the future of democratic institutions.  We
have always cherished in these islands, and in the Oversea Dominions as
well, the ideal of orderly government coupled with that of individual
liberty.  It remains to be seen, as the war proceeds, whether
individual liberty, within the British Isles and the Overseas
Dominions, is coupled with so strong a sense of duty and of service to
the State--whether in Peace or in war--as to make it possible for us to
withstand the onslaught of so formidable a foe.

For myself, I have no doubt as to the issue, because I remember that,
if we take the British Empire alone, our resources are infinitely
greater than those of Germany; and, if we consider the question of
population, that of the British Isles and of the Overseas Dominions is
almost equal to that of Germany.  it is true that we were not prepared,
as Germany was prepared, for war on this scale; but I believe the time
for preparation is not past, and I feel also that we have every reason
to congratulate ourselves upon the splendid preparation which has been
made, not only in these islands, but in the Dominions.  Yet I would
impress upon the people of the Empire that all for which our fathers
fought and bled, all our liberties and institutions, all the influences
for good which have been sent forth by the activities of the Empire
throughout the world, hang in the balance to-day, and therefore we
cannot, because we must not, fall in this war.

During the past week I visited France, and I have seen some of our
forces at the front.  It is a very inspiring thing to see a nation
under arms.  The manhood of France, except those engaged in industrial
pursuits, is at the front to-day; and yet I have seen the whole country
up to the lines of the trenches, bearing bountiful harvests.  The soil
was prepared, the seed was planted, and the harvest is now being reaped
by old men and women and children.  It is my intense conviction that a
nation so inspired can never perish or be subdued; and I am glad to
remember this great Allied nation is of our own kin, because you in the
British Isles look back to Celtic and Norman, as well as to Saxon
ancestors; and if this be true of you in Britain it is still more true
of us in Canada.

Last week I looked into the keen, intent faces, of 10,000 Canadian
soldiers, within sound and range of the German guns.  Three days ago I
looked into the undaunted eyes of 1,000 Canadian convalescents returned
from the valley of the shadow of death.  In the eyes, and in the faces
of those men, I read only one message--that of resolute and unflinching
determination to make our cause triumphant; to preserve our
institutions and our liberties, to maintain the unity of our Empire and
its influence through the world.  That message, which I bring to you
from those soldiers, I bring you also from the great Dominion which has
sent those men across the sea.

While the awful shadow of this war overhangs our Empire, I shall not
pause to speak of what may be evolved in its constitutional relations.
Upon what has been built in the past it is possible, in my judgment,
that an even nobler and more enduring fabric may be erected.  That
structure must embody the autonomy of the self-governing Dominions and
of the British Isles as well, but it must also embody the majesty and
power of an Empire united by ties such as those of which I have spoken,
and more thoroughly and effectively organised for the purpose of
preserving its own existence.  Those who shall be the architects of
this monument will have a great part to play, and I do not doubt that
they will play it worthily.  To those who shall be called to design so
splendid a fabric, crowning the labours of the past and embodying all
the hopes of the future, we all of us bid God speed in their great task.



  A WORLD STRUGGLE.

  CANADA'S SHARE.

  _At a patriotic meeting at the London Opera House,
  August 4th, 1915._

Considering all the events of the year, there are indeed some matters
on which we have the right and privilege to-night of congratulating
ourselves to the full.  Was the unity of this Empire ever so strikingly
made manifest before?  Was it ever more clearly demonstrated that the
race which inhabits these islands and the Overseas Dominions is not a
decadent race?  What has been the result of the call of duty to this
Empire?  You in these islands debated years ago, and not so long ago
for that matter, as to whether in case of necessity you could send
abroad an Expeditionary Force of 80,000 or 120,000 or 160,000 men, and
if I am not mistaken the most optimistic among you believed that
160,000 men was the limit.  What has been the result of the call?  You
have in part organised, and you are now organising, armies from ten to
twenty times greater than those which were the limit you set for
yourselves in the past.  That is not an indication of a decadent race,
and I am glad indeed to know that we in the Overseas Dominions as well
are doing our part as best we can.

Indeed, in Canada, and I believe the same is true in all the Overseas
Dominions, the difficulty has been with armament and equipment--all
that is necessary for the organisation of a great modern army, and not
with the provision of men, for the men came faster than we were able to
organise the armour to equip them.  And so it has been in India as
well.  I remember having, in the early months of the war, the privilege
of reading a debate which took place in the Council of India, a great
debate which was worthy of the Mother of Parliaments herself; a debate
couched in language of the most intense patriotism; and in that debate
the demand of India was that she should be permitted to do her part in
this war.  The same is true of Egypt and all the Crown Colonies.  From
East to West, from North to South, throughout the Empire, the response
on all hands has been more than we could have ventured to anticipate.

Mr. Balfour has referred in the most eloquent and appropriate terms to
the work of the great Navy which is under his direction, and which has
accomplished its task so wonderfully ever since the war broke out.  We
of the Overseas Dominions realise as much as you realise, that the
pathways of the seas are the veins and arteries of this Empire through
which its lifeblood must flow.  If these are once stopped or interfered
with in any way the Empire cannot continue to exist.  We are as
conscious as you are conscious of the wonderful vigil in the North Sea
and of the patience, endurance, and fortitude of officers and men.  We
are grateful, as you are grateful, with the most intense appreciation
of all they have done for us, and, more than all, the fact that they
have rid the seas of the marauders by which our commerce was troubled
has enabled us to keep in close contact with you, and keep up that
intercourse which is so absolutely necessary for you and for us, not
only in war but in peace as well.

I have no military knowledge nor experience--I am going to say a word
with regard to military affairs in a moment--but before doing that I
would like to express my own appreciation, and I think of all the
people in the Dominion which I have the honour to represent, of the
splendid work which has been done by the Royal Flying Corps in this
war.  Knowing the great efforts that have been made by other nations in
this particular branch of the military and naval services, we were
rather inclined to anticipate and expect that it might not be up to the
highest standard of the great nations of the world.  I have good reason
to know, because I have had some intimate accounts of what has
transpired at the front--I have good reason to know that the work of
our aeroplane service has been equal to the best, and that in
initiative, courage, resourcefulness, and fortitude our men have held
their place with the best, ever since the outbreak of this war.

It is not necessary to dwell on the valour of our troops, to which
eloquent reference has been made by Lord Crewe and Mr. Balfour.  I do
not believe that in all the splendid traditions of the British Army for
centuries past, a more splendid record can be shown than that displayed
in the retreat from Mons.  I believe that no retirement was ever
conducted successfully under greater difficulties and against more
overwhelming odds, and the conduct of officers and men adds glory to
the British Army that will not be forgotten as long as our race
endures.  I may, perhaps, be permitted to say that those who were sent
across the sea to France and to the Dardanelles, from Australia, from
New Zealand, from Canada, have proved that the old traditions of our
race are not forgotten overseas, and that the men there are prepared in
any danger, in any peril, to stand side by side with their comrades of
these islands.  A splendid force has been raised in South Africa, and I
associate myself with what has been so well said as to the valour of
the troops from India, who have fought by the side of our men in France
and Belgium.

Mr. Balfour has spoken of our Allies, and with what he has said I may
be permitted to associate myself.  One cannot forget the courage, the
patience, the fortitude of France.  We know that the soul of Russia is
unconquered and unconquerable.  The devotion and heroism of Belgium and
Serbia have moved the admiration of the world.  The fine valour of
Italy is now in the fighting line with the Allies, and she is doing her
appointed task as we expected she would do it.  She stands ready, I
imagine, for further services in case the emergencies of this war
should demand them.  I have said before that this is not like the wars
of a hundred or two hundred years ago.

This is a war of nations, and not of armies alone.  But it is more than
that.  It is a war of material resources to an extreme degree.  The
industrial resources of the nations are being organised; all that the
knowledge and science of the nations can devise is being brought into
play.  The command of the forces of nature which in the past centuries,
and especially in the past 100 years, we have learned has been brought
to bear, and for that reason I have every confidence in the outcome of
this struggle, because we have within this Empire resources almost
limitless--resources infinitely greater than those of Germany and
Austria-Hungary combined, and it merely depends upon our self-denial,
and organised capacity and patriotism, as to whether we can and shall
organise those resources to the end that our cause shall triumph.

I do not believe that we shall fail in that.  Our race has never failed
in time of crisis.  Why should it fail now?  To fail in doing that
would be accounted to us, in the years to come, as dishonour.  We will
not fail.  All that men can do, our men have done at the front, and
they will continue to do in the future.

In Canada, we began, as early as possible, to organise our industrial
resources for the production of munitions of war.  We made our first
effort as far back as August 21st.  Munitions of war have been the
great and growing need of our men at the front.  Because it is apparent
to us that, so far as it is in the power of this Empire to strain every
effort for the purposes of the war, we must not attempt to do with men
alone what our enemies are doing with munitions and guns.

As to what we have done in the past, whether in Canada or in these
islands or elsewhere, let the dead past bury its dead.  This is not the
time to speak of the past, but to look at the future.  What concerns
us, whether in these islands or in any of the Overseas Dominions, is to
see that, so far as the future is concerned, there shall be no failure;
and I believe there will be no failure.

It may be said that in some respects the twelve months' war has not
been all that we anticipated.  I believe I am entirely within the
bounds of truth when I state that if there is any disappointment with
us, the disappointment of Germany is tenfold greater; and if there has
been any disappointment, or if there should be any reverse in the
future, that should merely inspire us with a higher resolve and a more
inflexible determination to do our duty, and to see that that which
concerns the cause of civilisation and humanity shall be carried to the
issue which we all desire.

For a hundred years we have not had any wars which threatened the
existence of our Empire, and for more than fifty years we have not been
involved in any war which might perhaps be called a great one.  Under
the conditions of modern democracies, here and elsewhere in the Empire,
considerations of material prosperity have been urged, and this is
especially a danger in a new country like Australia or Canada.  The
call of the market-place has been sometimes clamorous and insistent,
and in days such as these the soul of a nation is more truly tried than
it is in war days, for the highest character of an Empire is sometimes
formed then--and not in the days of stress and trial--through the
consequences of duty and self-sacrifice.

I rejoice greatly that in these islands, and in the Overseas Dominions,
men have realised most fully that there is something greater than
material prosperity, something greater than life itself.  This war
cannot fail to influence most profoundly the whole future of the world
and of civilisation.  It has already most profoundly influenced the
people of this Empire.  There were great strivings for wealth,
everywhere, but no one could deny that the material advancement and
prosperity of the Empire has not in itself been a good thing.  The
standards of life for the people have been raised and comfort
increased.  It is not the wealth we should rail at.  Rome fell, I know,
at a time of wealth, but it was because she made wealth her god.

In the early days of the war we were much comforted by the fact that
men and women were ready to make sacrifices for this, the greatest
cause of all.  In Canada, and I am sure elsewhere throughout the
Empire, there has been manifest a spirit of co-operation, of mutual
helpfulness, of a desire to assist, of self-sacrifice which is most
comforting to those who have at heart the welfare of our Empire in
years to come.  So I am sure it will be in the future.  The influence
of a spirit of helpfulness and self-sacrifice, which we see everywhere
throughout the world, and within our Empire, is one for which I give
thanks and am most grateful.

I have come far across this ocean to see our men within these islands
and at the front, and our men in hospital who are wounded.  To see
them, whether at the front, where they stand almost within the valley
of the shadow of death, or wounded in the hospitals, is an inspiration
in itself.  I am glad to say that in visiting the hospitals I have had
the opportunity of speaking to many soldiers, officers and men, from
these islands, and with them I have found, as among our Canadians, just
one spirit--a wonderful spirit of heroism and of patience, a spirit of
consecration to the cause we all have at heart.  We who come from
overseas are touched by all this, perhaps more than you can imagine.

Last night I walked down the Embankment.  At my right was the great
Abbey, at my left the great Cathedral.  The historic river was at my
feet.  Here came in bygone centuries the Celt, the Saxon, the Dane, the
Norman, each in turn, finally all in co-operation, lending their
influence to our national life.  And how splendid a structure they
built; what an influence for good it has carried throughout the world!

Standing thus on what seems to us hallowed ground, we of the Overseas
Dominions meditate perhaps more than you do on the wonderful memories
of the past, and the great events to which the life of our Empire has
moved.  Let us never for one moment forget that of all the mighty
events in our history, none are greater than those through which we are
passing to-day.  Is an Empire like ours worth living for?  Yes, and
worth dying for, too.  And it is something greater than it was a year
ago.  Indeed, it can never be quite the same again.  The old order has
in some measure passed away.  Once for all it has been borne in upon
the minds and souls of all of us that the great policies, which touch
and control the issues of peace and war, concern more than the peoples
of these islands.

And more than that, we shall so bear ourselves in this war, and in the
mighty events to which it must lead, that whether in these islands or
in the Overseas Dominions, citizenship of this Empire shall be a still
greater and more noble possession in the years to come than it has been
even in the glorious past.  I have spoken to you frankly on some
matters of great moment.  If I had not done so I should have been
unworthy of my position.  And now, before I close, let me bring to you
this latest message from Canada:--

For those who have fallen in this struggle we shall not cease to mourn;
for the cause which they have consecrated their lives we shall not
cease to strive.  We are supremely confident that that cause will
assuredly triumph and for that great purpose we are inspired with an
inflexible determination to do our part.



  "WE CAN HOLD OUR OWN."

  _At the Canada Club, August 6th, 1915._

The fall of Warsaw has been foreshadowed for some time, and it is
useless for us to deny the Germans have achieved a success--which they
intended to achieve six or nine months ago.

This fall will mean that all will put forth greater efforts and
determination.  In the early months of the war we failed to estimate
the enormous military power of a nation, highly disciplined and
thoroughly organised for war as well as for peace.  The idea of the
people of these islands was to send across the Channel an expeditionary
force not exceeding 160,000 men.

Do any of you, who have not had the responsibilities of office, realise
what it means to provide guns, rifles, ammunition, and equipment for a
force ten times as great--with, perhaps, another force in reserve of
equal number?  I know something of those responsibilities.  We in
Canada have our difficulties, not in finding men ready to fight for the
cause, but because we find it difficult to provide the guns, rifles,
ammunition, and equipment.

When you increase your proposed expeditionary force by ten or twenty
times, you must realise that for that purpose it is necessary that the
whole power of the nation shall be concentrated on the task.

I hold this profound conviction--that, regiment for regiment and man
for man, our forces can hold their own, and more than hold their own,
with the best and most efficient troops of the enemy.

If we speak of the disappointments we had at the start of the war, let
us never forget to realise that the disappointments of the enemy must
be ten times greater.  And if we are discouraged from time to time, let
us remember we have accomplished one great work which outweighs a
thousandfold that, and that is the clearness and security of the
pathways of the seas.  The clearance of the seas means as much to the
Allies as to ourselves.




APPENDIX IV

  LT.-GENERAL E. A. H. ALDERSON, C.B.,
  COMMANDING THE CANADIAN CORPS.

The following is the text of the speech made to the Canadian troops
under his command after twelve strenuous days and nights of fighting,
from April 23rd to May 4th, 1915.


    I tell you truly, that my heart is so full that I hardly know how
    to speak to you.  It is full of two feelings--the first being
    sorrow for the loss of those comrades of ours who have gone; and
    the second, pride in what the 1st Canadian Division has done.

    As regards our comrades who have lost their lives--let us speak of
    them with our caps off--my faith in the Almighty is such that I am
    perfectly sure that when men die, as they have died, doing their
    duty and fighting for their country, for the Empire, and to save
    the situation for others--in fact, have _died for their
    friends_--no matter what their past lives have been, no matter what
    they have done that they ought not to have done (as all of us do),
    I am perfectly sure that the Almighty takes them and looks after
    them at once.  Lads, we cannot leave them better than like that.

    Now I feel that we may, without any false pride, think a little of
    what the Division has done during the past few days.

    I would first of all tell you that I have never been so proud of
    anything in my life as I am of my armlet with "Canada" on it.  I
    thank you, and congratulate you from the bottom of my heart, for
    the part each one of you has taken in giving me this feeling of
    pride.

    I think it is possible that all of you do not quite realise that,
    if we had retired on the evening of April 22nd--when our Allies
    fell back before the gas and left our left flank quite open--the
    whole of the 27th and 28th Divisions would probably have been cut
    off.  Certainly they would not have got away a gun or a vehicle of
    any sort, and probably not more than half the Infantry would have
    escaped.

    This is what our Commander-in-Chief meant when he telegraphed, as
    he did, that "the Canadians saved the situation."  My lads, if ever
    men had a right to be proud in this world, you have.

    I know my military history pretty well, and I cannot think of an
    instance, especially when the cleverness and determination of the
    enemy is taken into account, in which troops were placed in such a
    difficult position; nor can I think of an instance in which so much
    depended on the standing fast of one Division.

    You will remember that the last time I spoke to you, just before
    you went into the trenches at Sailly, now over two months ago, I
    told you about my old Regiment--the Royal West Kents--having gained
    a reputation for never budging from their trenches, no matter how
    they were attacked.  I said then I was quite sure that, in a short
    time, the Army out here would be saying the same of you.

    I little thought--none of us thought--how soon those words would
    come true.  But now, to-day, not only the Army out here, but all
    Canada, all England, and all the Empire are saying that you, too,
    stand fast.

    There is one more word I would say to you before I stop.  You have
    made a reputation second to none in this war; but, remember, no man
    can live on his reputation.  He must keep on adding to it.  And I
    feel just as sure that you will do so as I did two months ago when
    I told you that I knew you would make a reputation when the
    opportunity came.

    I am now going to shake hands with your officers, and as I do so, I
    want you to feel that I am shaking hands with each one of you, as I
    would actually do if time permitted.



  ON RELINQUISHING HIS COMMAND OF
  THE 1st CANADIAN DIVISION.

The following is the text of the Special Order issued by Lieut.-General
Alderson on transferring the 1st Canadian Division to the new
Commander, General Currie, C.B.:--


    On handing over the command of the 1st Canadian Division to General
    Currie, C.B., I wish to give my heartfelt thanks to all ranks of
    the Division, and especially to the Brigadiers and the Divisional
    and Brigade Staffs, for the loyal and efficient help they have
    given me during the eleven months that I have commanded the
    Division.  It is this help that, in spite of the difficulties of
    organisation, or the trying climatic and other unpleasant
    conditions of Salisbury Plain, has made my period of command so
    pleasant.

    I have already expressed personally, to all ranks, my appreciation
    of the conduct of the Division in action at all times, and
    especially during the trying twelve days--April 22nd to May 4th--at
    Ypres.  I will not, therefore, say any more about this conduct,
    except that I shall never forget it.

    I am consoled in my great regret at leaving the Division by the
    thought that, as Corps Commander, I shall still be in close touch
    with it.

    In handing over to General Currie I feel, as I have told him, that
    I hand over an efficient fighting unit, which, I am sure, will,
    under him, add to the reputation it has made, and also give him the
    same loyal support that it has always given to me.

    I feel that I cannot conclude better than by asking all ranks of
    the 1st Division always to remember the words which I am adopting
    as the motto of the Canadian Army Corps:--


"CONSENTIENTES VI TRAHUNT VICTORIAM."[1]



[1] Those in agreement seize victory by force.




  APPENDIX  V

  FIRST CANADIAN DIVISION.

  HONOURS AND REWARDS GRANTED

  _Officers._

                                                           HONOUR OR
                                                           REWARD
  RANK AND NAME.                     UNIT.                 GRANTED.

  Major Chisholm, H. A.
    (D.A.D.M.S.)             1st Divisional Headquarters   D.S.O.  Mention.
  Col. Foster, G. La F.
    (A.D.M.S.)                     "            "          C.B.  Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Wood, T. B.
    (A.A. & Q.M.G.)                "            "          Bt.-Col.  Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Hamilton,
    G. T. (D.A.A.G.)         General Headquarters, 3rd
                               Echelon                     Mention.
  Lt.-Col. MacBrien, J. H.
    (D.A.A. & Q.M.G.)        1st Divisional Headquarters
                               Staff                       D.S.O.  Mention.
  Col. Romer, C. F.
    (G.S.O.)                 1st Divisional Headquarters   Mention.
  Major Beatty, C. H. L.
    D.S.O. (A.D.C.)               "            "           Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Gordon-Hall,
    G. C. W. (G.S.O.)             "            "           Mention.
  Capt. Clifford,  E. S.
    D.S.O. (A.P.M.)               "            "           Mention.
  Lt.-Gen. Alderson,
    E.A.H.C.B. (G.O.C.)           "            "           Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Hayter, R.
    J. F. H.Q.,              1st Can. Inf. Bde.            D.S.O.  Mention.
  Capt.  Ware, F. D.
    (Staff Captain)                "            "          Mention.
  Br.-Gen. Mercer, M. S.           "            "          C.B.  Mention.
  Lt. Sprinks, W. D.         4th Can. Inf. Bde.            M.C.
  Major Kimmins, A. E.       1st Can. Inf. Bn.             Mention.
  Capt. Parks, J. H.               "            " H.Q.     D.S.O.  Mention.
  Lt. Campbell, F. W..             "            "          V.C.
  Lt. Culling, E. C.         2nd Can. Inf. Bn.             Mention.
    Temp. Capt.
  Lt.-Col. Watson, D.              "            "          Mention.
  Capt. Turner, A. G.              "            "          M.C.  Mention.
  Capt. Lyne-Evans,
    J. H.                    3rd Can. Inf. Bn.             M.C.  Mention.
  Capt. Haywood, A. K.       M.O. 3rd Bn.                  M.C.  Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Birchall, A. P.   4th Can. Inf. Bn.             Mention.
    C. O.
  Capt. Glover, J. D., Adjt.                               Mention.
  Major Ballantyne, J.             "            "          D.S.O.  Mention.
  Lt.-Col. H. Kemmis
    Betty                   2nd Can. Inf. Bde. H.Q.        D.S.O.  Mention.
  Capt. Clark, R. P.               "            "          Mention.
  Br.-Gen. Currie, A. W.    G.O.C. 1st Can. Div.           C.B. Also awarded
                                                             Legion of Honour,
                                                             Croix de
                                                             Commandeur.
  Lt.-Col. Tuxford, G. S.   5th Can. Inf. Bn               Mention.
  Major Pragnell, G. S. T.         "            "          D.S.O.  Mention.
  Lt. Currie, J. M.                "            "          Mention.
  Capt. Anderson, S. J.            "            "          D.S.O.
  Lt.-Col. Armstrong,
    C. J.                   H.Q. Can. Divl. Engrs.         Mention.
  Capt. Macphail,   A.
    Temp. Maj. 21/5/15.     1st F.C., Can. Engrs.          D.S.O.  Mention.
  Lt. Hertzberg, H. F. H.   2nd F.C., Can. Engrs.          M.C.  Mention.
  Major Wright, G. B.       3rd F.C., Can. Engrs.          D.S.O.  Mention.
  Capt. Kilburn, F. C.      Can. Divl. Sig. Co.            Mention.
  Major Lister, F. A.              "            "          D.S.O.  Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Simson, W. A.    H.Q. Can. Divl. Train          Mention.
  Lt. Webb, R. H.           No. 1 Co. Can. Divl. Train     M.C.  Mention.
  Major Duval, J. L.         No. 1 Can. Fld. Ambulance     Mention.
  Capt. Stone, E. L.               "               "       Mention.
  Capt. McGibbon, R. H.            "               "       Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Ross, A. E.             "               "       Mention.
  Capt. McKillip, T. H.      No. 2 Can. Fld. Ambulance     D.S.O.  Mention.
  Lt.-Col. McPherson, D. W.        "               "       Mention.
  Major Hardy, E. B                "               "       Mention.
  Capt. Fraser, J. J               "               "       Mention.
  Capt. Brown, P. G.               "               "       Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Watt, W. L.       No. 3 Can. Fld. Ambulance     Mention.
  Capt. Bell, F. C.                "               "       Mention.
  Capt. McQueen, J. D.             "               "       Mention.
  Capt. Donaldson, A. S.           "               "       Mention.
  Capt. Smith, S. A.               "               "       D.S.O.
  Lt.-Col. Ford, F. S. L.    C.A.M.C. No. 1. Cas. Clg.
                                Stn.                       C.M.G.  Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Shillington,
    A. T.                    C.A.M.C. No. 2 Stat. Hosp.    Mention.
  Brig.-Gen. Burstall,
    H. E. (G.O.C.)           H.Q. Can. Divl. Arty.         C.B.  Mention.
  Capt. Cosgrave, L. M.      1st Can. Arty. Bde.           Mention.
  Capt. White, D. A.
    (2nd Bty.)                     "               "       Mention.
                             o/c 2nd Battery.
  Lt. Craig, C. S.
    (4th Bty.)               1st Can. Arty. Bde.           M.C. 26/7/15.
  Lt.-Col. Creelman, J. J.
    (Bde. Staff).            2nd Can. Arty. Bde.           Mention.
  Major Hanson, E. G.
    (5th Bty.)               2nd Can. Arty. Bde.           Mention.
  Lt. Geary, H. F.
    (6th Bty.)                     "               "       Mention.
  Lt. Savage, H. M.
    (7th Bty.)                     "               "       Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Mitchell, J. H.   3rd Can. Arty. Bde.           Mention.  Also
    (Bde. Staff).                                            awarded Legion
                                                             of Honour,
                                                             Croix d'Officier
  Lt. Greene, E. A.
    (9th Bty.)               3rd Can. Arty. Bde.           Mention.
  Major King, W. B. M.
    (10th Bty.)                    "              "        D.S.O.  Mention.
                             o/c 8th How. Bde.
  Major Carscallen, H. G.
    (11th Bty.)              3rd Can. Arty. Bde.           Mention.
  Capt. Nash, J. P. P.       5th Can. Arty.-Bde.           D.S.O.
  Lt. Anderson, J. G.              "            "          M.C.
  Lt.-Col. Hart-McHarg,      7th Can. Inf. Bn.             Mention.
    W. F. R.
  Major Odlum, V. W.                                       D.S.O.  Mention.
    Temp. Lt.-Col.
    23/4/15.
  Lt.-Col. Lipsett, L. J.    8th Can. Inf. Bn.             C.M.G.  Mention.
  Major Matthews, H. H.            "            "          D.S.O.  Mention.
  Lt. McLeod, N. G. M.
    Temp. Capt.
    24/4/15                        "            "          M.C.  Mention.
  Lt. Scott, J. N.                 "            "          M.C.  Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Boyle, R. L.      10th Can. Inf. Bn.            Mention.
  Major McLaren, J.                "            "          Mention.
  Capt. Arthur, C. G.              "            "          D.S.O.  Mention.
  Major Ormond, D. M.        10th Can. Inf. Bn.            Order of St. Stan-
                                                             islas, 3rd Class.
  Lt.-Col. Hughes, G. B.     H.Q. 3rd Can. Inf. Bde.       D.S.O.  Mention.
    G. S. O.
  Capt. Pope, E. W.                "            "          Mention.
  Br.-Gen. Turner, R.
    E. W., V.C., D.S.O.            "            "          C.B.  Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Loomis,
    F. O. W.                 13th Can. Inf. Bn.            D.S.O.  Mention.
  Major Norsworthy,                "            "          Mention.
    E. C.
  Major McCuaig, D. R.             "            "          D.S.O.  Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Meighen, F. S.    14th Can. Inf. Bn.            Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Burland, W. W.          "                       D.S.O.  Mention.
  Capt. Scrimger, F. A. C.         "            "          V.C.
  Major Marshall, W. R.
    Temp. Lt.-Col.
    9/5/15                   o/c 15th Can. Inf. Bn.        D.S.O.  Mention.
  Capt. Alexander, G. M.           "            "          M.C.  Mention.
  Lt.-Col. Leckie, R. G. E.  16th Can. Inf. Bn.            C.M.G.  Mention.
  Maj. Godson-Godson, G.     16th Can. Inf. Bn.            D.S.O.  Mention.
  Capt. Merritt, C. Mack.          "            "          Mention.
  Lt. McLean, V. A.                                        Order of St. Anne,
                                                             4th Class.
  Capt. Morison, F.,               "            "          D.S.O.
    Temp. Maj. 14/6/15/
  Lt. Dennistoun, J. R.      Can. Divl. Mtd. Tps.
                               (Cyclist Coy.)              Mention.
  Lt. Scandrett, J. H.
    (12th Bty.)              3rd Can. Arty. Bde.           M.C.  Mention.
  Lt. Ryerson, A. C.
    (Ammn. Col.)             3rd C.F.A                     Mention.
  Maj. Lambarde, F. F.       118th How. Bde., R.F.A        D.S.O.  Mention.
    (458th Bty.)
  Lt. Harbord, G. M.
    (459th Bty.)
    Capt. 24/5/15.                 "               "       D.S.O.  Mention.
  Lt. Ramsden, A. G. F.,
    (Ammn. Col.)                   "               "       Mention.
  Lt. McDonald, D. J.
    (L.S.H.)                 Can. Cav. Bde                 M.C.
  Major Hesketh, J. A.
    (L.S.H.)                       "               "       D.S.O.




  APPENDIX V

  SECTION  II

  FIRST CANADIAN DIVISION.

  HONOURS AND REWARDS GRANTED

  _Other Ranks._

                                                                 HONOUR
  REGTL. NO.                                                     OR REWARD
  AND RANK.        NAME                 UNIT                     GRANTED.

  48009 S.M.       Clifton, A. E.       Divl. Hd.-Qrs.           D.C.M.
                     (Hon. Lieut. R.O. 1932 C.T.D.C.O. 397 D.M.S. 16/8/15
   1822 Q.M.S.     Cook, G. S.          Divl. Hd.-Qrs.           Mention.
   1825 S.Sgt.     Butt, H. G. B.         "      "               Mention.
  33304 L/Cpl.     McDonald, W.           "      "               Mention.
   7117 Pte.       Barrass, Wm. E.      1st Can. Inf. Bn.        St. George's
                                                                   Cross, 4th
                                                                   Class
   6264 L/Cpl.     Rouse, Chas. E.        "      "               Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 4th
                                                                   Class.
   6245 Pte.       McGrimmon, H. W.       "      "               Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 4th
                                                                   Class.
   7097 L/Cpl.     Whitla, W.             "      "               D.C.M.
   6972 Sgt.       Wakelin, F.            "      "               D.C.M.
   6771 M.G.Sgt.   Aiken, M. J.           "      "               Mention.
   9517 Sgt.       Jones, W. E.           "      "               Mention.
   6712 Pte.       Moore, G.              "      "               Mention.
   6409 C.S.M.     Owen, C.               "      "               D.C.M.
   6920 Pte.       Gledhill V.            "      "               D.C.M.
   6861 Pte.       Vincent H.             "      "               D.C.M.
   8631 Sgt.       Gardiner, E.         2nd Can. Inf. Bn.        St. George's
                                                                   Cross, 3rd
                                                                   Class.
  22900 L/Cpl.     Marchant, J. S.      2nd Can. Inf. Bn.        St. George's
                                                                   Cross, 4th
                                                                   Class.
   7980 Pte.       Highstone, A. S.       "      "               D.C.M.
  22844 Cpl.       Batchelor, C. W.       "      "               D.C.M.
  22846 Sgt.       Birdseye, R. W         "      "               D.C.M.
   8603 Sgt.       Bussell, E. W.         "      "               Mention.
   8569 Pte.       McGuire, T.            "      "               D.C.M.
   9062 L/Cpl.     Graveley, W. K.      3rd Can. Inf. Bn.        St. George's
                                                                   Cross, 4th
                                                                   Class.
   9101 Cpl.       Percy, Andrew          "      "               Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 3rd
                                                                   Class.
   9862 Sgt.       Ives, P.               "      "              D.C.M.
   9067 Sgt.       Adamson, S. L.         "      "              D.C.M.
   9342 L/Cpl.     Minns, E. H.           "      "              Mention.
   9389 Sgt.       Mote, G. A.            "      "              D.C.M.
  63983 Sgt.       Hobday, S. G.          "      "              D.C.M.
  11317 A/Sgt.     Elliott, T.          4th Can. Inf. Bn.       St. George's
                                                                  Cross, 4th
                                                                  Class.
  19103 Pte.       Broomfield, D. J.      "      "              Medal of St.
                                                                  George, 3rd
                                                                  Class.
  10865 Pte.       Sheppard, A.           "      "              Medal of St.
                                                                  George, 4th
                                                                  Class.
  10857 Sgt.       Kay, A. W.             "      "              D.C.M.
  10940 Pte.       Shipman, E.            "      "              Mention.
  11187 Pte.       Wright, F. L.          "      "              Mention.
  10538 L/Sgt.     Hart, W. E.            "      "              D.C.M.
                     (Lieut. promoted 14/10/15.)
  13821 Sgt.       Johnson, J.          5th Can. Inf. Bn.       Medal of St.
                                                                  George, 2nd
                                                                  Class.
  21584 Cpl.       Crawford, W. M.        "      "              Medal of St.
                                                                  George, 3rd
                                                                  Class.
  13357 Pte.       Cowell, J. D.          "      "              D.C.M.
  21855 Pte.       Joslyn, R. W.          "      "              D.C.M.
  13022 Pte.       Maguire, T.            "      "              D.C.M.
  13204 Cpl.       White, G. A            "      "              D.C.M.
  13760 Pte.       McIvor, N.             "      "              Mention.
  12605 Pte.       Hester, E.             "      "              D.C.M.
  12877 Sgt.       McKue, J. M.           "      "              D.C.M.
  16241 Sgt.       Weeks, H. H.         7th Can. Inf. Bn.       St. George's
                                                                  Cross, 4th
                                                                  Class.
  16425 Pte.       Farmer, J.           7th Can. Inf. Bn.        Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 4th
                                                                   Class.
  16420 Sgt.       Dryden, W. H           "      "               D.C.M.
  16246 Sgt.       Fearless, H. N.        "      "               D.C.M.
  16576 L/Cpl.     Mullins, T. M.         "      "               D.C.M.
  16608 Cpl.       Odlum, J. W.           "      "               Mention.
    729 Pte.       Nuttall, E.          8th Can. Inf. Bn.        St. George's
                                                                   Cross, 4th
                                                                   Class.
   1616 Sig/Sgt.   Thornton, J.           "      "                 Medal of St.
                                                                 Cross, 4th
                                                                   Class.
   1058 R.S.M.     Robertson, Wm.         "      "               Mention.
   1539 C.S.M.     Hall, F. W.            "      "               V.C.
    478 L/Cpl.     Payne, J. A. K.        "      "               Mention.
    508 Pte.       Walters, H.            "      "               D.C.M.
    601 C.S.M.     Hay, J.                "      "               D.C.M.
   6545 S.M.       Good, R. G.          10th Can. Inf. Bn.       Medal of St.
                   (Temp. Capt.                                    George, 1st
                   23/5/15).                                       Class.
                   (Struck off 9/8/15 permanently unfit, Med. Board).
  19616 L/Cpl.     Allan, G. W.         10th Can. Inf. Bn        D.C.M.
  11910 Cpl.       Ross, T. O.            "      "               D.C.M.
  19637 Sgt.       Schultz, S.            "      "               D.C.M.
  19491 Pte.       Bloxham, G. H.         "      "               D.C.M.
  19617 L/Sgt.     Palmer, J. E.          "      "               D.C.M.
  19589 L/Cpl.     King, H. W.            "      "               D.C.M.
  20743 Cpl.       Baker, W. H.           "      "               "Croix de
                                                                   Guerre."
  29900 Q.M.S.     Birch, G. R.         2nd Div. Hd.-Qrs         St. George's
                                                                   Cross, 4th
                                                                   Class.
  24583 Cpl.       Campbell, J. J.      13th Can. Inf. Bn.       Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 1st
                                                                   Class.
  24789 Sgt.       Key, R.                "      "               Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 2nd
                                                                   Class.
  46799 Pte.       Danson, H.           Div. Sig. Coy.             D.C.M.

  24001 R.S.M.     Jeffery, J.          13th Can. Inf. Bn.       M.C.  Mention.
                   (Officer 13th Bn. Temp. Capt. 24/4/15.)
  24061 C.S.M.     Trainor, J.          13th Can. Inf. Bn.       Mention.
  24201 Cpl.       Reid, F. J.            "      "               Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 4th
                                                                   Class.
  24066 L/Cpl.     Fisher, F.             "      "               V.C.
  25669 Sgt.       Worrall, R.          4th Can. Inf. Bn.        St. George's
                                                                   Cross, 3rd
                     (Temp. Lieut. 9/5/15.)                        Class.
  26284 Pte.       Barrette, A.         14th Can. Inf. Bn.       Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 3rd
                                                                   Class.
  26648 C.S.M.     Price, C. B            "      "               D.C.M.
                        (Temp. Lieut. 9/5/15.)
  25908 C.S.M.     Handcock. A.         14th Can. Inf. Bn.       Mention.
  25790 Sgt.       Hawkins, A. E          "      "               Mention.
  28776 Pte.       MacAtair, A.         Can. Divl. Sigl. Co.     D.C.M.
                      (H.Q., 3rd Can.
                      Inf. Bde.).
  23262 Pte.       Duncan, W.             "      "               D.C.M.
                      (H.Q. 3rd Can.
                      Inf. Bde.)
   5646 Cpl.       Casstles, E.           "      "               D.C.M.
   5696 Cpl.       Kennedy, B. E.         "      "               D.C.M.
   5753 Pte.       Stewart, H. R          "      "               Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 4th
                                                                   Class.
  30004 Sgt.       MacDonald, J.        Hd.-Qrs. Co. Can. Divl.  D.C.M.
                                          Train
  30115 Dr.        Pate, S. A.            "      "               D.C.M.
  30183 Dr.        Barton, Geo.         No. 2 Co. Can. Divl.     Medal of St.
                                          Train                    George, 4th
                                                                   Class.
  32713 Sgt.       Brown, T. M.         1st Can. Field Amb.      St. George's
                                                                   Cross, 4th
                                                                   Class.
                                                                   Mention.
                                                                     D.C.M.
  32758 Sgt.       Smith, W. B.           "      "               Mention.
  32922 Pte.       Trotter, E.            "      "               Mention.
  36210 Pte.       Sharman, J. D.         "      "               Mention.
  33191 Pte.       Turner, F.           2nd Can. Field Amb.      Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 3rd
                                                                   Class.
                                                                   D.C.M.
  32979 Sgt.       McKay, J. W.           "      "               Mention.
  33214 Pte.       Youldon, J. G.         "      "               Mention.
  33099 Pte.       Leishman, W. M.        "      "               Mention.
  33047 Pte.       Dalton, J.             "      "               Mention.
  28722 Pte.       Chester, R. M.         "      "               Mention.
                    (Temp. Lieut. 7/11/15.)
  33060 Pte.       Farr, C. J. E.       2nd Can. Field Amb.      Mention.
  33470 Pte.       Tomkins, C. B.       3rd Can. Field Amb.      Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 4th
                                                                   Class.
  32773 Sgt.       Kinsell, J. G.       3rd Can. Field Amb.      Mention.
                   (C.A.S.C. Attached-
                     Imperial).
  33259 S/Sgt.     Milborne, A. J. B.     "      "               Mention.
  33461 Cpl.       Stewart, H. G.         "      "               Mention.
  33280 L/Cpl.     Bartley, A.            "      "               Mention.
  33470 Pte.       Tompkins, C. B.        "      "               Mention.
  33358 Cpl.       Head, R. L.            "      "               Mention.
  33408 Pte.       Millen, A.             "      "               Mention.
  33365 Pte.       Holloway, W. J.      3rd Can. Field Amb.      Mention.
  26354 Pte.       Mallette, J. R.      14th Can. Inf. Bn.       D.C.M.
  25540 R.S.M.     Stephenson, J. M.      "      "               "Medaille
                                                                   Militaire."
  27155 Sgt.       Calder, J. M.        15th Can. Inf. Bn.       D.C.M.
  27210 Pte.       Kerr, M. K.            "      "               Mention.
  27892 Sgt.       Flood, W. J.           "      "               Mention.
  27001 R.M.S.     Keith, Jas.            "      "               Mention.
  28874 Sgt.       Dougall, J.          16th Can. Inf. Bn.       D.C.M.
  29519 Sgt.       Lunn, B. C.            "      "               D.C.M.
  29524 Cpl.       Heath, G. C.           "      "               Mention.
  29418 Pte.       Bizley, J. W.          "      "               Mention.
  29047 L/Cpl.     Minchin, A. W.         "      "               Mention.
   5591 S.M.       Ridgwell, S. A.      Hd.-Qrs. Can. Divl.
                                          Engrs.                 Mention.
   5154 L/Cpl.     McIntyre, H. P.      1st Fld. Co. Can.
                                                   Engrs.        St. George's
                                                                   Cross, 4th
                                                                   Class.
   5077 L/Cpl.     Casement, R. J.        "      "               D.C.M.
   5087 2nd Cpl.   Evans, A. J. L.        "      "               Mention.
                     (Lieut. 24/7/15.)
   3209 Sgt.       Smith-Rewse,
                     M. B. W.           1st Fld. Co. Can.
                                            Engrs                Mention.
                         (Temp. Lieut. 9/5/15.)
                         (Killed in Action 22/5/15.)
   5301 C.S.M.     Chetwynd, G. R.      2nd Fld. Co. Can.
                                          Engrs.                 Mention.
                         (Lieut. 25/10/15.)
   5310 Sgt.       Ferris, C. B.        2nd Fld. Co. Can.        "Croix de
                                                                   Guerre."
  45049 L/Cpl.     Borrie, W. J.        3rd Fld. Co. Can.
                                          Engrs.                 Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 3rd
                                                                   Class.
  45006 Sgt.       Turner, G. R.          "      "               Mention.
                      (Temp. Lieut. 13/9/15.)
  22046 Pte.       Dunham, A. W.        1st Can. Div. Mtd. Tps.  Medal of St.
                                          (Cyclist Co.).           George, 3rd
                                                                   Class.
   1944 Pte.       Aitken, G. T.        1st Can. Div. Mtd. Tps.  Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 4th
                                                                   Class.
   5679 Cpl.       Hudson, H.           Can. Divl. Sigl. Co.     St. George's
                     (H.Q., 2nd Can.                               Cross, 3rd
                      Inf. Bde.).                                  Class.
   5601 Coy.S.M.   May, H. T.             "      "               St. George's
                                                                   Cross, 4th
                                                                   Class.
   5674 Sgt.       Gale, T.               "      "               Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 2nd
                                                                   Class.
  21190 Pte.       Quigley, H. S.         "      "               D.C.M.
                     (Hd.-Qrs. 2nd Can. Inf. Bde.).
                     (Temp. Lieut. 19/9/15.)
   5615 Pte.       Adams, H. M.         Can. Divl. Sigl. Co.     D.C.M.
                     (Hd.-Qrs. 3rd Can. Inf. Bde.).
  33387 Pte.       Lisney, F. J.        3rd Can. Fld. Amb.       Mention.
  33442 Q.M.S.     Rotsey, A. E.          "      "               Mention.
  33303 L/Cpl.     Cameron, H. T.         "      "               D.C.M.
   1047 Sgt.       Morris, D.           Can. Cav. Brigade        D.C.M.
                     (K.E.H. Imperial
                      Forces).
   1517 S.S.M.     Collins, G. S.         "      "               D.C.M.
                     (L.S.H.).
    221 Cpl.       Pym, T. S.             "      "               D.C.M.
                     (R.C.D.).
  C40085 Bdr.      Wilkinson, H. E.     1st Can. Fld. A. Bde.    D.C.M.
                     (Bde. Staff).
  C40106 Cpl.      Lamplough, L. A.       "      "               Mention.
                     (1st Battery).
  C40440 S.M.      Donaldson, J. W. A.    "      "               D.C.M.
                     (2nd Battery).
  C40870 Cpl.      Ritchie, A. B.         "      "               D.C.M.
                     (Ammn. Col.).
  C42001 B.S.M.    Kerry, H. G.           "      "               Medal of St.
                     (4th Battery).                                George, 2nd
                                                                   Class.
  C40217 Sgt.      MacInnes, W.           "      "                 "Croix de
                                                                   Guerre."
  C41055 A/Sgt.    Olsen, O. C.         2nd Can. Fld. A. Bde.    D.C.M.
                     (5th Battery).
  C41434 Q-M.S.    Milburn, A. R.         "      "               D.C.M.
                     (6th Battery).
  C41314 Cpl.      Shirley, J.            "      "               Mention.
                     (7th Battery).
  C41445 Sgt.      Hicks, A. S.         2nd Can. Fld. A. Bde.    Mention.
                     (8th Battery).
  C41034 Bdr.      Cotton, D. P.          "      "               St. George's
                     (5th Battery).                                Cross, 4th
                                                                   Class.
  40195 Sgt.       Jacobs, M.           3rd Can. Fld. A. Bde.    Mention.
                     (Bde. Staff).
  42423 S.M.       Wildgoose, R.          "      "               Mention.
                     (9th Battery).
  C42509 Cpl.      Baker, R. F.           "      "               D.C.M.
                     (10th Battery).
  C40665 Gr.       James, A. W.           "      "               D.C.M.
                     (12th Battery)
  C42244 B.Q.Sgt.  Barnacal, Wm.          "      "               Mention.
                     (11th Battery).                               Medal of St.
                                                                   George, 2nd
                                                                   Class.
  42635 Sgt.       Hayward, J.            "      "               Mention.
                     (Ammn. Col.).
  12835 B.S.M.     Armitage, J.         118th How. Bde.
                     (458th Battery).                R.F.A.      D.C.M.
  15093 Drvr.      Marks, F. T.           "      "               Mention.
                     (459th Battery).
  24362 Cpl.       Pobjoy, H.             "      "               Mention.
                     (Ammn. Col.).
   3368 Gr.        Gurr, A.               "      "               D.C.M.
                     (Headquarters).



  SECOND CANADIAN DIVISION.

                                                              HONOUR
  REGTL. NO.                                                  OR REWARD
  AND RANK.      NAME.                   UNIT.                GRANTED

         2/11/15 Lieut. A. W. Northover  28th Battalion       Military
                                                                Cross.

  73741 29/10/15 Pte. H. B. Compton      28th Battalion       D.C.M.
  69805 29/10/15 Sgt. W. C. Ryer         26th Battalion       D.C.M.




  APPENDIX VI

  STATEMENT OF CASUALTIES, BY UNITS, OF THE
  CANADIAN DIVISIONS UP TO NOVEMBER 30TH,
  1915


                                                                 1ST DIVISION

                           Killed in       Died of      Died of                     Prisoners
                            Action.        Wounds.   Diseases, etc.   Wounded.       of War.      Missing.     Total.

                                 Other
                      Officers.  Ranks.   O.   O.R.    O.    O.R.     O.    O.R.    O.    O.R.    O.  O.R.   O.     O.R.


  H.Q. 1st Divn.         --       --      --    --     --      1      --      4     --     --     --   --    --       5
  H.Q. 1st In. Be.       --       --      --    --     --     --      --     --     --     --     --   --    --      --
  1st Battn.             14      184       3    42     --      3      17    636      1      2      1   74    36     941
  2nd   "                 5      102       1    38     --      9      13    350      3    122      3  141    25     762
  3rd   "                 7      109       3    38      1      3      24    427      6    245     --   74    41     896
  4th   "                 8      107       2    44     --      5      24    632     --     --      1   42    33     730
  H.Q. 2nd In. Be.       --       --      --    --     --     --       3     --     --     --     --   --     3      --
  5th Battn.              7      112       5    53     --      1      20    611     --     26      1   25    33     828
  7th   "                 8      112       2    51     --      5      24    642      7    209      1  114    42   1,033
  8th   "                 5      127      --    41     --      1      23    438      5    149      1   45    34     801
  10th  "                14      121       4    57     --      2      24    638      2     26      1  118    45     962
  H.Q. 3rd In. Be.       --       --      --    --     --     --       2      7     --     --     --    1     2       8
  13th Battn.             4      119      --    45     --      7      22    492      2    141      2   65    30     869
  14th  "                 4       84      --    39     --      3      16    402     --     53      2   33    22     614
  15th  "                 3       77       2    80     --     15      11    353     10    223      3  144    29     892
  16th  "                 7      117       9    51     --      3      16    402     --     53      2   33    27     659
  1st Div. Cavalry       --       --      --     4     --      2      --      8     --     --     --   --    --      14
  1st Div. Cyclist       --        5      --     3     --      4       1     --     --     --     --   --     1      12
  H.Q. Mtd. Bde.         --       --      --    --     --     --       1     --     --     --     --   --     1      --
  L.S.H. (R.C.)           1       23      --    12     --      1       7    161     --     --     --    2     8     199
  Roy. Can. Drag.        --       10      --     6     --      2       4    107     --     --     --   --     4     125
  H.Q. Div. Art'y.       --       --      --    --     --     --      --      1     --     --     --   --    --       1
  1st. Bde. C.F.A.        1        9      --     9     --      3      10     79     --     --     --   --    11     100
  2nd   "     "           3       22      --     9     --      4       5    100     --     --     --   --     8     135
  3rd   "     "          --        9      --    11     --      2       9    114     --     --     --   --     9     136
  lst. Div. Ammn. Col.   --       --      --    --     --      1      --     13     --     --     --   --    --      14
  1st Hvy. Battery       --       --      --    --     --     --      --      6     --     --     --   --    --       6
  R.C.H.A.               --       --      --    --     --      1       2      4     --     --     --   --     2       5
  A.M.G. Bde.            --        1      --    --     --      1      --      5     --     --     --   --    --       7
  1st Div. Engrs.         3       23      --    14     --      4       3    115     --     --     --    3     6     159
  1st  "   Sig. Co.      --        2      --     1     --      3      --     14     --     --     --    1    --      21
  C.A.S.C.               --       --       1     2     --      4      --     27     --     --     --    2     1      35
  C.A.M.C.               --       --      --    12      3      4       4     37     --      2     --    1     7      56
  C.A.V.C.               --       --      --    --     --      2      --      1     --     --     --   --    --       3
  C.O.C.                 --       --      --    --     --      1      --     --     --     --     --   --    --       1
  C. Postal C.           --       --      --    --     --     --      --     --     --     --     --   --    --      --
  C.A.P.C.               --       --      --    --     --     --      --     --     --     --     --   --    --      --
  P.P.C.L.I.              7      203       3    52     --      7      22    551      1     15      2   58    35     886
  N/Sisters              --       --      --    --     --     --      --     --     --     --     --   --    --      --

  Totals                 99    1,678      28   714      4    104     307  7,177     37  1,266     20  976   495  11,915


                                                          2ND DIVISION.

                           Killed in       Died of      Died of                     Prisoners
                            Action.        Wounds.   Diseases, etc.   Wounded.       of War.      Missing.     Total.

                                 Other
                      Officers.  Ranks.   O.   O.R.    O.    O.R.     O.    O.R.    O.    O.R.    O.  O.R.   O.     O.R.

  H.Q. 2nd Divn.         --       --      --    --     --     --      --      1     --     --     --   --    --       1
  H.Q. 4 Inf. Bde.       --       --      --    --     --      1      --     --     --     --     --   --    --       1
  18th Battn.             2       11      --     1     --      5      --     44     --     --     --   --     2      61
  19th   "               --       10      --     6     --      4      --     53     --     --     --   --    --      73
  20th   "               --        8      --     3     --      3      --     33     --     --     --   --    --      47
  21st   "                1        7      --     4     --      2      --     44     --     --     --   --     1      57
  H.Q. 5 Inf. Bde.       --       --      --    --     --     --       1     --     --     --     --   --     1      --
  22nd Battn.             1       12      --     3     --      4       1     74     --      1     --   --     2      94
  24th   "               --       13      --     9     --      2       4     65     --     --     --   --     4      89
  25th   "               --       18      --     7     --      1       3     99     --     --     --    6     3     131
  26th   "               --       28       1     8     --      4       6     90     --     --     --    1     7     131
  H.Q. 6 Inf. Bde.       --       --      --    --     --     --      --     --     --     --     --   --    --      --
  27th Battn.            --       15      --     9     --      1       1     57     --     --     --   --     1      82
  28th   "               --       26      --    10     --      5       2     54     --     --     --    9     2     104
  29th   "               --        8      --     4     --      2       6     27     --     --     --    1     6      42
  31st   "                1       14      --     1     --      4      --     46     --     --     --   --     1      65
  2nd Div. Cavalry       --       --      --    --     --      1      --     --     --     --     --   --    --       1
  2nd  "   Cyclists      --       --      --    --     --     --      --     --     --     --     --   --    --      --
  H.Q. 1st Bde. C.M.R.   --       --      --    --     --     --      --     --     --     --     --   --    --      --
  1st Regt. C.M.R.        1       --      --    --     --     --      --      2     --     --     --   --     1       2
  2nd   "     "          --        1      --     2     --     --      --      8     --     --     --   --    --      11
  3rd   "     "          --       --       1    --     --     --       1      6     --     --     --   --     2       6
  H.Q. 2nd Bde. C.M.R.   --       --      --    --     --     --      --     --     --     --     --   --    --      --
  4th Regt. C.M.R.       --       --      --    --     --     --      --      5     --     --     --   --    --       5
  5th  "      "          --       --      --    --     --     --      --      4     --     --     --   --    --       4
  6th  "      "          --       --      --    --     --     --      --      4     --     --     --   --    --       4
  H.Q. 2nd Div. Art.     --       --      --    --     --     --      --     --     --     --     --   --    --      --
  4th Bde. C.F.A.        --       --      --    --     --     --      --      2     --     --     --   --    --       2
  5th  "     "           --       --      --    --     --     13      --      6     --     --     --    1    --      20
  6th How.   "           --       --      --    --     --      2      --     --     --     --     --   --    --       2
  2nd Div. Amm. Col.     --       --      --    --     --     --      --      1     --     --     --   --    --       1
  2nd Hvy. Battery       --       --      --    --     --     --      --     --     --     --     --   --    --      --
  Eaton's M. G. Battery  --       --      --    --     --     --      --     --     --     --     --   --    --      --
  Bordon's  "      "     --       --      --    --     --      1      --      2     --     --     --   --    --       3
  2nd Div. Engrs.         1        2      --     2     --      1       3     24     --     --     --   --     4      29
  2nd  "   Sig. Co.      --       --      --    --     --      1      --     --     --     --     --   --    --       1
  C.A.S.C.               --       --      --    --     --      1      --     --     --     --     --   --    --       1
  C.A.M.C.               --       --      --    --     --     --       1     --     --     --     --   --     1      --
  42nd Battn.             1        2      --     2     --     --      --      7     --     --     --   --     1      11
  49th Battn.            --        2      --     1     --      2       3     16     --     --     --   --     3      21
  R.C.R.                 --       --      --    --     --     --      --     --     --     --     --   --    --      --
  N/Sisters              --       --      --    --      2     --      --     --     --     --     --   --     2      --

  Totals                  8      177       2    72      2     60      32    774     --      1     --   18    44   1,102


                                                      GRAND TOTALS CASUALTIES.

  1st Division           99    1,678      28   714      4    104     307  7,177     37  1,266     20  976   495  11,915
  2nd Division            8      177       2    72      2     60      32    774     --      1     --   18    44   1,102

  GRAND TOTALS          107    1,855      30   786      6    164     339  7,951     37  1,267     20  994   639  13,017




  PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN IN
  RICHARD CLAY AND SONS, LIMITED,
  BRUNSWICK STREET, STAMFORD STREET, S.B.,
  AND BUNGAY, SUFFOLK.



      *      *      *      *      *




  EXTRACTS FROM
  PRESS OPINIONS
  OF
  CANADA IN FLANDERS


EVEN NAPIER HAS WRITTEN NOTHING BETTER.

"I have no hesitation in saying that Sir Max Aitken is to be ranked
with Sir William Napier in the power of describing a battle.  The book
should be in the hands of every reader in the Empire, for the inspiring
quality of it, its nobility, its bravery.  It is in his description of
the part played by the Canadians in the Battle of Ypres that Sir Max
Aitken touches his highest, and that is so high that hardly anyone has
surpassed it.  Even Napier has written nothing better than Sir Max
Aitken's account of the second battle of Ypres--a battle which we won,
surely, by the direct grace of God."--Sir W. Robertson Nicoll in the
_British Weekly_.


A LIVING BARRIER.

"Excellently done....  With the aid of excellent sketch maps every
phase can here be followed of the fight in which the Canadians, first
alone, and then foremost among the reinforcements, improvised and
maintained a living barrier against the flood of the German army which
had poured through the great breach on the British flank, and thus
averted, in Sir John French's significant words, a 'disaster which
might have been attended with the most serious consequences.'"--_The
Times_.


A BOOK WHICH WILL LIVE.

"The story of how the Canadians fought at Neuve Chapelle, Ypres, at
Givenchy, at Festubert, as he tells it here, is as absorbing as ever,
and our pride in the lavish bravery and sacrifice of the daughter
nation is, if that were possible, strengthened by reading these
pages....  It will be one of the books on the war which will
live."--_Daily Telegraph_.


A GREAT BOOK.

"A great book by a big man--Sir Max Aitken deserves not merely
compliments and unstinted praise, but thanks as well."--_Reynolds's
Newspaper_.


CLEAR BATTLE PICTURES.

"The splendid work of the Canadians on the Western front makes a fine
story in the pages of 'Canada in Flanders,' by Sir Max Aitken, M.P.  He
writes an easy style, and when describing a complicated battlefield can
bring clear pictures of its events before the reader.  The most
important chapter is headed 'Ypres.'  It gives the best and most lucid
account we have yet seen of the battles which followed the German gas
attack last April."--_Manchester Guardian_.


AN EMPIRE ANNAL.

"A book to thrill and inspire ... to read the story told by Sir Max
Aitken is to read one of the finest stories in the annals of the
Empire."--_Sunday Times_.


STORIES THAT THRILL.

"One of the clearest expositions and most effective pieces of writing
we remember to have read....  His stories will thrill his readers not
only in Canada ... but wherever the English language is
read."--_Standard_.


HEROIC DEEDS.

"The heroic deeds of the Canadians at Ypres make one tingle with pride
to be a kinsman to such soldiers.  Farmers and fruit farmers, editors
and ranchers all showed themselves to be of the finest fighting stuff
in the world."--_Evening Standard_.


TWO NEW BRUNSWICKERS.

"Not only has Canada sent us splendid troops, but New Brunswick (there
is a fine irony in the name) has strengthened our arm in sending us Mr.
Bonar Law....  Another New Brunswicker, also a Scots minister's son,
who has made good is Sir Max Aitken.  His book of the Canadians in
Flanders is now one of the liveliest (and truest) stories on the
bookstalls."--_Graphic_.


CANADA'S AGINCOURT.

"What Agincourt is to the English reader of Shakespeare Ypres will be
to unborn Canadians....  We can wish for no better telling of the
heart-grips in a great battle."--_Observer_.


WITHIN SOUND OF THE GUNS.

"The Official Historian of the Canadian Expeditionary Force, whoever he
may be ... cannot hope to match the vivid narrative, written, as one
may say, within sound of the guns, in which Sir Max Aitken relates the
deeds of the gallant men with whom he served in Flanders."--_Daily
Chronicle_.


CANADA'S ACHIEVEMENT.

"Sir Max Aitken is a worthy chronicler of great deeds, and his
introductory chapters alone add materially to our knowledge of the
greatness of Canada's achievement.  Most space is naturally given to
the share of the Canadians in the battles of Neuve Chapelle and Ypres,
which are vividly described from the military and human
standpoint."--_Daily Graphic_.


DEATHLESS EXPLOITS AT YPRES.

"The deathless exploit of the Canadians in stemming the German onrush
at Ypres and frustrating the expected gains of the gas trick will often
be retold, but never, we think, to the displacement of the version here
given, with its tense reality and unforced power.  The author has
succeeded in combining a clear impression of the engagement and its
objective as a whole with a sufficiency of detail to let us understand
something of the character of such warfare from the individual's point
of view....  Canada has been fortunate in her Record Officer."--_Pall
Mall Gazette_.


FASCINATING IMPRESSIONS.

"What a fascinating book this is.  It has some thrilling stories of the
heroism of the gallant Canadian soldiers.  Sir Max Aitken can write.
It was he, you remember, who was responsible for the only official
story of the heroic fighting at Ypres that really gave an adequate
impression of the battle, and everyone was wondering for days after the
publication of that account who the brilliant author could be.  Well,
his new book is better than that account and tells more not only of
what the men did, but which men and which regiments took part in the
now historic struggles round ruined Ypres."--"The Rambler" in the
_Daily Mirror_.


A VERITABLE EPIC.

"This is one of the many good books of the war which rank with those of
'Ian Hay,' 'Sapper,' and Mr. John Buchan.  Such books are not likely to
be affected by the 'slump' in war books of which we hear.  They are
indispensable....  A veritable epic of Canada's share in the
war."--Clement Shorter in _The Sphere_.


A JOYOUS SHILLINGSWORTH.

"The Secretary of State for the Colonies is correct in his description
of Sir Max Aitken's work as 'a model of lucid, picturesque, and
sympathetic narrative.' ... A joyous shillingsworth--the best we have
seen for a long time."--_Morning Post_.


BRAVERY AND SACRIFICE.

"It is a thrilling record of the manner in which Canada has played her
part in the great fight on the Western front, and hitherto unpublished
stories of extraordinary feats of bravery and sacrifice for others are
told.  As a record of what the Canadians have accomplished for the
Motherland it is one of the best books the war has produced, and it is
written in such an interesting form that it can and should be read by
all of the English-speaking race."--_Star_.


A FLAME OF PATRIOTISM.

"Of the making of books on the war there is no end.  But few have
achieved, or will achieve, the popularity that is certainly destined
for 'Canada in Flanders.' ... To English readers, of whom there will be
many, the chapters which deal with the raising of the corps in Canada
will, perhaps for the first time, bring realization of the flame of
patriotism which spread like a prairie fire through the Dominion at the
outbreak of the war."--_Lloyd's Weekly_.


AN ARMY OF AMATEURS.

"Sir Max points out, over and over again, that the Canadian Army is
almost entirely an army of amateurs.  Princess Patricia's Light
Infantry was recruited from old soldiers, but the rest of the Canadian
army was made up of men without military experience.  This fact is of
immense significance, particularly as it is equally true of the greater
part of the British forces."--_Daily Express_.



HODDER & STOUGHTON, Publishers, WARWICK SQ., LONDON, E.C.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Canada in Flanders, Volume I (of 3), by
Lord Max Aitken Beaverbrook

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANADA IN FLANDERS, VOLUME I ***

***** This file should be named 46114.txt or 46114.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/1/1/46114/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
