The Project Gutenberg EBook of British Royal Proclamations Relating to
America 1603-1783, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: British Royal Proclamations Relating to America 1603-1783

Author: Various

Editor: Clarence S. Brigham

Release Date: July 1, 2014 [EBook #46167]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRITISH ROYAL PROCLAMATIONS, 1603-1783 ***




Produced by Colin Bell, John Campbell, Joseph Cooper and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.
  Bold text is denoted by =equal signs=.
  The oe ligature has been expanded to 'oe'.
  Superscripts in the text are indicated by ^. For example
      y^e, 10^{th}.

  Obvious typographical and punctuation errors have been corrected
  after careful comparison with other occurrences within the text
  and consultation of external sources.

  More detail can be found at the end of the book.




  _Burt Franklin: Bibliography and Reference Series # 56_

  BRITISH ROYAL PROCLAMATIONS
  RELATING TO AMERICA
  1603-1783

  [Illustration: PROCLAMATION OF 1688 (reduced facsimile).]

  BRITISH ROYAL PROCLAMATIONS
  RELATING TO AMERICA
  1603-1783

  EDITED BY
  CLARENCE S. BRIGHAM, A.M.

  _Burt Franklin: Bibliography and Reference Series # 56_

  [Illustration]

  BURT FRANKLIN
  NEW YORK

  Published by
  BURT FRANKLIN
  514 West 113th Street
  New York 25, N. Y.

  ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED
  AMERICAN ANTIQUARIAN SOCIETY--1911

  PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.




Introduction.


This volume is the outgrowth of action taken by the Society at its
annual meeting in October, 1906, when a committee consisting of Mr.
Waldo Lincoln, Professor William MacDonald, and Dr. J. Franklin
Jameson was appointed to arrange for a new volume of the Society's
Transactions. At the April meeting, 1907, the committee was given power
to proceed with the publication of the British Royal Proclamations
relating to America, and in October following appointed the writer to
edit the volume. The editor spent the summer of 1908 in England engaged
in this undertaking.


The present volume includes all English Royal proclamations which
concern North and South America, from 1603 to 1783. Only those
proclamations are printed which emanated directly from the King.
The numerous declarations and proclamations issued by provincial
and colonial governors, the unauthorized proclamations of minor
English officials serving in America, the proclamations of the
governors-general of Canada and the Thanksgiving and Fast-Day
proclamations of the New England governors have all been omitted. They
are documents of another class, and exist in such profusion as to be
quite beyond the scope of this volume. These colonial proclamations,
furthermore, are practically never entered in the English records.
As original broadsides, they are very rarely found in English
depositories, but are scattered throughout the libraries and archives
of America. Enough of these exist to form the basis of another volume.
Limiting the present field to royal proclamations allows the subject to
be covered with reasonable completeness.


Proclamations only are included, under which heading would come
manifestos and declarations of the King. In a few cases proclamations
were issued by the Lords Justices during the King's absence from
England. The great mass of orders in council, which were occasionally
issued as broadsides, but generally are found only in manuscript
entries, are not included. These are now being printed in the "Acts
of the Privy Council, Colonial Series," the third volume of which has
progressed as far as the year 1745. Another class of proclamations
rejected are those of the Lords Lieutenants of Ireland, which repeat
verbatim the English orders in council.


From the early days of English history, proclamations were issued
by the Crown to make known to the people new acts or regulations or
declarations of public importance. Distributed for public view in
printed broadside form, they have been familiar to twenty generations
of English-speaking people. Yet, in spite of their frequency of issue
and in spite of their occasional importance as public documents, there
has been scarcely a book upon the forms of English government or upon
the history of records, which gives a detailed account of the method of
issuing, entering, and publishing proclamations. It remained for Mr.
Robert Steele to compile during the past year, "A Bibliography of Royal
Proclamations, 1485-1714, with an Historical Essay on their Origin and
Use." This work, in two folio volumes, forms volumes five and six of
the Earl of Crawford's splendidly published series, the _Bibliotheca
Lindesiana_, and in this country can be consulted at most of the large
libraries. Mr. Steele so thoroughly treats of the issuing, enforcement,
and history of proclamations, that more than a brief allusion to their
method of publication is unnecessary in this place.


Proclamations, during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries at
least, usually underwent the following routine. They were drawn up
by the Attorney General upon instructions from the Privy Council,
then engrossed on vellum and signed by the King. After having been
printed as broadsides in an edition of a thousand or more by the King's
printer, they were sent by messengers to the sheriffs of the various
counties and towns, by whom they were posted. A document of the period
of Charles II preserved in the Public Record Office shows the method of
issuing a proclamation:

  "Proclamations how passed.--Proclamations are usually drawn by the
  Attorney Generall and assented to by the Council and brought down to
  a Secretary of State to be engrossed in vellum and soe signed by the
  King (without any attestation of the Secretary), then being dated
  they are sent (sealed in a paper) to the King's Printing House by a
  messenger, who of course receives for their service 2s. 6d. of the
  Printer. Then are printed off such a number as is judged convenient,
  and of them some Copys furnished on the K.'s and to the Secry^s to
  the Councell, &ca.: and 1250 are carryed to the Clerk of the Crown
  to be distributed under the Great Seal, together with the original
  Proclamation signed by the King, which is there kept upon a File for
  the Clerk of the Crown's discharge and warrant. There are made up by
  the Clerk of the Crown, 66 writs directed to so many Sheriffs; each
  containing a certain number of proclamations tyed up with a Label,
  and then sealed. These writs are delivered over to the 4 Riding
  Messengers, whose office it is to distribute them, and for their
  pains have among them L40 out of the Hanaper paid by Bill, if it be
  y^e King's business (as generally they are), or else L50 if it be
  a private man's concern. His fees for the 66 writs are, L22 at 6s.
  8d. per writt. The Printer has, by old Rates & Custom, 1d. per sheet
  for what he prints at the King's charge which comes to L15 for a
  Proclamation, and upon bills exhibited to the Lord Chancellor is paid
  in the Hanaper. His bills for quantitys furnished to the Secretary's
  office are attested by the Secretaries respectively & those to the
  Council office by the Clerks there." (S.P.D. Entry Book 72, p. 219,
  quoted by Steele.)

Another interesting side light upon their method of distribution is
shown by a quotation from the records of the Privy Council:

  January 10, 1678-79. "Whereas his Majesty did this Day in Council
  take notice of some Proclamations that have issued whereof no notice
  has come into severall parts of the Kingdome than what happens to
  be given by the Gazet, notwithstanding the great charge that is
  brought unto his Majesties accompt for the sending and Dispatching
  all Proclamations that issue, therefore to reform this abuse, and to
  settle for the future a method of lesse expence, and more certainty
  and expedition in the publique Service, It is this day ordered by
  his Majesty in Councill that the Right honorable the principall
  Secretaries of State do call before them Philip Frowde Esq. Governor
  of the Post office, and settle a method for sending all Proclamations
  to the respective Sheriffs, so as the next Postmaster to such Sheriff
  be charged with the Delivery of the same, and send up the Sheriffs
  receipt for his Discharge. The clerk of the Crowne is also to be
  summoned, and orders given him, that as soon as Proclamations passe
  the Seale, he do deliver them the next post day into the Post office
  and take a receipt thereof for the Discharge of his Duty herein, And
  the messengers of the Exchequer who have formerly been intrusted with
  this Service to his Majesties Damage and Expence are to be summoned
  and acquainted with the Rule that is now to be established, and that
  they desist hereafter from intermedling with this matter." (Privy
  Council Register, II Chas., 14:12.)

This new order, however, took away much of the revenue of the
messengers and after a formal complaint had been made and duly heard,
the Council concluded not to alter

  "the ancient Course of Dispersing Proclamations, but leaves the Same
  to the Execution of the messengers of the Exchequer as formerly
  and that they take care that no Complaints be brought against them
  hereafter for not timely delivering of Proclamations. And his Majesty
  is graciously pleased to Command that the said Order of the 10th
  Instant be, and the same is hereby Superseded." (Idem, p. 39.)

With the reform of the postal service in 1709, the Privy Council
discontinued the use of riding messengers and ordered that in future
proclamations should be sent out by post.


Proclamations when signed by the King were termed "signed bills" and
most of them are now preserved in the Public Record Office among
the Privy Seal bundles. During the period covered by this volume,
proclamations were generally copied on the backs of the Patent
Rolls, and can be found through the Indexes. The eighteenth century
proclamations were furthermore noted in the Crown Office Docquet Books,
which are in the Public Record Office. Since proclamations were first
ordered in the Privy Council, they were duly entered in its records and
are to be found in the Registers in the Privy Council Office. After
1665, proclamations were generally published in the _London Gazette_,
and before that date occasionally in London newspapers, such as the
_Mercurius Politicus_ and the _Kingdomes Intelligencer_.


It would seem as if there would be in England at least one official
collection of broadside proclamations, yet no depository--the
Public Record Office, the Privy Council Office, or the British
Museum--possesses more than a fair share of the total number. Private
collections are often the most valuable for certain periods, and as Mr.
Steele's work shows, it requires a canvass of all existing collections
to insure anything like completeness.

The principal depositories of proclamations have the following
distinguishing characteristics:

The British Museum collection, although but sparsely represented for
the eighteenth century, is notably full for the seventeenth century
issues. Scattered in many different volumes, however, a comprehensive
search requires a considerable amount of time. The Museum also has
excellent files of the newspapers in which many of the proclamations
were printed.

The collection of proclamations in the Public Record Office is
contained in eight folio volumes, and is also less strongly represented
for the eighteenth century. Here the Indexes to the Patent Rolls and
the Crown Office Docquet Books are invaluable.

At the Privy Council Office is the best collection of proclamations for
American reference and one which is especially good for the eighteenth
century. The long, bulky series of Privy Council Registers, which is
full of interest to students of American affairs, contains the entries
of most proclamations.

Other London libraries, where the collections of proclamations were
examined for this volume, were the Guildhall and the Society of
Antiquaries. Each of these depositories had large numbers of the
earlier proclamations and possessed certain issues which existed in no
other place. At the Bodleian Library, Oxford, the Public Record Office
in Dublin, and the Register House in Edinburgh, valuable collections
were consulted.

Of the private collections, easily the most comprehensive is that
gathered by the Earl of Crawford and described in the Bibliography
of Royal Proclamations before referred to, in which volume other
collections, both private and public, are noted at length. There is
no large collection of broadside proclamations in any one American
library, although many of the larger public and historical libraries
possess occasional issues, and these, so far as found, have been noted.


There are one hundred and one proclamations entered in this volume.
They have been carefully transcribed from the printed broadsides,
except in the few instances where the broadside could not be found
and some other source had to be used. Above each proclamation the
date is given, and also a descriptive heading supplied by the editor
and enclosed in brackets. The notes serve chiefly to explain obscure
points, or to refer to original sources for certain Acts printed
in the text. The bibliographical information entered at the end of
each document gives the size of the original broadside, a list of
libraries where it is to be found, a reference regarding the entry of
the proclamation upon the Patent Roll, Crown Office Docquet Book, or
Privy Council Register, and a note of the fact as to whether it is
reprinted elsewhere. A list of the libraries referred to as containing
the broadsides, and a chronological list of the proclamations precede
the body of the text. The frontispiece reproduction of a proclamation
of 1688 is from an original broadside owned by the John Carter Brown
Library.


The editor's indebtedness to many English officials and librarians
for courtesies extended to him in the course of his work is hereby
gratefully acknowledged, especially to Mr. Hubert Hall of the Public
Record Office and Sir Almeric FitzRoy, Clerk of the Privy Council.
Professor W. L. Grant, then editing the "Acts of the Privy Council,
Colonial Series," made many helpful suggestions. To Mr. Robert Steele
above all others the Society is most deeply indebted. His aid and
advice willingly given, his exceptional knowledge of the particular
subject constantly placed at the editor's service, and finally his
scholarly published work on the Bibliography of Royal Proclamations
have all greatly helped to lighten the burden of research.

        CLARENCE S. BRIGHAM,
        _Editor_.

  August 5, 1911.




  List of Proclamations.


  1603, September 17.  Banishing Vagabonds to America,                1.
  1606, August 23.     Transporting of Women and Children to Foreign
                           Parts,                                     3.
  1614, September 11.  Importation of Whale-fins from Greenland,      4.
  1617, December 23.   Banishing Notorious Offenders to Virginia,     7.
  1618, June 9.        Censuring Sir Walter Raleigh for sacking St.
                           Thomas,                                    8.
  1619, May 18.        Importation of Whale-fins from Greenland,     10.
  1619, October 6.     Manufacture of Tobacco-pipes,                 12.
  1619, November 10.   Inspecting of Tobacco,                        15.
  1619, December 30.   Forbidding Planting of Tobacco in England,    18.
  1620, May 15.        Forbidding Roger North's Expedition to
                           Brazil,                                   21.
  1620, May 27.        Manufacture of Tobacco-pipes,                 24.
  1620, June 29.       Restraining Disorderly Trading in Tobacco,    27.
  1621, March 8.       Suppressing Lotteries in Virginia,            31.
  1622, November 6.    Prohibiting Disorderly Trading to New
                           England,                                  33.
  1624, September 29.  Encouraging Growth of Tobacco in Plantations, 35.
  1625, March 2.       Encouraging Growth of Tobacco in Plantations, 42.
  1625, April 9.       Importation of Tobacco,                       50.
  1625, May 13.        Settling the Affairs of Virginia,             52.
  1627, February 17.   Importation of Tobacco,                       55.
  1627, March 30.      Sealing of Tobacco,                           61.
  1627, August 9.      Importation of Tobacco,                       62.
  1630, November 24.   Forbidding Disorderly Trading with the
                           Savages,                                  66.
  1631, January 6.     Restricting Importation of Tobacco,           68.
  1633, October 13.    Restricting Sale of Tobacco,                  71.
  1634, March 13.      Requiring Licenses from Tobacconists,         74.
  1634, May 19.        Concerning Tobacco,                           75.
  1636, May 16.        Limiting Whale-trade to Muscovy Company,      78.
  1637, April 30.      Regulating Emigration to America,             80.
  1638, March 14.      Importation of Tobacco,                       82.
  1638, May 1.         Requiring Licenses for New England,           87.
  1639, March 25.      Concerning Tobacco,                           88.
  1639, August 19.     Licensing of Tobacconists,                    92.
  1643, November 24.   Requiring Loyalty from America,               94.
  1655, October 10.    Encouraging Settling in Jamaica,              96.
  1658, March 9.       Limiting Greenland Trade to Muscovy Company, 100.
  1660, September 22.  For Apprehension of Whalley and Goffe,       104.
  1661, March 29.      Prohibiting Planting of Tobacco in England,  106.
  1661, May 9.         Suppressing Vagrancy,                        109.
  1661, December 14.   Encouraging Settling in Jamaica,             112.
  1667, August 23.     Recalling Dispensations of Navigation Act,   114.
  1671, December 22.   Concerning the Planters at St. Christophers, 116.
  1674, March 11.      Recalling Dispensations of Navigation Act,   119.
  1674, November 30.   Prohibiting African Trade to Plantations,    120.
  1675, October 1.     For Apprehending Don Philip Hellen,          124.
  1675, November 24.   Enforcing Navigation Acts,                   126.
  1676, April 1.       Concerning Passes for Ships,                 129.
  1676, October 27.    Suppressing the Rebellion in Virginia,       130.
  1681, April 2.       Granting Pennsylvania to William Penn,       133.
  1685, February 6.    Continuing Officers in the Colonies,         135.
  1685, April 1.       Prohibiting African Trade to Plantations,    137.
  1688, January 20.    Suppressing Pirates in America,              140.
  1688, March 31.      Prohibiting General Trading at Hudson's Bay, 143.
  1689, February 19.   Continuing Officers in the Colonies,         146.
  1689, May 7.         Declaration of War against France,           147.
  1690, July 14.       For Apprehending William Penn,               150.
  1691, February 5.    For Apprehending William Penn,               152.
  1700, January 29.    For Apprehending Author of Darien Libel,     153.
  1701, March 6.       For the Apprehension of Pirates,             155.
  1702, March 9.       Continuing Officers in the Colonies,         159.
  1704, June 18.       Rates of Foreign Coins in Plantations,       161.
  1708, June 26.       Encouraging Trade to Newfoundland,           163.
  1711, June 23.       Establishing Post Office in America,         167.
  1714, October 4.     Concerning Passes for Ships,                 172.
  1714, November 22.   Continuing Officers in the Colonies,         174.
  1717, September 5.   For Suppressing Pirates in West Indies,      176.
  1718, December 21.   For Suppressing Pirates in West Indies,      178.
  1722, July 19.       Concerning Passes for Ships,                 180.
  1727, July 5.        Continuing Officers in the Colonies,         182.
  1729, December 31.   Concerning Passes for Ships,                 184.
  1740, April 9.       Encouraging Trade with America,              188.
  1740, June 19.       Providing for Distribution of Prize Money,   189.
  1741, June 18.       Regulating Distribution of Prizes,           193.
  1741, June 18.       Regulating Distribution of Prizes,           195.
  1744, March 29.      Declaration of War against France,           196.
  1744, June 14.       Regarding Distribution of Prizes,            200.
  1752, June 25.       Continuing Officers in Georgia,              201.
  1756, May 17.        Declaration of War against France,           203.
  1759, October 23.    Thanksgiving in England for Defeat of
                           French,                                  207.
  1759, October 23.    Thanksgiving in Scotland for Defeat of
                           French,                                  208.
  1760, October 27.    Continuing Officers in the Colonies,         210.
  1763, October 7.     Establishing New Governments in America,     212.
  1764, March 26.      Colonizing Granada and other Islands,        218.
  1772, August 26.     For Apprehending Destroyers of the Gaspee,   224.
  1774, December 16.   Providing Copper Currency for Virginia,      226.
  1775, August 23.     For Suppression of Rebellion in America,     228.
  1775, December 22.   Appointing the Distribution of Prizes,       230.
  1776, October 30.    Fast Day in England,                         234.
  1776, October 30.    Fast Day in Scotland,                        236.
  1778, January 23.    Fast Day in England,                         237.
  1778, January 23.    Fast Day in Scotland,                        239.
  1778, September 16.  Regarding the Distribution of Prizes,        241.
  1779, January 1.     Fast Day in England,                         246.
  1779, January 1.     Fast Day in Scotland,                        247.
  1779, December 13.   Fast Day in England,                         249.
  1779, December 13.   Fast Day in Scotland,                        250.
  1780, December 20.   Relations of England to Holland,             252.
  1781, January 12.    Fast Day in England,                         256.
  1781, January 12.    Fast Day in Scotland,                        257.
  1782, January 9.     Fast Day in England,                         259.
  1782, January 9.     Fast Day in Scotland,                        260.
  1783, February 14.   Declaring Cessation of Arms,                 262.




  List of Abbreviations


  OF THE NAMES OF LIBRARIES POSSESSING
  PROCLAMATIONS.

  =Adv.=     Advocates' Library, Edinburgh.

  =Antiq.=   Society of Antiquaries, London.

  =B. M.=    British Museum, London.

  =Bodl.=    Bodleian Library, Oxford.

  =Camb.=    Cambridge University Library.

  =Cant.=    Municipal Library, Canterbury.

  =Ch.=      Chetham Library, Manchester.

  =Crawf.=   Lord Crawford's Library, Haigh Hall.

  =D. H.=    Devonshire House, London (Friends' Historical Society).

  =Dalk.=    Dalkeith Palace (Duke of Buccleuch), Scotland.

  =Dubl.=    Dublin Public Record Office.

  =Guild.=   Guildhall Library, London.

  =Hodg.=    J. Eliot Hodgkins' Library, London.

  =I. T.=    Inner Temple, Library, London.

  =P. C.=    Privy Council Office, London.

  =P. R. O.= Public Record Office, London.

  =Q. C.=    Queen's College, Oxford.

  =Signet=   Signet Library, Edinburgh.

  =T. C. D.= Trinity College, Dublin.




Royal Proclamations




1603, September 17.

[Banishing Vagabonds to Newfoundland and West Indies.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION FOR THE DUE AND SPEEDY EXECUTION OF THE STATUTE
AGAINST ROGUES, VAGABONDS, IDLE, AND DISSOLUTE PERSONS.

Whereas at a Parliament holden at Westminster in the nine and thirtieth
yeere of the Reigne of his Majesties late deare Sister deceased Queene
Elizabeth, a profitable and necessary Law was made for the repressing
of Rogues, Vagabonds, idle and dissolute persons,[1] wherewith this
Realme was then much infested, by the due execution of which Lawe,
great good ensued to the whole Commonweale of this Realme, but now of
late by the remissenesse, negligence, and connivencie of some Justices
of the Peace, and other Officers in divers parts of the Realme, they
have swarmed and abounded every where more frequently then in times
past, which will grow to the great and imminent danger of the whole
Realme, if by the goodness of God Almighty, and the due and timely
execution of the said Law the same be not prevented.

And where to the end that no impediment might be to the due and full
execution of the same Law, his Highnesse Privie Councell, according
to the power to them in that behalfe given by the sayd Law, have by
their Order assigned places and parts beyond the Seas, unto which such
incorrigible or dangerous Rogues should according to the same Lawe be
banished and conveyed, as by the Order in that behalfe made, and under
this present Proclamation particularly mentioned and set downe, more at
large appeareth: His Majestie purposing (for the universall good of the
whole Realme) to have the same Law duely and fully executed, doth by
advice of his Privie Councell require all Justices of Peace, Maiors,
Bayliffes, Hedboroughs, Constables, and other Officers whatsoever to
whom it appertaineth, to see that the said Law be in all the parts, and
branches of the same carefully, duely and exactly executed, as they and
every of them will answere the contrary at their uttermost perils.

Given at his Majesties Mannour of Woodstocke the seventeenth day of
September, 1603, in the first yeere of his Highnesse Reigne of England,
France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the seven and thirtieth.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

THE ORDER.[2]

Forasmuch as it hath appeared unto us aswell by our owne viewes in
our travailes in this present Progresse of his Majestie, as also by
good and credible information from divers and sundrie partes of the
Realme, that Rogues grow againe and increase to bee incorrigible, and
dangerous not onely to his Majesties loving Subjects abroad, but also
to his Majestie and his Honourable Houshold and attendants in and
about his Court, which growing partly through the remissenes of some
Justices of the Peace, and other Officers in the Countrey, and partly
for that there hath beene no Suite made for assigning some place beyond
the Seas, to which such incorrigible or dangerous Rogues might bee
banished, according to the Statute in that behalfe made: We therfore
of his Majesties privie Councel, whose names are hereunto subscribed,
finding it of necessitie to reforme great abuses, and to have the due
execution of so good and necessarie a Law, doe according to the power
limitted unto us by the same Statute, hereby Assigne and thinke it fit
and expedient, that the places and partes beyond the Seas to which any
such incorrigible or dangerous Rogues shall bee banished and conveyed
according to the said Statute, shall bee these Countries and places
following, viz. The New-found Land, the East and West Indies, France,
Germanie, Spaine, and the Low-countries, or any of them.

  _T. Buckhurst._       _Lenox._          _Nottingham._
  _Suffolke._           _Devonshire._     _Mar._
  _Ro. Cecill._         _E. Wotton._      _Jo. Stanhop._

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majestie. Anno 1603.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Crawf., P. R. O., and Q. C.
Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xvi, 554, and in
Barker's "Booke of Proclamations," p. 44._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Printed in _Statutes of the Realm_, iv, 899: "An Acte for
punyshment of Rogues Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars," 39 Eliz. ch. 4.

[2] This Order in Council is not to be found among the Records of the
Privy Council, which for the period from 1603 to 1613 were burned in a
fire at Whitehall in 1618.




1606, August 23.

[Transporting of Women and Children to Foreign Parts.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION TOUCHING PASSENGERS.

Whereas in the first Session of our Parliament holden at Westminster
the nineteenth day of March in the yeere of our raigne of England,
France and Ireland the first, and of Scotland the seven and thirtieth;
It was amongst other things Enacted, That no woman nor any childe
under the age of one and twenty yeeres (Except Saylers or Shipboyes
or Apprentice, or Factor of some Merchant in trade of Merchandize)
should bee permitted to passe over the Seas, except the same should be
by licence of us, our Heires or Successors, or some sixe or more of
our privy Councell, thereunto first had under their handes, upon paine
that the Officers of the Port that should willingly or negligently
suffer any such to passe, or should not enter the names of such
Passengers licenced, should forfeit his Office, and all his goods and
Chattels, And upon paine that the owner of any Ship or Vessell, that
should wittingly or willingly cary any such over the Seas, without
licence as is aforesaid, should forfeit his Ship or Vessell, and all
the Tackle, And every Master or Mariner, of or in any such Ship or
Vessell, offending as is aforesaid, should forfeit all their goods, and
suffer imprisonment by the space of twelve moneths without Baile, or
Maineprise, As by the saide Acte of Parliament amongst other things may
more at large appeare:[1]

And whereas many such our Subjects, That is to say, Women and persons
under the age of twenty and one yeeres, have from time to time just
and necessary causes and occasions to goe and passe over the Seas, In
which cases for every such women and persons under the age of twenty
and one yeeres to obteine such licence, either from our selves, or
from sixe of our said Privy Counsel according to the said Law, is
very inconvenient, and almost impossible; Wee have therefore thought
convenient, for the ease as well of our selfe and our said Counsell,
as of such of our Subjects as are of the condition mentioned in the
saide Acte of Parliament, to graunt our Commission to persons of trust
in certaine Ports of our Realme, lying most apt and convenient for
passage, That is to say, London, the Cinque Ports, Harwich, Yarmouth,
Hull, and Waymouth, to licence such women and persons under the age
of twenty and one yeeres, as shall have just cause to passe out of
our Realme, upon due examination had of them, to passe without perill
to themselves, or the Officers of our said Ports, Notwithstanding the
said Statute or anything therein conteined, And we have thought it fit
to give publique knowledge hereof to al our Subjects, and to all our
Officers whom it may concerne, to the ende they may know what shall bee
lawfull for them to doe in those cases.

Given at the Castle of Farneham the xxiii. day of August, in the fourth
yeere of our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and Ireland.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majestie. 1606.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Crawf., P. R. O., and Q. C.
Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed, in Barker's "Booke of Proclamations,"
p. 133._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] This Act, entitled "An Acte for the due Execution of the Statutes
againste Jesuits, Seminarie Priestes Recusants &c.," is printed in
_Statutes of the Realm_, iv. 1021, 1 James I, ch. 4, sec. 7.




1614, September 11.

[Importation of Whale-fins from Greenland.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION CONCERNING THE BRINGING IN OF WHALE-FINNES INTO HIS
MAJESTIES DOMINIONS, ETC.

As Wee conceive, it cannot be construed by any Our doings or
proceedings, that Wee are caried with any ambitions or unjust appetite,
to covet that which appertaineth to others So it shalbe alwayes Our
desire and resolution, to nourish and maintaine the happy estate of
Our loving Subjects, and the honour of Our Kingdomes; not onely in the
same degree, in the which We have received them; but likewise with
that increase and advancement, whereof the providence of Almighty
God by just occasions shal put meanes and opportunities into Our
hands; and in nothing more (next unto the true worship of God, and
the administration of Justice) then in the maintenance and increase
of Navigation, wherein Our kingdomes both by scituation, strength of
shipping, skill of Marriners, valew of Commanders at Sea, and many
honourable discoveries and exploits, have for long time, and more and
more of late time flourished. And whereas Our Company of Merchants for
the discovery of new Trades, commonly called the Muscovia Company,[1]
have with their great costs and charges, of late yeeres discovered a
Land, which they call by the name of King James his Newland,[2] to the
increase of Navigation and Mariners; and have further by their care and
industry entred into a trade of fishing for the Whale, and procured
Biscainers, skilfull in striking the Whale, to teach and instruct the
English Nation therein: And whereas a principall part of the benefit of
the Whale-fishing consisteth in the commoditie of Whale-finnes imported
into Our Kingdomes; And that experience already sheweth, that Our
owne subjects in their returne from that Fishing, are able to furnish
and serve Our Kingdomes with sufficient quantity for the use of Our
loving subjects: it being also a matter of delicacie, and rather to
be considered as it may concerne Navigation, then in itselfe: We have
therfore thought fit for the better encouragement of the said Company,
and other Our Subjects, in services of like nature, to prohibite all
Aliens and strangers, and also Our owne subjects, (except the said
Muscovia Merchants, and that in their joynt stocke) to bring hereafter
into any Our Kingdomes the said commodity.

Wherefore We do by these presents, straitly and expresly forbid and
prohibite, all Aliens and strangers whatsoever, and also Our owne
Subjects (others then the said Muscovia Merchants, and that in their
joynt stocke) to bring into any Our kingdomes, and Dominions any
Whale-finnes, upon paine of Confiscation of the same, and of Our high
indignation and displeasure, and of such further punishment, as shalbe
meet to be inflicted upon the offenders for their contempt in that
behalfe: And We do further hereby charge and require all Our Customers,
Comptrollers, Searchers and other Officers, and also the Farmors of Our
Customes, and their ministers, carefully to attend every one in their
severall dueties, the execution of this Our Royall Proclamation, and
in no wise to permit or suffer any Whale-finnes, either directly or
indirectly, openly or privately, to be brought into the Ports, or other
places of any of Our kingdomes: And in case any be brought in, the same
to seaze to Our use, and by all other meanes to finde out, and informe
of all offences tending to the breach of this Our Royall Proclamation.

Given at Wansted the eleventh day of September, in the
twelfth yeere of Our Raigne of Great Britaine, France, and
Ireland, 1614.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majestie. Anno Dom. 1614.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., I. T., P. C., P. R. O., and Q. C.
Entered on Patent Rolls._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The Russia, or Muscovy Company, chartered as a company of Merchant
Adventurers in 1554, received from King James in 1613 an additional
charter giving them the exclusive rights to the whale fishery of
Greenland. For the subsequent career of this Company and their
struggles with the Dutch for the possession of the Greenland trade, see
Cawston and Keane, _Early Chartered Companies_, pp. 45-52.

[2] In 1613 the Muscovy Company set up the King's arms at Spitzbergen,
calling it King James's Newland. (Anderson, _Origin of Commerce_, ii,
343.) In vol. iv of the _Transactions_ of the American Antiquarian
Society is printed from the original manuscript the Narrative of a
Voyage to Spitzbergen, being "A Brief Description of the Country of
Greenland, otherwise called King James his New Land." The rise of
the Muscovy Company and its participation in the Greenland trade
is carefully treated by Dr. S. F. Haven in the introduction to the
Narrative. This recently discovered land was Spitzbergen and not
Greenland proper.




1617, December 23.

[Banishing Notorious Offenders to Virginia.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION FOR THE BETTER AND MORE PEACEABLE GOVERNMENT OF THE
MIDDLE SHIRES OF NORTHUMBERLAND, CUMBERLAND, AND WESTMERLAND.

[A long proclamation for the prevention of disorders and outrages
in certain shires, requiring that no person shall lease lands and
tenements without sufficient surety, that all persons shall assist
in the pursuit of criminals, that notorious offenders shall not
receive bail except in open court, that care shall be exercised in
the granting of licenses to "hostler houses and malsters," that known
malefactors shall not be countenanced "by wearing of their liveries or
any other dependance," that the families of offenders who have been
banished shall be sent to join the fugitives, that all outlaws shall
yield themselves up to the law and shall not be sheltered, that for
the prevention of cattle stealing no beef shall be sold in any fair
or market without the hide, that all horses, sheep and cattle shall
be sold only in open fair or market, that notorious offenders shall
be sent to Virginia and other foreign parts, that the use of weapons
and horses be forbidden except to noblemen and gentlemen, that the
overlords shall require sufficient bonds of their tenants, and that
offenders shall be remanded to the place where their offense was
committed. Only the paragraph regarding America is quoted.]

Item, for the more speedy suppressing, and freeing the said Countreis
and places of notorious and wicked offenders that will not be reformed,
but by severity of punishment; Wee have taken order for the making out
a Commission to speciall Commissioners, to survey, search and finde
out, and enforme Us of the most notorious and lewd persons, and of
their faults, within the said Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland,
and Westmerland, Riddesdale, and Bewcastle within the same: And We
hereby signifie our pleasure to be upon Certificate of the said
Commissioners, to send the most notorious ill livers, and misbehaved
persons of them that shall so be certified, into Virginia, or to some
other remote parts to serve in the Warres, or in Colonies, that they
may no more infect the places where they abide within this our Realme.

       *       *       *       *       *

Given at Our Pallace of Westminister, the three and twentieth
day of December, in the fifteenth yeere of Our Raigne of
Great Britaine, France and Ireland. Anno 1617.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Deputies and
Assignes of Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majestie. Anno M.DC.XVII.

_4 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., I. T., P. C., P. R. O., and Q. C.
Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in Privy Council Register (Scotland),
xi, 288._




1618, June 9.

[Censuring Sir Walter Raleigh for sacking St. Thomas.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION DECLARING HIS MAJESTIES PLEASURE CONCERNING SIR WALTER
RAWLEIGH, AND THOSE WHO ADVENTURED WITH HIM.

Whereas We gave Licence to Sir Walter Rawleigh,[1] Knight, and others
of Our Subjects with him, to undertake a Voyage to the Countrey
of Guyana, where they pretended great hopes and probabilities to
make discovery of certain Gold Mines, for the lawfull enriching
of themselves, and these Our Kingdoms: Wherein We did by expresse
limitation and Caution restraine, and forbid them and every of them,
from attempting any Acte of hostility, wrong, or violence whatsoever,
upon any of the Territories, States, or Subjects of any forraine
Princes, with whom Wee are in amitie: And more peculiarly of those of
Our deare Brother the King of Spaine, in respect of his Dominions and
Interests in that Continent. All which notwithstanding, We are since
informed by a common fame, that they, or some of them have, by an
hostile invasion of the Towne of S. Thome (being under the obedience
of Our said deare Brother the King of Spaine) and by killing of divers
of the inhabitants thereof, his Subjects, and after by sacking and
burning of the said towne, (as much as in them for their owne parts
lay) malitiously broken and infringed the Peace and Amitie, which hath
beene so happily established, and so long inviolably continued betweene
Us and the Subjects of both our Crownes.

Wee have therefore held it fit, as appertaining neerely to Our Royall
Justice and Honor, eftsoones to make a publique declaration of Our owne
utter mislike and detestation of the said insolences, and excesses,
if any such have beene by any of Our Subjects committed: And for the
better detection and clearing of the very trueth of the said common
fame; Wee doe heereby straitly charge and require all Our Subjects
whatsoever, that have any particular understanding and notice thereof,
upon their duety and alleagiance which they owe Us, immediately after
publication of this Our pleasure, to repaire unto some of Our Privy
Counsell, and to discover and make knowne unto them their whole
knowledge and understanding concerning the same, under paine of Our
High displeasure and indignation; that Wee may thereupon proceede
in Our Princely Justice to the exemplary punishment and coertion of
all such, as shal be convicted and found guilty of so scandalous and
enormous outrages.

Given at Our Mannor of Greenwich, the ninth day of June,
in the sixteenth yeere of Our Raigne of England, France and
Ireland, and of Scotland the one and Fiftieth.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, deputie Printers
for the Kings most Excellent Majestie. Anno M.DC.XVIII.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., I. T., P. C., P. R. O., and Q. C.
Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xvii, 92, where
it is dated June 11, 1618._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Raleigh's voyage for the discovery of gold mines in Guiana (the
modern Venezuela) was projected in 1616. He was released from the Tower
in March of that year and sailed from Plymouth with a fleet of fourteen
ships in June, 1617. The expedition seemed doomed to failure from the
start, and after St. Thomas was attacked and burned in December, 1617,
Raleigh was compelled to return to England without having attained his
object. He landed at Plymouth in June, 1618, and after the due form
of trial was executed, although upon a sentence of 1603, on October
29, 1618 (_Dictionary of National Biography_, vol. 47, pp. 197-200,
where authorities are cited). Raleigh's commission for undertaking the
voyage, dated August 26, 1616, is printed in Rymer's _Foedera_, xvi,
789.




1619, May 18.

[Importation of Whale-fins from Greenland.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION INHIBITING THE IMPORTATION OF WHALE FINNES INTO HIS
MAJESTIES DOMINIONS BY ANY, BUT THE MUSCOVY COMPANY.

Whereas Wee by Our Proclamation given at Wansted, the eleventh day
of September in the twelfth yeere of Our reigne of Great Brittaine,
France, and Ireland,[1] for the reasons therein expressed, and for the
incouragement of Our welbeloved Subjects, the company of Merchants
trading for Muscovia, Greeneland[2] and the parts adjoyning, commonly
called the Muscovia Company, did straitly and expresly forbid and
prohibit all Aliens and Strangers whatsoever, and also all Our owne
Subjects (others then the sayd Muscovia Merchants, and that in their
joynt stock) to bring into any Our Kingdomes, and Dominions any
Whale Finnes upon paine of confiscation of the same, and of Our high
indignation and displeasure, and of such further punishment as should
be meet to be inflicted upon the Offenders for their contempt in that
behalfe.

Now forasmuch as We are given to understand, That Our sayd Proclamation
took not that good effect, nor found that due obedience and conformity
which We expected: We have therefore in further manifestation of our
former intentions and gracious favor towards the sayd Company, thought
good eftsoones to publish Our Royall pleasure heerein, and to revive
and quicken Our sayd former Proclamation, which We cannot but take in
ill part, hath beene so much neglected: And therefore We doe by these
presents straitly charge, prohibit, and forbid, aswell all Alliens and
Strangers whatsoever, as also Our naturall born Subjects and Denizens,
That they nor any of them (other then the sayd Muscovia Merchants, and
that in their joynt stocke onely) shall from hencefoorth directly or
indirectly import, or bring into Our Kingdomes and Dominions, or any of
them, any Whale Finnes, upon paine of forfeiture, and confiscation of
the same, whether they be found on board of any Ship, Hoy, Boate, or
Bottome, or layd on land in any warehouse, storehouse, shop, cellar,
or any other place whatsoever, and upon paine of Our high Indignation
and displeasure, and such other punishment, as by Our Court of Starre
chamber shalbe thought meet to be inflicted upon them, or any of them,
as contemners of Our Royall will and commandement in this behalfe.

And Wee doe likewise straitly charge, prohibite and forbid, aswell
all Aliens and Strangers, as Our naturall borne Subjects and Denizens
(other then the sayd Muscovia Merchants) that they nor any of them doe
presume to buye, utter, sell, barter or contract for, any Whale finnes,
knowing the same to be imported into any of our Realmes or Dominions
contrary to Our wil and pleasure heerein declared, upon paine of Our
high indignation and displeasure, and such further punishment as by Our
said Court of Starre chamber shall bee thought meet to be inflicted
upon such offenders, as contemners also of Our Royall commandement.
And to the end this Our pleasure may take the better effect, We doe
heereby charge, and command all Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers,
Waiters, Farmors, and Collectors of Our Customes, and other our
Officers and Ministers, carefully to attend every one in his severall
place, the execution heereof, and in no wise to permit or suffer any
Whale finnes directly or indirectly, openly or privately to be brought,
or imported into any Our Kingdomes or Dominions, contrary to Our Royal
pleasure heerein expressed, or being so imported, that they doe not
permit, or suffer the same to bee colourably customed for other goods
and Merchandize, but that foorthwith they or some of them doe seize
and take to Our use all such Whalefinnes as shall be so imported, and
immediately upon such seizure made, to give notice thereof in writing
to Our Register for forfeitures in Our Custome house in the Port of
London, upon paine to undergoe such punishment, as shalbe thought meet
by the Lords of Our Privie Councell.

Neverthelesse Our intent and meaning is, That the sayd Muscovie
Company, and none other, shall or may buy, and sell, barter, or
contract for, any such Whalefinnes, as being imported contrary to this
Our Proclamation shalbe confiscate and seized, and the same, being
sold by the sayd Company, may be afterward bought, contracted for, and
used by any other Our Subjects at their wil and pleasure. Any thing
heerein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Given at Our Mannour of Greenwich, the eighteenth day of May, in the
seventeenth yeere of our Raigne of England, France, and Ireland, and
of Scotland the two and fiftieth.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most excellent Majestie. Anno. M.DC.XIX.

_2 pp. folio. There are two issues slightly varying in set-up. Copies
in Antiq., B. M., Dalk., I. T., P. C., P. R. O., and Q. C._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Refers to the proclamation of September 11, 1614. In 1618 the
East India Adventurers had joined stock with the Muscovy Company to
form one joint company for the whale fishery, but after two years of
unsuccessful adventuring the agreement was dissolved (Anderson, _Origin
of Commerce_, ii, 360, 367).

[2] Spitzbergen, rather than Greenland proper.




1619, October 6.

[Manufacture of Tobacco-pipes.]


AN ABSTRACT OF SOME BRANCHES OF HIS MAJESTIES LATE CHARTER, GRANTED
TO THE TOBACCO-PIPE MAKERS OF WESTMINSTER; DECLARING HIS MAJESTIES
PLEASURE TOUCHING THAT MANUFACTURE, AND ALSO ALL PERSONS WHOM IT MAY
CONCERNE.

James by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, &c. Whereas Wee have been informed by the complaint of divers
of Our poore Subjects, the ancient Makers of Tobacco-Pipes within this
Our Realme, That for want of power and priviledge to retaine their
Apprentises and Servants during their Apprentiship (who commonly depart
from them before they have served their tearmes, or attained to the
knowledge of their Art) they are much prejudiced both in their Trades
and meanes of living, by their excessive making and uttering of ill
Ware, And Our Subjects who have use of that Manufacture, are thereby
greatly abused and deceived: And not only so, but to their Masters
farther impoverishment, these loose and idle persons doe instruct
and teach others of as bad qualitie as themselves, to make and sell
like ill and deceitful ware. Besides, for that the said Art of making
Tobacco Pipes is easily learned, sundry of our Subjects trained up in
other Trades more useful for the Realme, doe forsake the same and
take up this of making Tobacco-Pipes: And others who have other good
Trades to live upon, intrude themselves into this also, and use both,
to the hinderance and overthrow of those who anciently practised the
same. And whereas for the better reforming of all those disorders, to
cut off the superfluous straglers and late intruders, to reduce them to
a competent number, and to settle good government amongst them (this
Trade being a new Trade, never yet ordered by any Law or Policie, and
which concerneth not any Commoditie of necessitie for our Common-weale,
but a superfluous pleasure, necessarie to be regulated by Our Royall
power and authoritie) We have therefore thought fit by Letters Patents
under Our Great Seale, to Incorporate a certaine number of choice
and selected persons, who have either served as Apprentices, or have
otherwise practised that Art by the space of seven yeers, to whom
and whose Servants, Apprentices, and such others as shall be by them
admitted into that Societie for their skill and honest conversation,
Wee intend to appropriat the said Art, and to restraine all others from
taking that benefit which in no right belongeth unto them.

And to the end that all our loving Subjects may take knowledge of
Our pleasure expressed in our Charter, that it may be duly observed
without pretext of ignorance, Wee doe heereby declare Our expresse
will and pleasure to be, and doe straightly charge and command, That
no person or persons whatsoever, other then such as are members of the
said Societie of Tobacco-pipe makers of Westminster, or which have by
the space of seven yeares at the least beene bound to (or exercised)
that Art, or such others as shall be chosen into the Societie by the
said Societie, shall not presume (from the date of these presents)
directly nor indirectly to make any manner of Tobacco-pipes within
this Our Realme of England or Dominion of Wales, nor shall bring in
or import any manner of Tobacco-pipes from beyond the Seas, or from
Our Realme of Scotland; Nor shall utter, sell, or put to sale any
Tobacco-pipes so made or brought into this Our Realme of England and
Dominion of Wales, contrary to Our pleasure heerein declared Upon paine
not only of forfeiture of all such Manufacture, but of incurring such
penalties, imprisonments and punishments, as by the Lawes and Statutes
of this Our Realme, or by Our prerogative Royall may be inflicted
upon the offenders in this kind for their contempt or neglect of Our
Royall Will and Commandment. And further, for the better discovering
and suppressing of all secret and under-hand making or uttering of
the said Manufacture by such as are not members of this Societie or
otherwise enabled as aforesaid, Wee doe require, charge, and straightly
command all Our loving Subjects (especially such Retaylers as shall
buy Tobacco-pipes to sell againe) that they, nor any of them directly,
nor indirectly, shall buy, acquire, get or obtaine any Tobacco-pipes
whatsoever of or from the hands of any person or persons, not being
knowne members of the said Societie, And to that end it is provided,
that all Tobacco-pipes made by the said Company, shall be brought to
the Common Hall of the said Societie, there to be proved whether the
same be good and marchantable ware, before they shall be uttered or put
to sale; (where they may be bought of all Our loving Subjects) Upon
paine of undergoing of Our displeasure, and such paines and penalties
as shall or may ensue thereupon for such contempt against Our will and
Our prerogative Royall. And for the full effectuating of Our pleasure
heerein, These are to command and straightly charge, That all the said
Tobacco-pipe Makers aforesaid, shall forthwith take knowledge of our
Charter by these presents, and by resorting to the said Societie in
London, where they shall receive such Orders and Ordinances as shall
be constituted and made by the Master, Wardens, and Assistances of the
said Societie for the benefit of the said Societie. And lastly, We
will and do hereby require all Mayors, Sherifes, Justices of Peace,
Bailifes, Constables, and all other Officers and Ministers whatsoever,
That they and every of them in their severall Offices and Places be
from time to time ayding and assisting to the said Master, Wardens, and
Societie in the due execution and accomplishment of this Our Royall
Will and Commandment, as they tender Our pleasure, and will avoid the
contrary.

Witnesse Our selfe at Westminster the sixth day of October, in the
seventeenth yeere of Our Raigne of England, France, and Ireland, and
of Scotland, the three and Fiftieth.

_1 p. folio. Copy in Antiq._




1619, November 10.

[Inspecting of Tobacco.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION CONCERNING THE VIEWING AND DISTINGUISHING OF TOBACCO
IN ENGLAND AND IRELAND, THE DOMINION OF WALES, AND TOWNE OF BARWICKE.

Whereas divers good and necessarie provisions have beene heretofore
made, as well by Act of Parliament, as otherwise, for the well garbling
of Spices and Drugges, to the intent the Subjects of this Our Realme
should not bee occasioned to use any unwholesome Spices or Drugges,
to the impayring of their health, or to buy the bad instead of the
good, to the impairing of their substance. And for as much as the
Drugge called Tobacco, being of late yeeres growne frequent in this
Our Realme and other Our Dominions, is daily sold ungarbled, whereby
more inconvenience groweth and ariseth to Our loving Subjects, then
by any other Drugge whatsoever. And for that also by the manie and
sundrie abuses practised and committed by Merchants, Masters of Ships
and others, in concealing and uttering the said Tobacco without paying
any Impost or Custome for the same, great losse and dammage accrueth
to Us, notwithstanding any Lawes, Statutes or other course heretofore
taken for preventing thereof: For remedie of all which Inconveniences,
Wee, by our Letters Patents under our great Seale of England, bearing
Date, at Westmynster the five and twentieth day of May now last past,
did prohibite and forbid, That no person or persons should at any time
after the day of the Date of our said Letters patents within Our Realme
of England, the Dominion of Wales, and Port and Towne of Barwicke, or
any of them; or within Our Realme of Ireland, or any part of them or
any of them, by himselfe or themselves, or his or their servants or
factours, or any others, directly or indirectly sell or put to sale;
or attempt, presume or goe about any manner of way to sell or put to
sale, either in grosse or by retaile, any Tobacco, of what sort, kind
or growth soever, before the Custome and Impost thereof due, were paid;
and the same Tobacco were viewed, distinguished and sealed by the
Officer or Officers of Us, Our Heires and Successours, in that behalfe
to be constituted and appointed; For whose labour, travell, charges and
expences in that behalfe to be sustained and taken in the execution of
the said Office: Wee did by the said Letters Patents, constitute and
appoint, That they should and might from time to time, demand, take and
receive to their owne use, of every person and persons whose Tobacco
they should so garble, viewe and seale, the summe of foure pence of
currant English money, for every pound weight thereof so viewed and
sealed.

And Wee did also by Our said Letters Patents (for the considerations
therein mentioned) give and grant the said Office, with the powers,
fees and authorities before mentioned to Our welbeloved Subjects,
Francis Nichols, Jasper Leake and Philip Eden, Gentlemen, to be
executed by them or their Deputies or Assignes for thirtie and one
yeeres next ensuing the Date of the said Letters Patents.

And Wee did further by Our said Letters, for Us, Our Heires and
Successours, give and grant unto the said Francis Nichols, Jasper
Leake and Philip Eden, and their Assignes, and to all and every person
and persons, which by them or any of them, by writing under their or
any of their hands and Seales, should bee in that behalfe deputed and
assigned, full power and authoritie during the terme aforesaide, as
well to bee present and to have place in all manner of Custome-houses,
Ports, Havens, Creeks and places of lading or unlading of any manner
of Goods, Wares or Merchandizes, into or out of the said Realmes and
Dominions: As also to be present with all and every the Customers,
Collecters, Searchers, Surveyers, Waiters, and other Officers and
Ministers having charge for or concerning the lading or unlading of any
Goods, Wares or Merchandizes, for their better executing of all and
everything and things thereby appointed, and for their better receiving
and enjoying of the benefit of Our said Grant at all times and places,
where the said Officers and Ministers or any of them, should by reason
of their said severall Offices have cause or occasion to be: And
also in all and every place or places, as well in Ships arrived with
Tobacco, and riding in any Port, Roade or River, as on the Land, to
make and appoint such and so many Watchmen, Waiters and Officers, and
to provide and use such reasonable waies, orders and meanes, as they
the said Francis Nichols, Jasper Leake and Philip Eden, and their
Assignes and Deputies should and might be just and truely informed of
all parcels and quantities of Tobacco, as should at any time or times
during the said Grant, be brought into any Port or place, or be planted
or growing in any place or places of the said Realmes and Dominions or
any of them.

And also that it should and might be lawfull, to and for the said
Francis Nichols, Jasper Leake, and Philip Eden, and their Assignes, and
their and every of their Deputies and Substitutes, at all and every
time and times during the terme aforesaid, in lawfull and convenient
maner, with a Constable or other Officer of the place, as well to goe
on board, view, and survay all Shippes, Vessels, or Bottomes, riding
or lying within any of the Ports, Havens, Creekes and places of lading
or unlading, within Our saide Realme of England, Dominion of Wales,
Port or Towne of Barwicke, or Realme of Ireland, or any the members or
places thereunto belonging, as to goe into any House, Celler, Vault,
Warehouse, Shop, or other place within the said Realmes and Dominion,
and Port, or Towne of Barwicke, or any part of them, or any of them
to search and view if there be any Tobacco uttered, sold, or put to
sale, or offered to be sold, or put to sale before the same be viewed,
distinguished, and sealed contrary to the true meaning of the said
Letters patents.

And We did also by the said Letters for Us, Our Heires and Successors,
require, charge and Command all and singular Maiors, Shiriffes,
Justices of Peace, Bailiffes, Constables, Headboroughes, Customers,
Comptrollers, Searchers, Surveyors, Waiters, and all other Officers,
Ministers, and Subjects whatsoever, of Us, Our Heires and Successors,
as well of the said Realme of England, Dominion of Wales, and Port and
Towne of Barwicke, as of the said Realme of Ireland, That they and
every of them, should from time to time during the continuance of that
Our graunt, be aiding and assisting to the said Francis Nichols, Jasper
Leake, and Philip Eden, and their Assignes, and to every of them, their
and every of their Deputie and Deputies, Substitute and Substitutes, in
the due Execution of all and every the powers and authorities expressed
in the said Letters Patents, upon paine of the displeasure of Us, Our
Heires and Successors, and as they would answere the contrary at their
perils; as by the said Letters Patents more at large appeareth.

Wee now, to the intent Our will and pleasure in the premisses may be
the better knowne to all Our loving Subjects whom it may concerne, Doe
hereby notifie, publish and declare the same Our pleasure, willing
and commanding that all and every the premisses, be from time to time
in every respect duely performed, executed and observed according to
the true intent and meaning of the same Our Letters Patents. And that
no person or persons doe attempt or presume to violate or infringe Our
Command hereby; or by Our said Letters Patents declared or expressed,
upon the paines and penalties therein contained. And We doe also hereby
Charge and Command, as well all and singular Merchants, and other
person and persons whatsoever, which shall import any Tobacco of what
sort soever, That they cause the same to be duely entred in the Custome
house belonging to the Port or place where it shall bee landed, in the
name or names onely of the true proprietor or owner, proprietors or
owners thereof, and not in the name or names of any other person or
persons which is not the true owner thereof; As also all Our Customers
and other Officers whatsoever, That they take speciall care and regard
to the due performance of the same, as they tender Our pleasure, and
will avoide the contrary.

Given at Theobalds the tenth day of November, in the seventeenth
yeere of Our Reigne of Great Brittaine, France, and Ireland.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majestie. Anno MDC.XIX.

_2 pp. folio. There are two issues varying only in set-up. Copies in
Antiq., Camb., I. T., P. C., P. R. O., and Q. C._




1619, December 30.

[Forbidding Planting of Tobacco in England.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION TO RESTRAINE THE PLANTING OF TOBACCO IN ENGLAND AND
WALES.

It is not unknowen what dislike Wee have ever had of the use of
Tobacco, as tending to a generall and new corruption, both of mens
bodies and maners: Neverthelesse it is of the two, more tolerable,
that the same should be imported amongst many other vanities and
superfluities which come from beyond the Seas, then permitted to be
planted here within this Realme, thereby to abuse and misimploy the
soile of this fruitfull Kingdome: For which purpose by Our direction,
Letters of late have beene addressed from our Councell of State,
prohibiting the plantation thereof within a certaine distance of Our
City of London: But entring into further consideration of the manifold
inconveniences of suffering this nourishment of vice, (and nothing
else) as a noysome and running Weede, to multiply and overspread within
this Our Kingdome, Wee are resolved upon many and weightie reasons of
State, to make the said Prohibition generall.

For first, Wee are informed, That whereas the use of forreine Tobacco
was chiefly vented, and received in Cities and great Townes, where ryot
and excesse useth to take place, it is now by the Inland plantation
become promiscuous, and begun to be taken in every meane Village, even
amongst the basest people.

Secondly, Wee are given to understand from divers persons of skill and
experience, That the English Tobacco, howsoever some doe presume or
imagine by industrie and experience to rectifie it, and make it good
(wherein it is easie for opinion to doe mischiefe) yet it is certeinly
in it selfe more crude, poysonous and dangerous for the bodies and
healths of Our Subjects, then that that comes from hotter Climates; So
that the medicinall use of Tobacco (which it is that that is onely good
in it, and to be approoved) is in this kind also corrupted and infected.

Thirdly, Whereas Our Colonies and Plantations in Virginia and the
Sommer Islands, (being proper and naturall Climates for that plant,
and the true temper thereof) receive much comfort by the Importation
thereof into this Kingdome, (which it is to be respected at least in
the Interim, untill Our said Colonies may grow to yeeld better and more
solide commodities) Now the said Trading from thence is and will be by
the Plantation within this Realme, choaked and overthrowen.

Fourthly, Wee doe find also, that the reason that mooved Us to
interdict the planting thereof neere the Citie of London, (which was in
regard of the conversions of garden grounds, and rich soyled grounds
from divers Roots and Herbes, fit for victuall and sustenance, unto
this harmefull vanitie) extendeth likewise unto all Cities, Townes and
Villages, and rather more, by how much the povertie is greater there,
then here above.

And lastly, for that it doeth manifestly tend to the diminution of Our
Customes, which is a thing, that although in case of good Manufactures,
and necessary commodities Wee doe little esteeme; Yet where it shall
be taken from Us, and no good but rather hurt thereby redound to Our
people, Wee have reason to preserve.

Wee therefore intending in time to provide a remedie for this spreading
evill, which hath in a very few yeeres dispersed it selfe into most
parts of Our Kingdomes, doe hereby straightly charge and command all
and every person and persons of what degree or condition soever,
That they or any of them, by themselves, their servants, workemen or
labourers, doe not from and after the second day of Februarie next,
presume to sow, set, or plant, or cause to be sowen, set or planted,
within this Our Realme of England, or Dominion of Wales, any sort or
kinde of Tobacco whatsoever, And that they or any of them, shall not,
or doe not hereafter maintaine, or continue any olde stockes, or plants
of Tobacco, formerly sowen or planted, but shall foorthwith utterly
destroy and roote up the same, converting and imploying the ground and
soyle thereof to some other lawfull uses and purposes, as to them shall
seeme best, upon paine of contempt of Our Royall commandement, to be
proceeded with according to Our Lawes, and Prerogative Royall with all
severitie.

And therefore, for the more due execution of the premisses, Wee doe
further will, require and command all Mayors, Sheriffes, Justices of
Peace, Bayliffes, Constables, and other Officers and ministers, to
whom it shall or may appertaine, That they and every of them, shall
from time to time diligently and carefully intend the due and exact
observation of this Our Royall pleasure, And that they permit not, nor
suffer any thing to be done, contrary to the true intent and meaning of
this Our Proclamation, but withstand the same to their uttermost power,
as they tender Our service: And further that they take order that such
offenders, labourers, or workemen, as shal persist in the sowing or
planting of Tobacco, in this Our Realme or Dominion of Wales, or in the
maintaining or continuing any old stocks, or former plantations thereof
hereafter, may be called before them, and be bound in Recognizances
of good summes to Our use, to appeare in Our Court of Starrechamber,
there to be prosecuted by Our Attourney generall, as contemners of Our
expresse Commandement, Proclamation, and Prerogative Royall; wherein
(especially in a cause of this nature) Wee will expect, and require of
all Our Subjects, their due conformitie and obedience.

Given at Our Palace of Westminster the thirtieth day of December, in
the seventeenth yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and
Ireland.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majestie. Anno MDC.XIX.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., I. T., P. C., P. R. O., and Q. C._




1620, May 15.

[Forbidding Roger North's Expedition to Brazil.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION DECLARING HIS MAJESTIES PLEASURE CONCERNING CAPTAINE
ROGER NORTH, AND THOSE WHO ARE GONE FOORTH AS ADVENTURERS WITH HIM.

Whereas Roger North[1] Esquier, with divers others of Our Subjects,
as Adventurers for the intended Plantation and setling of Trade and
Commerce in those parts of the Continent of America neare and about the
River of Amazones (which were presupposed not to be under the obedience
and governement of any other Christian Prince or State) hath secretly
conveyed himselfe away and hath disloyally precipitated and imbarqued
himselfe, and his fellowes, and sodainly set to Sea with a pretended
purpose to prosecute that designe, contrary to Our Royal pleasure and
Commandement expresly signified unto him by one of Our principall
Secretaries, Our Admirall of England having also refused him leave
to go: We then having out of weightie considerations, and reason of
State, and upon the deliberate advise of Our Privy Councell resolved to
suspend and restraine the said Plantation and voyage for a time, and
having thereupon streightly charged and commanded him the said North
upon his duty and aleageance, that hee and his Associates should for a
while surcease their Provisions, and should stay themselves and their
Shipping, which they had already prepared, untill Our further pleasure
should be made knowen unto them.

Wee have therefore held it fit hereby to make a publique Declaration of
Our utter mislike and disavowement of this their rash, undutiful and
insolent attempt; and do hereby revoke, annihilate and disanull all
Power, Authoritie, jurisdiction, or Commission whatsoever, which he the
said North, or any of his Complices may pretend in any sort to derive
and hold from or under Us; and do hereby charge aswell him the said
North, as all his Companions and followers, immediately upon the first
notice that shall be given him or them of this Our pleasure, that they
shall make their speedie returne directly home, with all their shipping
and munitions into this Our Kingdome of England, assoone as the windes
and weather shall permit them; and being heere arrived shall foorthwith
present themselves in person unto some of Our Privie Councel, under
paine of being heereby declared guiltie of high contempt and rebellion,
in case they shall disobey this Our expresse commandement.

And Wee doe further heereby straitly require and charge aswell the
Governours, as all other the Partenors and Adventurers, any wayes
concerned, or interested as members of the Companie and Incorporation
intended for that Plantation, as all other Merchants, Captaines,
Masters, and Officers, of Ships, Saylors, Marrinors, and all other
our loving subjects whatsoever, that they shall in no sort ayd or
abette, nor comfort him the said North, nor any of his Complices with
any supply of shipping, men, money, munition, victuals, merchandise,
or other commodities or necessaries whatsoever: but that aswell all
and every Our Admirals, Vice-Admirals, and other Our Officers and
Commanders of Our Ships, or Pinnaces, as all other Captaines and
Masters of any of Our subjects ships and vessels whatsoever, that
shall happen to meete with him the saide North, or any of his Company
at sea, or in any Harbour, Port, or Creeke wheresoever, shall in Our
Name attach, seize, and summon him, or them, and their shipping, to
returne immediately home, and shall foorthwith bring them backe to some
of Our Ports of this Our Kingdome, and there commit them and their
Ships to the charge of such Our Officers, as it shall respectively
appertaine unto, untill Wee (having received information of their such
returne, which Wee will expect from Our said Officers, who shall so
stand incharged with them) shall give further order concerning them,
aswell their persons as their shipping and munitions. Wherein Wee doe
expresly charge and command aswell him the said North, and all his
Company, Abettors, and Adherents, and all the rest of that Company
and Incorporation intended, as all and every other Our Officers by
Land or Sea, and all other Captaines, Masters, and Marriners in any
of Our subjects ships, and all other Our loving subjects whatsoever,
faithfully, diligently, and carefully to observe, doe, and performe
in their severall qualities and places, that which Wee have heereby
required of them, according to every of their duties, charges, and
imployments, upon paine of Our high displeasure and indignation, and as
they will answere the contrarie at their uttermost perill.

Given at Our Manour of Greenwich this fifteenth day of May, in the
eighteenth yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and Ireland.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majestie. Anno Dom. M.DC.XX.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., I. T., P. C., P. R. O., and Q. C.
Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xvii, 215._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Capt. Roger North, who had been a member of Raleigh's unfortunate
expedition to Guiana, petitioned the King in 1619 for letters patent
authorizing him to establish the King's right to the coast and country
adjoining the Amazon River and to found a Plantation there. On April
18, 1619, the Privy Council authorized the Solicitor General to prepare
a bill for granting him privileges for a Plantation which should
"extend from the River of Wyapoco [Oyapok] to five degrees of southerly
latitude, from any part or branch of the River of Amazons otherwise
called Oreliana and for longitude into the Land to be limited from
sea to sea." This was then esteemed to be part of Guiana, but is now
territory of Brazil. Provided with a passport, but without express
leave from the King, North sailed from Plymouth in May, 1620. The
King, inspired by the remonstrances of Spanish agents, then issued the
proclamation of recall. Although his cruise prospered, his ship being
"well fraught" with 7000 pounds of tobacco, he returned to England
as soon as he heard of the warrant against him. He was imprisoned in
the Tower in January, 1621, and his cargo was confiscated. He soon
succeeded in obtaining his release and later made good his claim to
the restitution of the tobacco (see _Acts of Privy Council, Colonial_,
i, 23-48; _Calendar of State Papers, Colonial, 1574-1660_; _Dict. of
National Biography_, xli, 174.)




1620, May 27.

[Manufacture of Tobacco-pipes.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION COMMANDING CONFORMITY TO HIS MAJESTIES PLEASURE,
EXPRESSED IN HIS LATE CHARTER TO THE TOBACCO-PIPE-MAKERS.

Whereas divers of the poorer sort of Our Subjects have heretofore
lived by the trade of making Tobacco pipes, but for want of power to
retaine and keepe their Apprentices and servants in due obedience,
and to restraine others from intruding upon their Arte, the auncient
Makers have not so well prospered as was desired: For prevention of
which inconveniences, and for reducing the workemen in that trade to
such a competent number, as they might bee governed after the example
of other Societies, who florish by ranging themselves under good
Orders; We did by Our late Charter Incorporate a selected number of the
most ancient, and such others as they for skill and honestie should
admit into their Socitie: Thereby prohibiting all others who were not
members thereof, to make any sort of Tobacco-pipes within Our Realme
of England or Dominion of Wales; And thereby also commanding, that no
person or persons directly, or indirectly should buy Tobacco-pipes
to sell againe, of, or from the hands of any others then the knowne
Members of the said Societie. Yet neverthelesse being lately informed
by Certificate from sundry Our Justices of Peace of Our Counties of
Middlesex and Surrey (who in due obedience of Our Royall pleasure,
declared in Our said Charter, did in person assist the execution of
the same) That divers lewde and obstinate offenders, had fortified
themselves in their houses with weapons, And in contempt of Our Regall
Authority resisted them, comming with the severall Warrants of the Lord
Chiefe Justice of Our Bench, and other the Justices of Peace within
Our Citie of London, and the said counties of Middlesex and Surrey;
And also that there were divers il disposed persons (who delighting
to oppose al good orders) contemptuously maintained these underhand
offendors, some by harboring the unlawfull Makers of Tobacco-pipes
secretly in their houses, there to make them contrary to Our Charter,
to the end to partake of the stolne profit thereof; Others, by buying
secretly this under-hand made ware, in contempt of Our Authority, and
with an evill intent of overthrowing this Societie which we have sought
to establish.

Now therefore, that by the presumptuous example of these disobedient
persons, others may not be incouraged hereafter by impunity to presume
to resist and contemne Our Royall Commandement in matters of greater
moment, or to withstand the authority of Magistrates and government,
These are to charge and straitly command, that no persons whatsoever
within this Our Realme of England and Dominion of Wales shall hereafter
presume to make any manner of Tobacco-pipes, but such as are or shall
bee members of the said Societie: nor shall presume to harbour in their
houses any Tobacco-pipe-makers to use their trade there, who are not
of the said Societie; nor that any person or persons (especially who
buy Tobacco-pipes to sell againe) shall at any time, or in any place
buy or obtaine by any meanes, directly or indirectly any Tobacco-pipes
whatsoever, from any under-handmakers or others, but only from such as
are knowne members of the said Societie, and that at their common Hall,
or other knowne Warehouses appointed, or hereafter to bee appointed,
where they may bee bought by all Our loving Subjects, upon paine of Our
high displeasure, and such punishments as are due for such contempts,
whereof We shall require a strict account by proceeding against the
offendours in Our Court of Starre-Chamber.

Further commanding, that if at any time heereafter any person shall
bee so audacious as to fortifie themselves in their houses, or in the
houses of any other, or to withstand Our will and pleasure heerein,
or to resist Our authoritie given and imparted to Our Lord chiefe
Justice and others, in the search or apprehension of them, or any of
them; Then Wee doe heereby will and require, that sufficient power be
had and taken by such who shal have such Warrants, to apprehend such
obstinate and contemptuous persons, and to carry them before Our said
chiefe Justice, or other Justice of the Peace, that punishment may
be inflicted on them in the severest manner Our Lawes will permit by
imprisoning their bodie, till they have put in sufficient suretie for
their good behaviour afterwards. Heereby further, straitly charging Our
Atturney generall for the time being, that he cause all and every such
wilfull and disobedient persons, for such their high contempt in this
behalfe, to be prosecuted in Our Court of Starre-Chamber (where Our
will is they shall bee sharpely punished) according to the measure of
such their audacious and bold resistance of Our Royall commandement.
And to the intent that these fraudes and abuses may the better be found
out and punished, Our pleasure is, that it shall and may bee lawfull
for any two, or more of the said Societie, together with a lawfull
officer to enter into any suspected place or places, at lawful and
convenient times, there to search for, and finde out any under-hand
made, or sold Tobacco-pipes; And all such so found to seize, take, and
carry away, and them safelye to keepe to bee disposed of, according to
the tenor of Our sayd Charter.

And lastly, for the full execution of this Our Royall Commandement, Wee
will and require the Lord Maior of our Citie of London, for the time
being, and all other Maiors, Shiriffes, Justices of Peace, Bailiffes,
Constables, and all other Officers and Ministers whatsoever; That they
and every of them in their severall Offices and places, bee from time
to time ayding and assisting to the Master, Wardens, and Societie of
Tobacco-pipe makers in the due execution and accomplishment of this Our
Royall will and Commandement, as they tender Our pleasure, and will
answere the contrary at their perill.

Given at Our Court at Theobalds the seven and twentieth day of May,
in the eighteenth yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and
Ireland.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majestie. Anno Dom. M.DC.XX.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., I. T., P. C., P. R. O., and Q. C.
Entered on Patent Rolls._




1620, June 29.

[Restraining Disorderly Trading in Tobacco.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION FOR RESTRAINT OF THE DISORDERED TRADING FOR TOBACCO.

Whereas Wee, out of the dislike Wee had of the use of Tobacco, tending
to a generall and new corruption both of mens bodies and maners, and
yet neverthelesse holding it of the two more tolerable, that the same
should be imported amongst many other vanities and superfluities, which
came from beyond the Seas, then permitted to be planted here within
this Realme, thereby to abuse and misimploy the soile of this fruitfull
Kingdome, did by Our Proclamation dated the thirtieth day of December
now last past straitly charge and commaund all and every person and
persons, of what degree or condition soever, That they or any of them
by themselves, their servants, workemen or labourers should not from
and after the second day of February then next following, presume to
sow, set or plant, or cause to be sowen, set or planted within this
Our Realme of England, and the Dominion of Wales, any sort or Kinde of
Tobacco whatsoever, and that they, or any of them, should not maintaine
or continue any olde stockes or plants of Tobacco formerly sowen or
planted, but should forthwith utterly destroy and root up the same.
And whereas We have taken into Our Royall consideration as well the
great waste and consumption of the wealth of Our Kingdomes, as the
endangering and impairing the health of Our Subjects, by the inordinate
libertie and abuse of Tobacco, being a weede of no necessary use, and
but of late yeeres brought into Our Dominions, and being credibly
informed, that divers Tobacconists, and other meane persons taking upon
them to trade and adventure into the parts beyond the Seas for Tobacco,
to the intent to forestall and engrosse the said commoditie, upon
unmerchantlike conditions, doe transport much Gold bullion and Coyne
out of Our Kingdomes, and doe barter and vent the Staple commodities
of Our Realme at under-values, to the intent to buy Tobacco, to the
discredit of Our native merchandizes, and extreame enhansing of the
rates and prices of Tobacco, and the great disturbance and decay of
the Trade of the orderly and good Merchant: We taking the premisses
into Our Princely consideration, and being desirous to put a remedie
to the said inconveniences, which Wee have long endeavoured, though
with lesse effect then Wee expected, have resolved to make some further
redresse, by restraining the disordered traffique in that commoditie,
and reducing it into the hands of able persons that may manage the same
without inconvenience, whereby the generall abuse may be taken away,
and the necessary use (if any be) may be preserved. We doe therefore
not only by these presents, straitly charge and commaund, That Our
said Proclamation restraining the planting of Tobacco, be in every
respect observed and performed according to the tenour thereof, upon
the penalties therein contained; but also that no person or persons
whatsoever, Englishmen, Denizens or Strangers, (other then such as
shall be authorized and appointed thereunto by Letters Patents under
Our great Seale of England) doe import or cause to be imported into
this Our Realme of England or Dominion of Wales, or any part of
them or either of them, any Tobacco, of what nature, kind, or sort
soever, after the tenth day of July next ensuing the date hereof,
from any the parts beyond the Seas, upon paine of forfeiture to Us of
all such Tobacco so to be imported contrary to the true meaning of
these Presents, and upon such further paines and penalties as by the
Lawes and Statutes of this Realme, or by the severitie or censure of
Our Court of Starrechamber may be inflicted upon the offendors, for
contempt of this Our Royall command. And likewise that no Master,
Merchant, or Purser of any Ship or other Vessell, doe at any time or
times after the said tenth day of July, presume or attempt to take into
their ships to be imported into this Realme and Dominion, or either of
them, any sort, maner, or quantity of Tobacco whatsoever, but onely to
the use of such person and persons as shalbe so as aforesaid authorized
and appointed under Our great Seale of England to import the same, and
which shalbe by them, their deputies, servants or factors delivered to
the said Masters, Merchants or Pursers of Ships to be imported, upon
the paines and penalties aforesaid.

And to the intent that no such offendor may colour or hide his offence
and contempt, by shadowing the Tobacco to be brought in, contrary to
Our pleasure before expressed, under pretence of former store, We doe
hereby signifie and declare Our will and pleasure, and doe straitly
charge and command, That all and every person and persons which now
have, or hereafter shall have within or neere the Cities of London
or Westminster, in their hands, custody or possession, any Tobacco
heretofore imported, or hereafter and before the said tenth day of
July now next ensuing to be imported into this Realm, amounting to the
quantitie of ten pounds weight or above, shall before the said tenth
day of July now next comming, bring the same unto the house commonly
called, The Hawke and Feasant, situate in Cornehill in the said citie
of London, and shall cause the same to be there sealed and marked by
such person and persons, and with such marke or Seale as by Us shalbe
for that purpose assigned and appointed, without giving any Fee or
allowance for the said Seale or marke.

And to the intent that the Tobacco to be hereafter imported by Warrant
or Authoritie under Our great Seale, may be knowen and distinguished
from such as shall be secretly and without Warrant brought in by
stealth, We doe likewise charge and command, that all such Tobacco as
from and after the said tenth day of July shall be imported by force
of any such warrant or Authoritie and none other, except the old store
aforesaid to be sealed as aforesaid, shall be sealed and marked with
such Seale and marke as aforesaid. And we doe hereby prohibite all
person and persons from and after the said tenth day of July, to buy,
utter, sell or vent within the said Kingdome and Dominion, or either
of them, any Roll or other grosse quantitie of Tobacco whatsoever,
before the same be so as aforesaid marked or sealed, upon paine of
forfeiture unto Us of all such Tobacco so bought, uttered, solde
or vented contrary to the intent of these Presents, and upon such
further penalties as by Our Lawes, or by the censure of Our Court of
Starrechamber may be inflicted upon the offenders, as contemners of Our
Royall command.

And for the better execution of this Our Pleasure, Wee doe hereby
command all and singular Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, Waiters,
and other officers attending in all and every the Ports, Creeks, or
places of lading or unlading, for the taking, collecting, or receiving
of any Our Customers, Subsidies or other duties, to take notice of this
Our pleasure: and We do hereby command, and give power and authority
unto them, and every or any of them, from time to time, as well to
search any Ship or other Vessell or Bottome, riding or lying within
any Port, Haven or Creeke within their severall charge and place of
attendance, for all Tobacco imported contrary to the intent of this Our
Proclamation, and the same being found, to seize and take to Our use;
as also to take notice of the names, and apprehend the bringers in, and
buyers of the same, to the end they may receive condigne punishment for
their offences, upon paine that every of the said Officers which shalbe
found negligent, remisse or corrupt therein, shall lose his place and
entertainment, and undergoe such paines and penalties as by Our Lawes,
or the censure of Our said Court of Starrechamber may be inflicted upon
them for the same.

And likewise We doe hereby will, ordaine, and appoint, That it shal
and may be lawfull to and for such person and persons, as shalbe so as
aforesaid authorized and appointed by Letters Patents under Our great
Seale, to import Tobacco by himselfe or themselves, or his or their
Deputie or Deputies, with a lawfull Officer to enter into any suspected
places at lawfull and convenient times, and there search, discover and
finde out any Tobacco imported, uttered, solde or vented, not marked or
sealed as aforesaid, contrary to the true meaning hereof, and all such
Tobacco so found, to seize, take away and dispose of, and the owners
thereof, or in whose custody the same shalbe found, to informe and
complaine of, to the end they may receive punishment according to Our
pleasure before herein declared.

And further, We doe by these Presents will and require all and
singular Mayors, Sheriffes, Justices of Peace, Bayliffes, Constables,
Headboroughes, Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, Waiters, and all
other Our Officers and Ministers whatsoever, That they and every of
them in their severall places and offices be diligent and attendant in
the execution of this Our Proclamation, and also aiding and assisting
unto such person and persons, and his and their Deputies and Assignes
as we shall so as aforesaid authorize and appoint to import Tobacco,
aswell in any search for discovery of any acte or actes to bee
performed contrary to the intent of these Presents, as otherwise in the
doing or executing of any matter or thing for the accomplishment of
this Our Royall Command. And lastly Our will and pleasure is, and Wee
doe hereby charge and command Our Atturney generall for the time being,
to informe against such persons in Our Court of Starrechamber from
time to time, whose contempt and disobedience against this Our Royall
command shall merit the censure of that Court.

Given at Our Manour of Greenwich the nine and twentieth day of June,
in the eighteenth yeere of Our Reigne of England, France and Ireland,
and of Scotland the three and fiftieth.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majestie. Anno Dom. M.DC.XX.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., I. T., P. C., P. R. O., and Q. C.
Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xvii, 233._




1621, March 8.

[Suppressing Lotteries in Virginia.]


BY THE KING.

Whereas, at the humble suit and request of sundry Our loving and
well disposed Subjects, intending to deduce a Colony, and to make a
Plantation in Virginia, Wee, for the inlarging of Our Government,
increase of Navigation and Trade, and especially for the reducing of
the savage and barbarous people of those parts to the Christian faith,
did incorporate[1] divers Noblemen, Gentlemen and others, adventurers
in the sayd Plantation, and granted unto them sundry Priviledges and
Liberties; amongst which, for their better helpe and assistance to
raise some competent summes of money to prosecute the same Plantation
to a happy end, Wee did grant them licence to set foorth, erect, and
publish Lotteries, to continue for one yeere after the opening of the
same, and further, during Our pleasure; which liberty hath been by the
same Company put in use divers yeeres past. Now forasmuch as We are
given to understand, that although Wee in granting the sayd Licence,
had Our eye fixed upon a religious and Princely end and designe, yet
the sayd Lotteries, having now for a long time been put in use, doe
dayly decline to more and more inconvenience, to the hinderance of
multitudes of Our Subjects.[2]

Wee whose care continually waiteth upon the generall welfare of Our
people, have thought it expedient, for the generall good of Our
Subjects, to suspend the further execution of the saide Lotteries,
untill upon further deliberation and advisement, We shall be more fully
informed of the inconveniences and evils thereby arising, and may
ordaine due remedy for the same, without any conceit of withdrawing
Our favour in any degree from the said Company or plantation, and good
worke by them intended.

And therefore We doe heereby expresly charge and command the sayd
Company and their successors, and all their Officers, Ministers,
and Servants, and all others, That from hencefoorth they desist and
forbeare, to use or execute any manner of grant or Licence from Us, for
the keeping and continuing of any Lotterie, or to keepe or continue any
Lotterie, within this Our Realme of England or the Dominions thereof,
untill such time as Wee shall declare Our further pleasure therein. And
Wee likewise require all Justices, Officers, and Ministers whatsoever,
from hencefoorth, diligently and carefully to see this Our pleasure
executed, and to punish the infringers thereof, as contemners of Our
Royall command.

Given at Our Palace of Westminster the eighth day of March, in the
eighteenth yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and Ireland.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majestie. M.DC.XX.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., I. T., P. C., P. R. O., and Q. C.; also
John Carter Brown Library._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The third charter to the Virginia Company, granted March 12, 1612,
contained four clauses, sections xvi-xix, regarding the conduct of
lotteries (Brown's _Genesis of the United States_, ii, 552).

[2] The Privy Council, upon complaint of the House of Commons, took
action regarding the suspension of lotteries in Virginia on March
4, 1621 (_Acts of Privy Council, Colonial_, i, 39). For the general
subject of lotteries in Virginia, see Bruce, _Economic History of
Virginia_, ii, 275; Kingsbury, _Records of Virginia Company_, i,
93; Brown, _Genesis of the United States_, index; and Brown, _First
Republic in America_, index. In the last reference, p. 394, this
proclamation is incorrectly dated March 18. The proclamation is
reproduced in fac-simile in _Three Proclamations concerning the Lottery
for Virginia_, published by the John Carter Brown Library, Providence,
R. I., 1907, in which volume are also reproduced a broadside of 1613
issued by the Council for Virginia regarding the drawing of the lottery
and "A Declaration for the certaine time of drawing the great standing
Lottery," printed February 22, 1615 [-16].




1622, November 6.

[Prohibiting Disorderly Trading to New England.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION PROHIBITING INTERLOPING AND DISORDERLY TRADING TO NEW
ENGLAND IN AMERICA.

As it hath ever beene held a principall Office of Christian Kings, to
seeke by all pious meanes the advancement of Christian Religion; so the
consideration thereof, hath beene a speciall motive unto Us, from time
to time, as often as cause hath required, to further, by Our Royall
authority, the good disposition of any of Our well affected Subjects,
that have a will to attempt the discovering and planting in any parts
of the World, as yet savage and unpossessed by the Subjects of any
Christian Prince or State. And now for that, by Gods sacred favour,
there is likely to ensue great advancement of his glory, Our Crown, and
State, by reason of Our grant heeretofore made to the Counsell for the
managing of the affaires of New England in America, being in breadth
from forty degrees of Northerly latitude from the Equinoctiall line
to forty eight degrees of the sayd Northerly latitude, and in length
by all the breadth aforesayd, thorowout the maine land from Sea to
Sea[1]; We cannot but continue Our speciall respect and favour unto
them in their endevours, and exercise Our Royall authority against the
hinderers thereof. Wherefore, having received certaine information of
many and intolerable abuses offered by sundry interlopers, irregular
and disobedient persons, that seeking principally their present and
private profits, have not only impeached some of the Planters there,
of their lawfull possessions, but also taken from them their Timber
without giving any satisfaction, as in justice they ought to have done:
and not therewith contented, have rined whole woods to the utter ruine
of the same for ever after; as also, by casting of their ballast in the
harbors of some of their Ilands, have almost made them unserviceable:
And yet not so contented, by their promiscuous trading, as well
Mariners as Masters with the Savages, have overthrowne the trade and
commerce that before was had, to the great profit of the Planters,
and which were indeed their principall hopes for the advancement of
that plantation, next unto the commodities that coast affords of
Fishing: Neither heerwith satisfied, but as if they resolved to omit
nothing that might be impious and intolerable, they did not forbeare
to barter away to the Savages, Swords, Pikes, Muskets, Fowling peeces,
Match, Powder, Shot, and other warlike weapons, and teach them the use
thereof; not only to their owne present punishment (divers of them
being shortly after slain by the same Savages, whom they had so taught,
and with the same weapons which they had furnished them withall) but
also to the hazard of the lives of Our good subjects already planted
there, and (asmuch as in them lay) to the making of the whole attempt
it selfe (how pious and hopefull soever) frustrate, or so much the
more difficult.[2] We, for reformation and prevention of these or
the like evils heerafter, and for the more cleare declaration of Our
Kingly resolution and just intents, both to maintayne Our Royall grant
already made, and to uphold and encourage by all wayes and meanes the
worthy dispositions of the undertakers of those designes, have thought
fit, and doe heerby straitly charge and command, That none of Our
Subjects whatsoever, (not Adventurers, Inhabitors or Planters in New
England) presume from hencefoorth to frequent those Coasts, to trade or
traffique with those people, or to intermedle in the woodes or freehold
of any the Planters or Inhabitants (otherwise then by the licence of
the sayd Counsell, or according to the orders established by Our Privy
Counsell for the releese or ease of the transportation of the Colony
in Virginia) upon paine of Our high indignation, and the confiscation,
penalties and forfeitures in Our sayd Royall grant expressed: Leaving
it neverthelesse, in the meane time, to the discretion of the sayd
Counsel for New England, to proceed against the foresayd offenders
according to the same, especially, seeing We finde the armes of the
sayd Counsell to bee open to receive into that plantation any of Our
loving Subjects, who are willing to joyne with them in the charge,
and participate in the profits thereof.

Given at Our Court at Theobalds, the sixt day of November, in the
yeere of Our Reigne of England, France, and Ireland, the twentieth,
and of Scotland the sixe and fiftieth.[3]

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majestie. M.DC.XXII.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Dalk., I. T., P. C., P. R. O.,
and Q. C.; also John Carter Brown Library. Entered on Patent Rolls.
Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xvii, 416._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The patent of November 3, 1620.

[2] These "irregular and disobedient persons" were undoubtedly the
members of Thomas Weston's colony at Weymouth. The Council for New
England, in May, 1622, took notice of the complaints against Weston
and moved that a proclamation be secured warning those who went to New
England in contempt of authority (Records in Amer. Antiquarian Society
_Proceedings_ for April, 1867, p. 59). The proclamation was ordered
by the Privy Council on October 23, 1622 (_Acts of the Privy Council,
Colonial_, i, 55).

[3] A note on the original proclamation in the privy seal bundles,
no. 1955, in the Public Record Office, reads, "I have prepared this
proclamation readie for your Majesty's signature upon an order made at
the Councell Board. Thomas Coventry."




1624, September 29.

[Encouraging Growth of Tobacco in Plantations.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION CONCERNING TOBACCO.

Whereas Our Commons, assembled in Our last Sessions of Parliament,
became humble Petitioners unto Us, That, for many waightie reasons,
much concerning the welfare of Our Kingdome, and the Trade thereof,
We would by Our Royall power, utterly prohibite the use of all
foreigne Tobacco, which is not of the growth of Our owne Dominions[1]:
And whereas We have upon all occasions made knowen Our dislike, We
have ever had of the use of Tobacco in generall, as tending to the
corruption both of the health and manners of Our people, and to that
purpose have at severall times heretofore prohibited the planting of
Tobacco, both in England and Wales, as utterly unfit, in respect of
the Climate, to cherish the same for any medicinall use, (which is
the onely good to bee approoved in it;) And at other times have also
prohibited the disorderly Trading for Tobacco, into the parts beyond
the Seas, as by Our severall Proclamations, published to that purpose,
it may appeare. Neverthelesse, because Wee have beene earnestly
and often importuned by many of Our loving Subjects, Planters and
Adventurers in Virginia, and the Sommer Islands, and lately by Our
Commissioners for Virginia, that We would be pleased to take into Our
Royall care that part of Our Dominions, by Our Royall authoritie, and
by the industrie of Our loyall Subjects, added to the rest of Our
Empire, for the propagation of Christian Religion, and the ease and
benefite of this populous Realme, and to consider, that those Colonies
and Plantations, are yet but in their infancie, and cannot be brought
to maturitie and perfection, unlesse We will bee pleased for a time
to tolerate unto them the planting and venting of the Tobacco, which
is, and shall be of the growth of those Colonies and Plantations; We,
taking into Our Princely consideration these, and many other important
reasons of State, have beene graciously pleased to condescend to the
desires and humble petitions of Our loving Subjects in this behalfe.

And therefore We doe by these presents straitly charge and command,
That no person whatsoever, of what degree or qualitie soever, doe at
any time hereafter, import, or cause to be imported from any part
beyond the Seas, or out of Our Kingdome of Scotland, into this Our
Realme of England, or Dominion of Wales, or into Our Realme of Ireland,
any Tobacco, which is not of the proper growth of the Plantations
of Virginia, and the Sommer Islands, or one of them, upon paine of
forfeiture unto Us of all such Tobacco so to be imported, contrary to
the true meaning of these presents, in whose hands soever the same
shall be found, and upon such further paines and penalties, as by
the Lawes and Statutes of these Our Realmes, or by the severity or
censure of Our Court of Starre-chamber, in either of those Kingdomes
respectively, may be inflicted upon the Offendors, for contempt of
this Our Royall command, and to be reputed and taken as enemies to
Our proceedings, and to those Plantations which so much concerne Our
Honour, and the honour and profit of these Our Kingdomes. And We
further will and command, upon the penalties aforesaid, that from
hencefoorth, no person or persons whatsoever, presume to sow, set, or
plant, or cause, or permit, or suffer to be sowed, set, or planted, in
any of his or their grounds, any Tobacco whatsoever, within these Our
Realmes of England, or Ireland, or Dominion of Wales, or any Isles or
places belonging thereto, or permit or suffer any old stocke, plant,
or root of Tobacco formerly set, sowed, or planted there to continue,
not plucked up and utterly destroyed, contrary to the tenour and true
meaning of a former Proclamation, made and published by Us to that
purpose, bearing date the thirtieth day of December, in the seventeenth
yeere of Our Reigne of England.

And Wee further straitly charge and command, upon the paines and
penalties aforesaid, That no person whatsoever, presume to buy, or sell
any Tobacco, which from hencefoorth shall be imported, or brought from
any the parts beyond the Seas, or from Our Realme of Scotland, which is
not, or shall not be of the proper growth of the Colonies aforesaid,
of Virginia, and the Sommer Islands, or one of them. And because
Wee understand, that some, who intend their owne private, more then
the publique, conceiving it to be probable, that We would grant the
petition of Our Commons in Parliament, to prevent the effect thereof,
have lately imported secretly, and by stealth, great quantities of
forreigne Tobacco, for which they have payd no Subsidie, or other duety
unto Us; We further will and command, under the paines and penalties
aforesaid, that no person whatsoever, from, and after the five and
twentieth day of March, now next ensuing, presume to sell, or offer,
or put to sale within these Our Realmes or Dominion, any Tobacco,
which hath beene formerly imported into this Realme, which is not of
the proper growth of the Colonies, or Plantations aforesaid, or one of
them, nor that any person whatsoever, willingly and knowingly, take,
or use any Tobacco, from, and after the first day of May, now next
ensuing, which is not, or shall not be of the proper growth of the
sayd Colonies, or Plantations, or one of them. Yet, because the said
forreigne Tobacco may not lie on the hands of the owners thereof, Wee
are graciously pleased, that at any time, within fortie dayes after
the sayd five and twentieth day of March, such forreigne Tobacco
may be freely exported by any person whatsoever, without paying any
Subsidie or other duetie for the same. And because no man shall pretend
ignorance, and thereby endevour to excuse his offence in any of the
premisses; Wee doe further charge and command, and doe hereby signifie
and declare Our will and pleasure to be, that all, and every person and
persons, Merchant or other, who useth to sell, or hath any purpose to
sell Tobacco, who have in his, or their hands, custodie or possession,
or in the hands, custodie or possession of any other by their delivery,
or to their use, any Tobacco heretofore imported into this Our
Realme, or planted, set, or sowen within this Realme, shall before the
twentieth day of October, now next comming, bring the same into Our
Custome-house, within Our Citie of London, if such Tobacco be within
five miles of Our said Citie, or if such Tobacco be in any other Citie,
Towne, or Place, within this Our Realme of England, or Dominion of
Wales, or Realme of Ireland, shall bring the same to the Towne-house,
or other fit place, which shall be to that purpose appointed by Us, in
that City or Corporate Towne, neerest unto which the said Tobacco shall
be, and shall before the first day of December, now next comming, there
require and cause the same to be Marked and Sealed by such person or
persons, and with such Seale and Marke, as We shall thereunto assigne
or appoint for that purpose, without giving any fee or allowance for
the said Seale or Marke, and whatsoever Tobacco shall not be Sealed or
marked, as aforesaid, within the severall times aforesaid, shall be
confiscate et forfeited unto Us for such their default and contempt.
And for the avoyding of all deceit and abuse in disguising of forraigne
Tobacco, or mingling the same with the Tobacco of Virginia, or the
Sommer Islands, thereby to defraud the true intent of these presents,
We further straitly charge and command, under the paines and penalties
aforesaid, That no person, who is, or shall be a seller of Tobacco,
shall have, or keepe ready cut, above the quantity of one pound of
Tobacco at once, nor shall mingle any forraigne Tobacco, with any
Tobacco of the growth of the Sommer Islands or Virginia.

And Wee straitly charge and command, that all the planters of Tobacco
in the Colonies aforesaid, or any part thereof, shall make the same
good, and merchantable, and shall not presume to send over into this
our Realme of England, any Tobacco, which shall not be good and
merchantable, and well made up in rolle without stalkes, or other bad
or corrupt stuffe, upon paine of confiscation thereof, or so much
thereof, as upon due triall made, shall be found to be otherwise, to
the intent that such of Our Subjectes, as shall desire to use the
same, may not be abused, or deceived therewith, to the impairing of
their health. And to the intent that the Tobacco of the Colonies,
and Plantations aforesaid, thus tolerated by Us, may be knowen and
distinguished, from such as shall bee secretly, and without warrant
brought in by stealth; Wee doe likewise straitly charge and command,
upon the paines and penalties aforesaid, That all such Tobacco, as
shall bee brought from the Colonies aforesaid, shall be all brought,
and landed at the Key of Our Custome house, in Our citie of London,
and not elsewhere, in any of Our Realmes or Dominions, and shal be
there registred, et shall not be removed from Our said Custome house,
untill it shall bee there first tryed, sealed, and marked, by such
person, or persons, et with such seale or marke, as We shall thereunto
assigne and appoint; such seale or marke to bee set thereto, without
Fee, or other reward whatsoever. And Wee doe further straitly charge
and command, upon the paines and penalties aforesaid, That all owners
of ships, bee carefull to imploy such masters in their ships, or other
vessels, from whom they will take good caution, not to offend in the
importation of any Tobacco, contrary to this Our Royall pleasure.
And We do further signifie and declare by these presents, that We
will require an exact accompt of the master of every ship, or other
vessell, that he shall make such diligent, and carefull search, over
the mariners and passengers in his ship, or other vessell, that none
of them shall conveigh over into these Our Realmes of England, or
Ireland, or dominion of Walles, or into any Port, Haven, Creeke, or
other parts thereof, any Tobacco, to be imported, contrary to the true
intent and meaning of these presents: And that Our Customers, or their
deputies, in every Port of these Our Realmes of England, and Ireland,
shall, upon oath, examine every Master of a ship, or other vessell, or
other Officers and Mariners in the said ship, or vessell, whether they
have made search in the said ship or vessell, for Tobacco, and whether
any Tobacco bee in the said ship, or vessell, to their knowledge, and
whether any Tobacco were laden in the said ship or vessell, and bee
taken out thereof, and what is become of the same: And if any Master
of a ship, or other vessell, shall wilfully, or negligently permit, or
suffer any Tobacco to be imported, or shall otherwise offend, contrary
to these presents, every such Master (because it is in his power to
prevent the same) shall also be answerable unto Us for his contempt
herein, and shall be subject, et lyable to all the paines and penalties
aforesaid, as well as if he himselfe had actually and purposely
committed the said offence. And whereas We are informed, that some
traders in Tobacco, doe use to import Tobacco in forreigne Bottomes;
Wee strictly charge and command, that no person whatsoever, either
Stranger, Denizen, or naturall borne Subject, presume to import any
Tobacco whatsoever, in any forreigne bottome, at any time hereafter,
upon paine of confiscation, not onely of the said Tobacco, but also of
the ship, or vessell, wherein the same is so imported, and upon the
other paines and penalties aforesaid.

And for the better execution of Our pleasure herein, We doe hereby
command all and singuler Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, Wayters,
and other Officers, attending in all, and every the Ports, Creekes, or
places of lading or unlading, for the taking, collecting, or receiving
of any of our Customes, Subsidies, or Duties, to take notice of this
Our pleasure: And We do hereby command, and give power and authoritie
unto them, and every of them, from time to time, as well to search
any shippe, or other vessell, or bottome, ryding, or lying within any
Port, Haven, or Creeke, within their severall charge of attendance,
for all Tobacco imported, contrary to the intent of this Our Royall
Proclamation; and the same being found, to seize and take to Our use,
and also to take notice of the names, and apprehend the bringers in and
buyers of the same, to the end they may receive condigne punishment
for their offences, upon payne, that every of the said Officers, which
shall bee found negligent, remisse or corrupt therein, shall lose his
place and entertainement, and undergoe such paines and penalties, as by
Our Lawes, or by the censure of Our said Court of Starre-chamber, may
be inflicted upon them for the same.

And We doe likewise, will, ordaine, and appoint, that it shall and
may bee lawfull, for such person or persons, as shall be thereunto
authorized and appointed, by him, or themselves, or his, or their
Deputy or Deputies, with a lawfull Officer to search any shippe, or
other vessell, and to enter into any shoppe, house, seller, warehouse,
or other suspected places, at lawfull and convenient times, and there
to search, discover, and find out any Tobacco, imported, uttered, sold,
or vented, or to be uttered, sold, or vented, not marked or sealed, as
aforesaid, contrary to the true meaning hereof, and all such Tobacco
so found, to seize, take away, and dispose of, and the owners thereof,
or in whose custodie the same shall be found, to informe and complaine
of, to the end they may receive punishment, according to Our pleasure
before herein declared.

And further, We doe by these presents, will and require all and
singuler Mayors, Sheriffes, Justices of Peace, Bayliffes, Constables,
Headboroughs, Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, Wayters, and all
other Our Officers and ministers whatsoever, That they, and every of
them, in their severall places and Offices, be diligent and attendant
in the execution of this Our Proclamation, and also ayding and
assisting unto such person and persons, and his and their Deputies and
Assignes, as We shall so, as aforesaid, authorise et appoint,[2] as
well in any search for discovery of any act, or acts to be performed
contrary to the intent of these presents, as otherwise, in the doing
or executing of any matter or thing, for the accomplishment of this
Our Royall command. And further Our will and pleasure is, and Wee doe
hereby charge and command Our Atturney generall, for the time being,
to informe against such persons in Our Court of Starre-chamber, from
time to time, whose contempt and disobedience against this Our Royall
command, shall merit the censure of that Court, and to prosecute every
such information speedily and effectually, untill the same shall bee
brought to sentence. And Our pleasure and command is, that all the
Tobacco which upon any seizure shall become forfeited, shall bee
brought to Our Custome house, next adjoyning to the Port, or place
where the same shall be seized, where the seizor thereof shall deliver
the same to Our use, and the same shall be forthwith burnt, consumed,
and destroyed; but the offendour, before he be discharged, shall pay
to the partie, who seized the said Tobacco, the one halfe of the
true value thereof: And that such person or persons, whom Wee shall
appoint specially by Our Privie Seale, to take care and charge of the
execution of Our pleasure in the premisses, shall have the one halfe
of all the Fines, to bee imposed upon every offendour against this Our
Proclamation, for their encouragement to bee diligent and faithfull,
in, and about the performance of that service, We shall so commit unto
them.

Given at Our Honour of Hampton Court, the nine and twentieth day of
September, in the two and twentieth yeere of Our Reigne of England,
France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the eight and fiftieth.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majestie. 1624.

_4 pp. folio. There are two issues varying only in set-up. Copies in
Antiq., B. M., Canterbury, Dalk., I. T., P. C., and P. R. O.; also in
John Carter Brown Library. Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's
"Foedera," xvii, 621._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The Commons vote, dated May 24, 1624, is in the _Journal of the
House of Commons_, i, 794. The several documents leading up to the
issuing of this Proclamation are listed in Kingsbury's _Records of the
Virginia Company_, i, 192-200.

[2] The commission, dated November 9, 1624, appointing Edward Dichfield
and five others officers to take charge of the execution of the
provisions of this Proclamation, is printed in Rymer's _Foedera_,
xvii, 633.




1625, March 2.

[Encouraging Growth of Tobacco in Plantations.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION FOR THE UTTER PROHIBITING THE IMPORTATION AND USE OF
ALL TOBACCO, WHICH IS NOT OF THE PROPER GROWTH OF THE COLONIES OF
VIRGINIA AND THE SUMMER ISLANDS, OR ONE OF THEM.

Whereas, at the humble suite of Our Commons in Parliament, by Our
Royall Proclamation, bearing date the nine and twentieth day of
September now last past, for the reasons therein contained, We have
prohibited the importation and use of all Tobacco, which is not of the
proper growth of Our Colonies of Virginia and the Summer Islands, or
one of them; And whereas, upon the humble Petition of many Our loving
Subjects, being Planters or Adventurers in those Colonies, and for
the support and incouragement of those Plantations (whose prosperous
estate We much affect, and shall by all good meanes be alwayes ready
to cherish and protect) We have beene contented to tolerate the use of
Tobacco, of the growth of those Plantations for a time, untill by more
solid Commodities they be able to subsist otherwise, which (as We are
informed) they cannot as yet by any meanes doe; And therefore by Our
said Proclamation, Wee did thinke fit to give particular directions
in many things tending to those ends, and did straitly command the
due execution and observation thereof, under the penalties therein
contained: Now because Wee have beene informed, as well by the humble
Certificate of Our Commissioners for Virginia, as by the humble
Petition of divers of Our loving Subjects, the Planters and Adventurers
of, and in those Colonies, That, notwithstanding Our Royall pleasure
was so expressly signified, and the reasons of State are so plainely
laid downe, as might have perswaded every well affected Subject to the
due observance thereof; yet divers, out of an inordinate desire of
private gaine, have wilfully disobeyed Our commandement herein, and
thereby have indeavoured, as much as in them lieth, to destroy so noble
a worke as the support of those Plantations, which so much concernes
Our Honour, and the honour and profit of Our people.

Wee therefore, being very sensible of this neglect and contempt,
have thought good to renew Our said Proclamation; And doe hereby
signifie and declare unto all Our loving Subjects, and unto all
others, Our expresse will and pleasure to be, That Our said former
Proclamation, and every clause, prohibition, article and thing therein
contained, shall from hencefoorth be duly observed and obeyed, with
such alterations and additions, as are in these presents contained
and expressed, upon paine of Our high displeasure, and such penalties
and punishments, as in Our said former Proclamation are, or in these
presents shall be limited or appointed for the offenders thereof.

And whereas some have since Our said last Proclamation, unmerchantlike,
secretly and cunningly stollen in great parcels of Tobacco, contrary
to Our said Proclamation; Wee would have those persons, and all others
by their example know, That they must expect the severitie of that
censure, which Our Court of Starre-Chamber shall thinke fit to inflict
upon them, and that Wee are resolved not to relent or remit their
deserved punishment, but to cause them and all others, that shall dare
to offend herein, to bee prosecuted and punished in such measure, as
such their high contempt doth deserve.

And because We conceived it would be utterly in vaine to prohibite
the importation of such forreine Tobacco, as aforesaid, unlesse the
care and charge of the execution thereof were committed by Us, to some
fit and able persons, who besides the respect to Our service, might
for their owne particular interests take the same to heart; Therefore
We have by Our Letters Patents under Our great Seale of England,
authorized certaine persons, Citizens of London, well affected to those
plantations, and to Our service, by themselves, and their Deputies, to
search and inquire into the offences, and offenders against Our said
Proclamation: And Wee have also contracted with them to bee Our Agents
for Us, and to Our use to receive the Tobacco of those Colonies,
at, and for such prices as Wee have agreed to give for the same; and
besides those prices, to bee given to the Planters and owners of the
said Tobacco, Our said Agents have further contracted with Us, to give
and pay unto Us, and to Our use, such summes of money more, as may
give Us reasonable satisfaction for that losse, which otherwise Wee
should sustaine in Our Customes and other Dueties, and may inable Us
to beare that charge, which Wee have undertaken yeerely to disburse
for the generall defence and support of those Plantations. And We doe
further by this Our Proclamation publish and declare, that We will
constantly and inviolably observe and performe Our said contract, and
on Our parts, will allow and disburse out of Our revenew, those summes
of money for the safety of those Plantations, and for the ease of the
Planters and Inhabitants there, which by the said contract hath beene
on Our parts undertaken; whereof We would have, aswell Our said Agents,
as the Planters and Adventurers in those Colonies, and all other whom
it may concerne, to rest confidently assured.

And because Wee are given to understand, that divers using to trade
in Tobacco, and having a purpose to import, or buy, or sell the same,
contrary to the intent of this Our Proclamation, doe usually land
the same at private Wharffes, Staires, or other places, and send,
or conveigh the same unto the Houses, Cellers, Warehouses, or other
places, of, or belonging to others, who are lesse suspected then
themselves, thereby to conceale the same from Us, and Our Agents; Wee
further will and command, That from hencefoorth no person whatsoever,
presume, or suffer the said prohibited Tobacco to bee landed at any
Wharffe, Staire, or other place, nor receive, or conceale any such
prohibited Tobacco, or suffer the same to be bestowed in any of their
Houses, Cellers, Warehouses, or other places, upon paine of Our high
displeasure, and upon such paines and penalties, as by this, or Our
former Proclamation, are to be inflicted upon the principall offenders,
And to the intent that all the prohibited Tobacco brought in, shall
be justly and truely exported againe, et no part thereof sold, or
vented within these Our Kingdomes; Our will and command is, That all
the prohibited Tobacco which shall be seized within Our Kingdome
of England, shall be brought and delivered into the Warehouse, or
Storehouse which shall be to that purpose provided by the said Agents,
in Our city of London; and all the prohibited Tobacco, which shall be
seized within Our Kingdome of Ireland, shall bee brought and delivered
into the Warehouses, or Storehouses which shall to that purpose bee
appointed by Our Agents in Our city of Dublin, or elsewhere within Our
said Kingdome of Ireland.

And for the incouragement of those, who shall take paines in the
discovery and seizing thereof, Our will and pleasure is That the
one halfe of the reasonable value thereof, shall bee paid unto the
seizers thereof in money by Our Agents, et the Tobacco it selfe shall
be exported againe by Our said Agents, or by their appointments: And
for the better execution of Our service herein, We doe hereby give
full power and authority, as well to Our Agent and Agents, as to their
Deputy and Deputies, at all time and times, to enter into, and to
search for any prohibited Tobacco, contrary to this Our Proclamation,
in any Ship, Boate, or vessell, or in any House, Ship, Celler, Soller,
Warehouse, or in any Trunke, Chest, Case, Barrell, or Pack, Cabbin, or
any other suspected place whatsoever, and finding any such prohibited
Tobacco, the same to seize and cary away, to be conveyed to such place
or Warehouse, as Our said Agent shall appoint for that purpose, as
aforesaid.

And Our expresse will and command is, That neither Our said Agents, nor
any others, doe sell, or utter any part of the said prohibited Tobacco,
within any Our owne Dominions, there to bee spent and used, whereby
the vent of the Tobacco of our Colonies aforesaid may any way bee
hindred, upon paine of Our heavy displeasure, and such other paines and
penalties, as other offenders against this Our Proclamation are liable
unto.

And whereas by Our former Proclamation, We did command, that from, et
after the five et twentieth day of March, then, and now next ensuing,
no person should sell, utter, or offer to put to sale, or use any
Tobacco, which is not of the proper growth of the Colonies aforesaid,
and before the ende of forty dayes then next ensuing, should transport
out of Our said Kingdome, all other Tobacco, then that of the growth
of those Colonies; Wee doe now by this Our Proclamation, ratifie and
confirme the same, and command, the same to be duely put in execution:
And to the ende there may be no evasion used to avoyd the same, Wee
doe hereby give full power and commandement to Our said Agents, by
themselves and their Deputies, at any time, or times after the said
five and twentieth day of March now next ensuing, to search for the
said prohibited Tobacco, and to take a true and exact note and accompt
of the quantity thereof, to the intent that the Owners thereof, before
the ende of forty dayes next ensuing after the said five and twentieth
day of March, either by themselves, or some other, may export the
same by the privity of the said Agents, according to the true intent
of this, and of Our said former Proclamation, and at the end of the
said forty dayes, may give a just account unto Our said Agents, what
is become thereof; et whatsoever Tobacco, which is not of the proper
growth of the Plantations aforesaid, shall after the said forty dayes
be found in the hands of any person whatsoever, shall bee seized by
Our said Agents, or their Deputies to Our use, and the said person or
persons having or using the same, shall incurre Our high displeasure,
and bee subject to such further paines and penalties, as by Our said
Proclamation are to be inflicted upon any other offenders.

And Our further will and command is, that all the Tobacco of the growth
of Our Colonies aforesaid, shall be brought to the Custome-house-key
of Our port of London, and there be delivered to Our Agents, or their
Assignees to Our use, according to Our contract aforesaid, or be kept
in Our said Custome-house to bee transported out of Our Dominions; and
whatsoever Tobacco of the growth of those Plantations, or either of
them, shall not be brought to that Key, and be delivered as aforesaid,
or for which there shall not bee good security given to Our Agents,
within foureteene dayes after the landing thereof, to export the same
as aforesaid, the same shall bee forfeited and seized to Our use by Our
Agents or their Deputies, as other prohibited Tobacco, and this to bee
duely observed under the paines and penalties aforesaid.

And whereas Wee are given to understand, that divers using to trade
in Tobacco, have and still doe secretly and underhand steale into Our
Kingdomes the said prohibited Tobacco, and doe so privily hide and
conceale the same, that they cannot be easily discovered, nor found
out; and doe either by themselves, or others by them to that purpose
imployed, carry the same by small quantities to the houses or shops
of Our subjects, inhabiting within Our said Kingdomes, and doe sell
or profer the same to bee sold, or else doe secretly and covertly
offer to contract for the sale of such prohibited Tobacco; Our will
and pleasure is, and Wee doe hereby straitly charge and command all
and every Our loving subjects, to whom any the said prohibited
Tobacco shall be offered to be sold or contracted for, as aforesaid,
that immediately upon the sight of any such prohibited Tobacco, or
upon offer to contract for any such Tobacco, they make stay thereof,
and of such person or persons, as shall either profer the same to
sell, or shall offer to contract for any the said prohibited Tobacco,
and that they and every of them, who shall have the said prohibited
Tobacco so proffered unto them to be sold, as aforesaid, shall give
notice thereof, and charge the next Constable, Head-borough or other
Officer, with such person or persons, who shall offer to put the same
to sale, upon paine of Our high displeasure, and of such other paines
and penalties, as other offenders against this Our Royall Proclamation
are liable unto. And Wee doe hereby further charge and command all and
singuler Constables, Head-boroughs et other Our Officers aforesaid,
that they and every of them, upon notice unto them given of any such
prohibited Tobacco, as aforesaid, or of any such person and persons so
offending, as aforesaid, that they seize the said Tobacco, and detaine
all such person and persons so offending as they shal have knowledge
of, untill they have given notice thereof unto Our said Agents or
their Deputie or Deputies, and untill by their meanes the person
offending may be brought before such Officer as hath power by this Our
Proclamation to take sufficient bond for the appearance of such person,
in some of Our Courts of justice, to answer for their faults as the
same shall deserve.

And for the better finding out and discovery of the offences and
offenders against Our former and this Our Proclamation, We are well
pleased, and doe hereby require and command, that Our Treasurer,
Commissioners for Our Treasury, Chancellour and Barons of Our Exchequer
now, and for the time being, within Our said Kingdomes of England and
Ireland, respectively shall and may award such and so many Commissions,
as they shall thinke meet, to be directed to discreet and fit persons
in all or any Our Ports, or elsewhere, to enquire of and examine upon
oath, or otherwise, all such persons as are, or shall be suspected
to have heretofore offended, or which hereafter shall offend against
this, or Our former Proclamation in this behalfe, or any other
person or persons whatsoever, for the finding out and discovery of
the said offences and offenders, as is before mentioned; to the end
that, as well the importers of such Tobacco as the buyers, sellers,
spenders, receivers and concealers thereof, may receive such condigne
punishment by fine or otherwise, for their offences, as by Our Court of
Star-chamber, or Court of Exchequer shall be thought fit: And in case
such Tobacco shall not, or cannot be taken, or found to bee seized,
that then every such offender shall forfeit and pay to the hands of Our
Agent or Agents, in this behalfe for Our use, the full value of such
Tobacco, as the said offenders heretofore have, or hereafter shall have
imported, bought, sold, vented or received, as aforesaid, beside such
further punishment, as shall be fit to be inflicted upon them for their
contempt.

And Our further will and pleasure is, and We doe hereby declare, That
whatsoever Our said Agent or Agents, their Assignee or Assignees, under
the hands and seales of the greater number of them, have already done,
or shall doe hereafter against any offender or offenders, in requiring
and taking the forfeiture of any Tobacco, or the value thereof so
imported or uttered as aforesaid, or in the mitigating or taking any
lesse summe then the value of the same of any such offender in the
premisses, or otherwise according to the good discretion of Our said
Agent or Agents, Wee doe and will from time to time approve and allow
of by these presents: And this signification of Our pleasure shall be
as well unto Our said Agent or Agents for the time being, as unto all
and every such Commissioner and Commissioners which have beene, or
shall be imployed, in, or about this Our service, a sufficient warrant
and discharge in that behalfe, without any account to be by them, or
any of them respectively yeelded to Us, Our Heires or Successors, and
without incurring any penalty in the doing or executing of this Our
Service and Royall Command.

And forasmuch as heretofore divers great quantities of Tobacco have
beene imported into this Realme, under the name or names of sundry
poore Mariners, and other, which are not able to pay the value thereof,
nor give satisfaction for the same, Our will and pleasure is, the
better to avoyd such frauds and deceipts in time to come, That in
whatsoever Ship, or other Vessell, any such Tobacco in greater or
lesser quantities, shall be found or discovered to have beene, or to
be so imported, and to be shifted away that seizure thereof cannot,
or shal not be made, That then such Mariners, or others, who shall
so import or couler the said Tobaccoes, shall not onely be punished,
as aforesaid, but that every Master of such Ship or Vessell, wherein
such Tobacco shall be so imported or shifted away, as aforesaid, shall
forfeit to Us the value of the said Tobacco, and that such Ship or
Ships shall be arrested, and stayed by the Officers of every Port, or
any of Our Agents, their Deputies or Assignees respectively, untill
the said forfeiture be duly answered and paid to the hands of Our said
Agent or Agents to Our use, or such others as they shall appoint in
that behalfe.

And for the better execution of the premisses, Wee doe straitly charge
and command all Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffes, Bailiffes,
Constables, Headboroughs, Tythingmen, Our Warden and Constable of Our
Cinque Ports, and all other Our Officers and Ministers, as well of Our
Admiralties, as otherwise, and all other Our loving Subjects, to whom
it shall or may appertaine, that they and every of them at all times
et times hereafter, and from time to time, upon sight of Our Letters
Patents, granted to Our said Agents, or of a Deputation under the hands
et seales of Our Agents, or any three of them, be ayding and assisting
to Our said Agent and Agents, and their Deputie and Deputies, and to
such Our Commissioners, as shall be from time to time appointed for or
about this Our service, And also to be from time to time ayding and
assisting to all Our Searchers, Waiters, and to all such other person
and persons as shall be authorized by Our said Agent or Agents, or by
Our Customers or Farmers of Our Customes, for the searching, seizing,
taking, and carying away of all such Tobacco imported, or hereafter to
be imported or uttered, or intended to be put to sale contrary to this
Our Royall prohibition and command. And if any person or persons shall
bee found, privily or secretly to oppose or animate any others, to
contradict or withstand them in the due execution of this Our service
and Royall command, or to neglect the due execution thereof, That then
We do by these presents, straitly charge and command, all and every Our
sayd Officers respectively, that every such person and persons shall
be apprehended and brought before Our Treasurer, Chancellour of Our
Exchequer, or before any the Lords or others of Our Privy Councell, or
before Our chiefe Baron, or some other of the Barons of Our Exchequer
for the time being, to receive such order for condigne punishment to be
inflicted upon them according to their demerits, as shall be fit.

Given at Our Court at Theobalds, the second day of March, in the two
and twentieth yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France, and
Ireland.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majestie.

M.DC.XXIIII.

_4 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Dalk., P. R. O., and Q. C.
Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xvii, 668._




1625, April 9.

[Importation of Tobacco.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION TOUCHING TOBACCO.

Whereas Our most deare Father, of blessed memorie, deceased, for many
weighty and important Reasons of State, and at the humble suit of His
Commons in Parliament, did lately publish two severall Proclamations,
the one dated the nine and twentieth day of September, now last past,
and the other the second of March following, for the utter prohibiting
of the importation, and use of all Tobacco, which is not of the proper
growth of the Colonies of Virginia and the Sommer Islands, or one of
them, with such Cautions, and under such Paines and Penalties, as are
in those Proclamations at large expressed:

Wee, tendring the prosperity of those Colonies and Plantations, and
holding it to bee a matter of great consequence unto Us, and to the
honour of Our Crowne, not to desert, or neglect those Colonies, whereof
the foundations, with hopefull successe, have been so happily layd by
Our Father, beeing given to understand, that divers persons intending
onely their private gaine, and neglecting all considerations of the
publique, in this short time, whilest Wee have been necessarily taken
up in ordering of the great affaires of Our Kingdomes and State,
have taken the boldnesse, secretly, and by stealth, to import and
utter great quantities of Tobacco, which is not of the growth of the
Plantations aforesaid, to the utter destruction of those Plantations,
as much as in them lieth; Wee have thought fit, for the preventing of
those inconveniences, which may otherwise ensue, to the irrecoverable
dammage of those Plantations, and of Our service, to publish and
declare Our Royall pleasure for the present, touching the premisses,
untill upon more mature deliberation Wee shall see cause to alter, or
adde unto the same, in any part.

And Wee doe therefore straitly charge and command, that no person
whatsoever, of what degree or qualitie soever, doe at any time
hereafter, either directly or indirectly, import, buy, sell, or utter,
plant, cherish, or use, or cause to bee imported, sold, or uttered,
cherished, planted, or used, in Our Realmes of England, or Ireland, or
Dominion of Wales, or in any Isles or places thereunto belonging any
Tobacco, of any sort whatsoever, which is not of the proper growth of
the said Colonies, or one of them; And that no person whatsoever, by
any shift or device whatsoever, doe receive, or conceale, or colour
the Tobacco of any other, so imported, planted, bought, sold, uttered,
or used within Our sayd Realmes, or Dominions, or the Isles or places
aforesaid, or any part thereof, upon paine of forfeiture unto Us, of
all such Tobacco so to be imported, bought, sold, planted, uttered,
or used, contrary to the true meaning of these presents, in whose
hands soever the same shall be found, and upon such further paines and
penalties, as by the Lawes and Statutes of these Our Realms, or by the
Censure of Our Courts of Star-Chamber, in either of Our said Kingdomes
respectively, can or may be inflicted upon the offenders, for contempt
of this Our Royall Command; and to be reputed and taken as enemies to
Our proceedings, and to those Plantations, which so much concerne Our
honour, and the honour and profit of Our State.

And Our further will and command is, that all the forreigne Tobacco,
of what sort soever, which is not of the proper growth of those
Plantations, or one of them, shall before the fourth day of May, now
next ensuing, bee transported out of Our Realmes and Dominions, as
by the sayd former Proclamations it was directed and commanded, upon
paine of forfeiture thereof, and upon the other paines and penalties
aforesayd to be inflicted upon the offenders.

And Our pleasure is, That all such forreigne Tobacco may bee freely
exported by any person whatsoever, without paying to Us, or to Our use,
any Subsidie, or other duetie for the same.

Given at Our Court at White-Hall, this ninth day of April, in the
first yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France, and Ireland.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Printed at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majestie. M.DC.XXV.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Crawf., I. T., P. C., and
P. R. O. Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xviii,
19._




1625, May 13.

[Settling the Affairs of Virginia.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION FOR SETLING THE PLANTATION OF VIRGINIA.

Whereas the Colonie of Virginia, Planted by the hands of Our most deare
Father of blessed memory, for the propagation of Christian Religion,
the increase of Trade, and the enlarging of his Royall Empire, hath
not hitherto prospered so happily, as was hoped and desired, A great
occasion whereof his late Majesty conceived to be, for that the
government of that Colony was committed to the Company of Virginia,
encorporated of a multitude of persons of severall dispositions,
amongst whom the affaires of greatest moment were, and must be ruled
by the greater number of Votes and Voyces; And therefore his late
Majestie, out of His great Wisedome, and depth of Judgement, did desire
to resume that popular government, and accordingly the Letters Patents
of that Incorporation, were by his Highnesse direction in a Legall
course questioned, and thereupon judicially repealed, and adjudged to
bee voyde[1]; wherein his Majesties ayme was onely, to reduce that
government into such a right course, as might best agree with that
forme which was held in the rest of his Royall Monarchy, and was not
intended by him, to take away, or impeach the particular Interest of
any private Plantor, or Adventurer, nor to alter the same, otherwise
then should be of necessity for the good of the publique: And wheras We
continue the like care of those Colonies and Plantations, as Our late
deare Father did, and upon deliberate advice and consideration, are
of the same Judgement that Our said Father was of, for the government
of that Colony of Virginia; Now lest the apprehension of former
personall differences, which have heretofore happened (the reviving
and continuing whereof Wee utterly disallow, and strictly forbid)
might distract the mindes of the Plantors and Adventurers, or the
opinion, that We would neglect those Plantations, might discourage men
to goe or send thither, and so hinder the perfecting of that worke,
wherein We hold the honor of Our deare Father deceased, and Our owne
honour to be deeply engaged; We have thought fit to declare, and by
Our Royal Proclamation to publish Our owne Judgement, and resolution
in these things, which by Gods assistance Wee purpose constantly to
pursue. And therefore Wee doe by these presents publish and declare to
all Our loving Subjects, and to the whole world, that Wee hold those
Territories of Virginia and the Sommer-Ilands, as also that of New
England, where Our Colonies are already planted, and within the limits
and bounds whereof, Our late deare Father, by His Letters Patents,
under His great Seale of England, remaining of Record, hath given
leave and liberty to His Subjects to plant and inhabite, to be a part
of Our Royall Empire, descended upon Us and undoubtedly belonging and
appertaining unto Us; And that We hold Ourselfe, as well bound by Our
Regal office, to protect, maintaine, and support the same, and are so
resolved to doe, as any other part of Our Dominions:

And that Our full resolution is, to the end that there may be one
uniforme course of Government, in, and through Our whole Monarchie,
That the Government of the Colonie of Virginia shall immediately depend
upon Our Selfe, and not be committed to any Company or Corporation,
to whom it may be proper to trust matters of Trade and Commerce, but
cannot bee fit or safe to communicate the ordering of State-affaires,
be they of never so meane consequence: And that therefore Wee have
determined, That Our Commissioners for those Affaires, shall proceed
according to the tenor of Our Commission directed unto them, untill Wee
shall declare Our further pleasure therein. Neverthelesse We doe herby
declare, That Wee are resolved, with as much convenient expedition,
as Our Affaires of greater importance will give leave, to establish a
Councell, consisting of a few persons of understanding and qualitie,
to whom We will give trust for the immediate care of the Affaires of
that Colony, and who shall be answerable to Us for their proceedings,
and in matters of greater moment, shall be subordinate and attendant
unto Our Privie Councell heere; And that We will also establish another
Councell to be resident in Virginia, who shall be subordinate to Our
Councell here for that Colonie; and that at Our owne charge we will
maintaine those publique Officers and Ministers, and that strength of
Men, Munition, and Fortification, as shall be fit and necessary for
the defence of that Plantation, and will by any course that shall be
desired of Us, settle and assure the particular rights and interests of
every Planter and Adventurer, in any of those Territories, which shall
desire the same, to give them full satisfaction for their quiet and
assured enjoying thereof.

And lastly, whereas it is agreed on all sides, that the Tobacco of
those plantations of Virginia and the Sommer Islands (which is the
onely present meanes for their subsisting) cannot be managed for the
good of the Plantations, unlesse it be brought into one hand, whereby
the forreigne Tobacco may be carefully kept out, and the Tobacco of
those Plantations may yeeld a certaine and ready price to the owners
thereof; Wee doe hereby declare, That to avoid all differences and
contrariety of opinions, which will hardly be reconciled amongst the
Planters and Adventurers themselves, We are resolved to take the same
into Our owne hands, and by Our servants or Agents for Us, to give such
prices to the Planters and Adventurers for the same, as may give them
reasonable satisfaction and encouragement; but of the maner thereof,
Wee will determine hereafter at better leisure: And when We shall have
concluded the same, We shall expect, that all Our loving Subjects will
readily conforme themselves thereunto.

And in the meanetime, because the importation and use of forreigne
Tobacco, which is not of the growth of those Plantations, or one
of them, will visibly and assuredly undermine and destroy those
Plantations, by taking away the meanes of their subsistence, We doe
hereby strictly charge and command, That Our late Proclamation,
bearing date the ninth day of April last, intituled, (A Proclamation
touching Tobacco) shall in all points and parts thereof, be duely
and strictly observed, upon paine of Our high displeasure, and such
further penalties and punishments, as by the sayd Proclamation are
to be inflicted upon the offenders. And We doe hereby advise all Our
loving Subjects, and all others whom it may concerne, not to adventure
the breach of our Royall Commandement in any of the premisses, We being
fully resolved, upon no importunitie or intercession whatsoever, to
release or remit the deserved punishment of such, as shall dare to
offend against the same, seeing We holde not Our Selfe onely, but Our
people interested therein.

Given at Our Court at White-Hall, the thirteenth day of May, in the
first yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France, and Ireland.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majestie. Anno Dom. M.DC.XXV.

_2 pp. folio. There are two issues, varying only in the cut of the
royal arms. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Crawf., I. T., P. C, and P. R. O.
Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xviii, 72._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] For the proceedings whereby the patent was overthrown by the _quo
warranto_, June 26, 1624, see Brown, _First Republic in America_, p.
601.




1627, February 17.

[Importation of Tobacco.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION TOUCHING TOBACCO.

Whereas Our most deare Father, of blessed memory, deceased, for
many weighty and important reasons of State, and at the humble suit
of his Commons in Parliament, did heretofore publish two severall
Proclamations, the one bearing date the nine and twentieth day of
September, in the two et twentieth yeere of His Highnesse Reigne of
England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the eight and fiftieth,
and the other the second day of March then next following, by both
of them utterly prohibiting the importation et use of all Tobacco,
which is not of the proper growth of the Colonies of Virginia, and
the Summer-Ilands, or one of them, with such Cautions and under such
Paines and Penalties, as are in those Proclamations at large expressed.

And whereas Our sayd Father by another Proclamation bearing date the
thirtieth day of December, in the seventeenth yeere of His Highnesse
Reigne of England, did straitly charge all and every person or persons,
of what degree or condition soever, that they should not from the
second day of February then next following, presume to Sowe, Set, or
Plant, or cause to be sowen, set, or planted within this Realme of
England or Dominion of Wales any sort or kinde of Tobacco whatsoever,
and that they, or any of them should not maintaine and continue any
old Stockes or Plants of Tobacco formerly sowen or planted, but should
foorthwith destroy and roote up the same.

And whereas We, finding the said Proclamations to be grounded upon
many weighty reasons and considerations, did since Our Accesse to Our
Crowne, by Our Proclamation lately published, renew and confirme the
said former prohibitions: Neverthelesse, because the immoderate desire
of taking of Tobacco hath so farre prevailed in these Our Kingdomes, as
that it cannot on a sodaine bee utterly suppressed, and the difference,
or, at least, the opinion of difference betweene Spanish or forreine
Tobacco, and Tobacco of the Plantations of Virginia, and of Our owne
Dominions, is such, that Our Subjects can hardly be induced totally to
forsake the Spanish Tobacco; whereby it commeth to passe, That where
Wee were willing to have suffered losse in Our Customes, so as the said
forreigne Tobacco might have been kept out, the same is secretly, and
by stealth brought in in great quantities, and many great quantities
of Tobacco are set and so wenwithin this Our Realme of England and
Dominion of Wales, and so the mischiefe, intended to be redressed, is
not avoided, and yet Our Revenue in Our Customes is much diminished.

Wee therefore, taking into Our Princely consideration, as wel the
present estate of these times, and how many important necessities
doe at this instant presse Us, that by all good meanes Wee should
husband Our Revenue to the best, and also considering the many
inconveniencies which doe and will arise, both to Our selves and
to Our Subjects, by the secret importation of Spanish Tobacco, and
planting of English Tobacco, whereby divers of Our Subjects have taken
liberty to themselves, for the desire of private gaine, without respect
to the publique, to make such frequent sale of the same, as that
thereby not onely Our Plantations abroad are much hindered, but Our
Customes also are much impayred, Wee have thought fit, by the advice
of Our Commissioners for Our Revenue, as Our first part of proceeding
concerning Tobacco, to restraine wholly the planting of Tobacco within
these Our Realmes, or any the Iles thereto belonging, and to forbid the
importation of forreine Tobacco. And yet to give way to the infirmitie
of Our Subjects for the present, by the allowing the importation of
some smal quantity of Spanish or forreine Tobacco, not being of the
growth of the English Plantations, not exceeding the quantitie of
fiftie thousand weight in any one yeere to bee brought in by Our owne
Commissioners onely, and to Our owne particular use onely, and not
otherwise.[1]

And to the end that the extraordinary liberty now taken, may be
restrained, the said Colonies or plantations not hindered, nor Our
Selfe deceived in Our Customes, Wee have likewise by the advice
aforesaid, thought it requisite, to imploy some persons of trust and
qualitie to be Our Commissioners in this Service, to, and for Our owne
proper use, and upon accompt to be given to Us for the same.

Wee doe therefore hereby publish and declare Our Royall will and
pleasure, that, notwithstanding the severall Proclamations before
mentioned, We are well contented to give way to the importation and
sale of so much Spanish and forreine Tobacco, as shall not exceede the
quantitie of fifty thousand weight in any one yeere, as aforesaid,
and that the same shall bee Our owne Merchandise and Commodity, and
be managed and disposed of by Our owne Commissioners, or such as they
shall appoint for Our use, and not otherwise.

And, because that no man shall presume, by colour of this Our Licence
or toleration, to import any other, or greater quantity of Spanish or
forreine Tobacco, nor utter or put the same to sale, to the prejudice
of Our Service hereby especially intended, and to the overthrow of Our
Colonies and Plantations abroad, Wee doe hereby straitly charge and
command, that no man other then Our owne Commissioners, for Our owne
proper use, presume to import any forreine Tobacco into Our Realmes
of England or Ireland, or any parts thereof. And for their better
assistance therein, and the prevention of all abuses, Wee have thought
fit, and so ordaine, and doe by these presents publish Our Royall
pleasure, That all Tobacco that shall from hencefoorth be imported
into this Our Realme of England, whether it be Spanish, or of the
growth of Virginia, the Sommer-Ilands, or the West-Indies, or other
adjacent Ilands, beeing English Plantations, shall be brought into Our
Port of London onely: Also that there shall bee three severall Seales
kept by Our Commissioners in some convenient place, where they shall
appoint, under three lockes, whereof three of Our Commissioners shall
keepe three severall Keyes, wherewith both all such forreine Tobacco,
as shall bee so imported, as aforesaid, as also such other Tobacco
of the growth of Virginia, and the Sommer-Ilands, and other the sayd
Plantations as shall bee imported, shall be sealed, That is to say,
for that of Virginia, and the Sommer-Ilands, a Seale engraven with Our
Armes, and for that of the other English Plantations, a Seale engraven
with a Lion and a Crowne, and for the other forreine Tobacco, a Seale
engraven with a broad Arrow and a Portcullice, without paying anything
for the sealing of the Tobacco of Virginia, and Sommer-Ilands, and
other the sayd Plantations, but onely what the parties themselves shal
thinke fit to allow for the sealers paines, waxe, and threed.

And We doe hereby will et Command, that no person or persons
whatsoever, whether Denizen, or Stranger, or borne within any of Our
Realmes or Dominions, doe presume, attempt, or go about to counterfeit
the said Seales, or any of them, and that no person or persons
whatsoever, other then Our Commissioners, their deputy or deputies, do
presume, attempt, or go about to import any Spanish or forraine Tobacco
whatsoever, or to buy, utter, or sell any Tobacco, of what sort soever,
but such as the Roule thereof shall bee sealed with one of the Seales
aforesaid, or to import any other, or greater quantity of Spanish
Tobacco, then the said fifty thousand weight onely in any one yeere, or
to sowe, set, or plant, or cause to be sowen, set, or planted in any
of his, or their grounds, any Tobacco whatsoever, within Our Realmes
of England, or Ireland, or Dominion of Wales, or any Isles or places
belonging thereto, or permit, or suffer any old stockes formerly set
to continue, upon paine of forfeiture unto us, of all such Tobacco as
shall be imported, set, sowen, planted, suffered, uttered, or put to
sale, contrary to the true meaning of these presents, and to have the
same English Tobacco utterly destroyed, in whose hands soever the same
shall be found, and upon such further paines, and penalties, as by the
Lawes and Statutes of this Our Realme of England, or by the severity,
or censure of Our Court of Star-chamber, or by Our Prerogative Royall
may be inflicted upon the offenders for their contempt of this Our
Royall Command, the one moity of all which fines to be imposed upon any
the said offenders, We are graciously pleased shall be bestowed upon
the persons that shall informe against them for the same; and that such
person or persons as shall discover any planting of Tobacco within Our
Realme of England, or other Our Realmes or Dominions, shall have his
charges expended in following of Suite against the offendors, allowed
out of Our part of the fines to be imposed, besides his moity aforesaid.

And further, that every person or persons, that shall discover the
falsifying, or counterfeiting of any the Seales aforesaid, shall have
an hundred Crownes for such his discovery out of Our part of the fine
to be imposed for the same, besides the one moity for himselfe, as
aforesaid.

And for the better execution of Our will and pleasure, We doe hereby
Command, all and singular Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, Waiters,
and other Officers, attending in all, and every, or any of Our Ports,
Creekes, or places of lading, or unlading, for the taking, collecting,
or receiving of any Our Customes, Subsidies, or other duties, to take
notice of this Our pleasure.

And We doe hereby command, and give power and authority unto Our said
Commissioners, and those whom they shall thinke fit to imploy in Our
said service, and every, or any of them from time to time, and at
all times when they shall thinke fittest, with a Constable, or other
officer, for their assistance to search any ship, or other vessell or
bottome, riding or lying within any Port, Haven, or Creeke within their
severall charge and place of attendance, for all Tobacco, imported
contrary to the intent of this Our Proclamation, and the same being
found, to seize and take to Our use, as also to take notice of the
names, and apprehend the bringers in, and buyers of the same, to the
end they may receive condeigne punishment for their offence.

And further, to take speciall care, that no more of the said Spanish,
or other forraine Tobacco, shall be imported, then the said fifty
thousand weight onely, in any one yeere, and that the same be brought
into Our Port of London onely, as aforesaid, upon paine that every of
the said officers that shall be found negligent, corrupt, or remisse
herein, shall lose his place, and entertainement, and undergoe such
paines and penalties, as by the Laws, or the censure of Our said Court
of Star chamber may be inflicted upon them for the same.

And likewise We doe hereby ordaine, will and appoint, that it shall
and may be lawfull, to and for Our said Commissioners, authorised, as
aforesaid, to import the said fifty thousand weight of Spanish or other
forraine Tobacco, by him, or themselves, or his, or their deputy or
deputies with a Constable, or other officer, for their assistance, to
enter into any suspected place or places, at such time or times, as
they shall thinke to be most convenient, and there to search, discover,
and finde out any Tobacco, imported, uttered, planted, set, sowed,
sold or vented, not marked, or sealed, as aforesaid, contrary to the
true meaning hereof, and such Tobacco so found to seize, take away, et
dispose of et the owners thereof, or in whose custome the same shal
be found, to informe, and complaine of, to the end they may receive
punishment, according to Our pleasure herein before declared.

And further, We doe by these presents, will and require, all and
singular Mayors, Sheriffes, Justices of peace, Bailiffes, Costables,
Headboroughs, Customers, Controllers, Searchers, Waiters, and all other
Our Officers, and Ministers whatsoever, that they, and every of them,
in their severall places and offices, be diligent and attendant in the
execution of this Our Proclamation, and also ayding and assisting, to
Our said Commissioners thereunto by Us appointed, or to be appointed,
and to their Deputies, as well in any search for discovery of any act,
or acts to bee performed, contrary to the intent of these presents, as
otherwise in the doing, or executing of any matter or thing for the
accomplishment of this Our Royall Command.

And lastly, Our will and pleasure is, and We doe hereby, charge and
command Our Atturney generall, for the time being, to informe against
such persons in Our Court of Star-chamber, or Exchequer-chamber, as the
case shall require from time to time, whose contempt and disobedience
against this Our Royall Command, shall merit the censure of these
Courts.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the seventeenth day of Februarie, in
the second yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France, and Ireland.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majestie. M.DC.XXVI.

_3 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Crawf., I. T., P. C., and
P. R. O. Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xviii,
848._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] In a commission issued to Sir John Wolstenholme and ten others
to execute the regulations regarding the importation of tobacco,
dated January 31, 1627, this provision as to Spanish tobacco had been
inserted. (Printed in Rymer's _Foedera_, xviii, 831.)




1627, March 30.

[Sealing of Tobacco.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION TOUCHING THE SEALING OF TOBACCO.

Whereas We (by the advice of Our Commissioners for Our Revenue) have
resolved to import a quantity of Spanish Tobacco (not exceeding
fifty thousand weight in any one yeere) and utterly to prohibite the
importation of any other forreine Tobacco, which is not of the growth
of Our owne Plantations, and to prohibite also the planting of all
Tobacco within these Our Realmes of England and Ireland, and Islands
thereto belonging or adjacent, As by Our Proclamation, dated the
seventeenth day of February last (for the reasons therein expressed)
it doth at large appeare: Now, because Wee are informed, that it will
much conduce to Our Service, and the setling of that businesse, for the
preventing of the stealing in of all forreine Tobacco, and discovery
of the offendours, and for the clearing of all others, who are not
offendors, from future trouble, that all the Tobacco of the growth of
Our plantations already imported, shal be sealed by Our Commissioners
to that purpose appointed, aswell as that which shal be hereafter
imported, in such sort as by our sayd Proclamation is already directed,
That so the Tobacco of Our Plantations may bee distinguished from the
forreine Tobacco, and the Tobacco planted within these Our Realmes,
which are prohibited: Our will and command therfore is, and We doe
hereby declare et publish Our Royall pleasure to be, That Our said
Commissioners appointed by Us for this Service, shal with al covenient
speed, Seale all the Tobacco of the growth of Our said Plantations
already imported in such sort, as they are directed to Seale that which
shall be hereafter imported.

And if any person whatsoever, having any such Tobacco, of the growth
of Our said Plantations, or any of them, which shall refuse to have
the same Sealed, or which shall not offer the same to be Sealed, as
aforesayd, and the same shall hereafter, at any time after one moneth,
from the date hereof, be discovered, that the same shall bee taken and
reputed for forreine Tobacco, or for Tobacco of the growth of these Our
Realmes, which hath been prohibited, and which they durst not avow the
keeping of, and as such Prohibited Tobacco shal be taken, and seized as
other prohibited Tobacco, according to the Tenor and true meaning of
Our said former Proclamation, whereof Wee will, that every person, whom
it may concerne, do take notice at their perill.

Given at Our Court at White-Hall, the thirtieth day of March, in the
third yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and Ireland.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majestie. M.DC.XXVII.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Crawf., P. C., and P. R. O.
Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xviii, 886._




1627, August 9.

[Importation of Tobacco.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION FOR THE ORDERING OF TOBACCO.

The Kings most Excellent Majestie, and His Royall Father of blessed
memory, having at severall times and upon severall occasions, published
their Proclamations concerning Tobacco, as well that which hath beene
indeavoured to bee planted within this Realme, as that which is of the
growth of Virginia and the Sommer Islands, and other English Colonies
and Plantations, and also concerning Spanish and other forraigne
Tobacco; And finding that the inordinate desire of taking Tobacco, and
the immoderate thirst of gaine, by the planting and selling of Tobacco,
cannot otherwise be allayed or moderated; Hath at the last, by the
advice of His Privie Counsell, determined upon this finall resolution
touching all sorts of Tobacco, in manner following.

First, His Majestie doth heereby declare His Royall Pleasure to be, and
doth heereby Will and Command, that no person whatsoever doe at any
time hereafter, plant, cherish, or preserve any Tobacco, within these
His Realmes of England or Ireland, or Dominion of Wales, or any the
Isles, parts, or places, of, or belonging to them or any of them, and
if any bee now planted or growing there, that the same bee presently
plucked up and utterly destroyed, by the Owners, Planters, Tenders, or
Dressers thereof, and lest they or any of them, should adventure to
neglect the performance hereof, His Majestie doeth further straitly
charge and command all Constables, Tything-men, Headboroughs, and other
Officers within their severall limits and Jurisdictions, carefully and
effectually to see the same executed and performed accordingly. And His
Majestie doth further Will and Command all Justices of Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffes, and other principall Officers in their severall places,
within the compasse of their severall Jurisdictions and authorities,
upon complaint to them made, to cause the same to be duly performed and
executed without partialitie, as they and every of them will answere
their contempts in that behalfe at their uttermost perils.

And that the Tobacco of His Majesties own Plantations and Colonies may
not bee planted and imported hither without limitation or measure,
or under colour thereof, the Tobacco of the growth of Spaine and
other forraigne parts, may not be brought into these His Realmes, or
sold or uttered heere, to the overthrow of His Colonies abroad, and
to the wasting of the wealth and treasure of His Kingdomes at home.
His Majesty doeth further Will and straitly Command, that no person
whatsoever doe at any time heereafter import any Tobacco of the growth
of Spaine, and other forraigne parts out of His owne Dominions, nor
sell, utter, or offer to sell, or utter, or otherwise dispose or keepe
any such Tobacco, to the intent to sell or utter the same without
His Majesties speciall Commission in that behalfe, upon paine of
confiscation and forfeiture thereof, in whose hands soever the same
shall be found, and upon such further paines and penalties, as by the
Lawes of these His Realmes, or by His Prerogative Royall which in
this case He will not admit to be disputed, may be inflicted upon the
offendors.

And because such forraigne Tobacco, may not be received and uttered,
under the pretence of the Tobacco of the growth of Virginia, the
Summer-Ilands, and other Colonies and Plantations, under and within His
Majesties owne Dominions, nor the Planters, Owners, or Adventurers,
of, and in these Plantations, give themselves over to the planting of
Tobacco onely, to make a present returne of profit, and neglect to
applie themselves to solide Commodities fit for the establishing of
Colonies, which will utterly destroy these and all other Plantations;
His Majestie doth further will and command, that from henceforth no
Tobacco of the growth of Virginia, the Summer-Ilands, or any other
Plantations, or Colonies, of, or within His owne Dominions, bee
imported into these his Realmes or Dominions, or any the Ports, Havens,
Creekes, or places thereof, without His Majesties especiall licence
in that behalfe, under the great Seale of England, and that upon the
importation thereof, the same bee delivered into the hands of such
Commissioners, for his Majesties owne immediate use, as His Majestie
under His great Seale of England shal appoint, at, and for such Prices
and Rates to be paid for the same, as shall be reasonable agreed upon,
betweene the Owners or Factors of the same, and the Kings Commissioners
on His Majesties behalfe, or if they shall not agree thereon, then to
be transported againe, and sold elsewhere, upon paine of confiscation
and forfeiture thereof, and upon further paines and penalties, as by
the Law, or His Majesties Prerogative Royall may be inflicted upon them.

And further His Majestie doth straitly charge and command, that no
person whatsoever presume to buy any sort of Tobacco, within these
Realmes or Dominions, or any Haven, Port, Creeke, or place thereof,
of any other person, then of His Majesties Commissioners onely to bee
authorised under the great Seale of England, as aforesaid, and after
the same shall bee sealed with a Seale to that purpose appointed, and
that they, upon the buying thereof, doe expresse the true time when the
same was bought, the quantitie and qualitie thereof, in and by a note
in writing indented betweene the Buyer and Seller, testifying the same
upon the paines and penalties aforesayd.

And if during these times of Hostility, any Tobacco shall bee imported
by any of His Majesties owne Shippes, or by the Ships of any of
his Subjects, by way of Prize, or Letters of Marque, his further
will and pleasure is, that all such Tobacco shall be delivered unto
his Majesties Commissioners, at, and for reasonable prices, to bee
accomptable therefore to his Majesties use.

And his Majesty doeth hereby straitly charge and command, all
Customers, Controllers, Searchers, Wayters, and all other Officers,
Ministers, of, or belonging to His Customes, And also all Justices of
Peace, Mayors, Sheriffes, Constables, and other Our Officers, Ministers
and loving Subjects, in their severall places and degrees, to take
knowledge of this his Royall pleasure and Commandement, and to bee
ayding, helping and assisting to His Majesties Commissioners, and their
Deputies, Factors and servants, in all things touching and concerning
this His Service, whereof his Majestie is resolved to require a due and
strict accompt.

Given at His Majesties Court at Windsore, the ninth day of August
in the third yeere of His Reigne of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majestie. M.DC.XXVII.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Crawf., I. T., P. C., and
P. R. O. Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xviii,
920._




1630, November 24.

[Forbidding Disorderly Trading with the Savages.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION FORBIDDING THE DISORDERLY TRADING WITH THE SALVAGES
IN NEW ENGLAND IN AMERICA, ESPECIALLY THE FURNISHING OF THE NATIVES
IN THOSE AND OTHER PARTS OF AMERICA BY THE ENGLISH WITH WEAPONS, AND
HABILIMENTS OF WARRE.

Whereas a Proclamation was heretofore published by Our deare Father
King James of blessed memorie, in the twentieth yeere of His Reigne,[1]
for the better supportation and Reiglement of the Plantations within
Our Territory of New England in America, whereby, amongst divers other
things, the insufferable abuses committed by divers Interloping and
irregular Merchants, and disobedient Fishermen and Mariners, were
prohibited, who seeking only their present and private profit, did
Trade with the Salvages of that Countrey, and to the great prejudice
and danger of Our loving Subjects the Planters there, did Barter away
to the Salvages, Swords, Pikes, Muskets, Fowling-Pieces, Match, Powder,
Shotte, and other Warlike Armes, Weapons, and Munition, and teach them
the use thereof, not onely to their owne present ruine (divers of them
having been slaughtered by the barbarous people with their owne Weapons
formerly sold by them) but also to the great hazard of the lives of the
English already, planted there, and to the apparant destruction of that
hopefull Plantation.

Wee, being informed that these abuses are still continued to the
indangering of that Plantation,[2] and that the like abuses are also
practised in other Forreigne Plantations: Out of Our Princely care for
the prosperity of these Colonies, which being well governed may be of
great use to this Nation, for the reformation and prevention of these
and the like enormities for the future.

And to the end that the Royal Grant of Our late Father to the President
and Counsell of New England aforesayd, may bee maintained and
upholden, and that the Planters there, and adventurers thither, may bee
encouraged by all good wayes and meanes to proceede in their worthy
designes, have thought it fit, and doe hereby straitly charge and
command, That none of Our Subjects whatsoever (who are not Adventurers,
Inhabiters, or Planters, authorised by Our President and Counsell for
New England, according to the sayd Letters Patents) doe presume from
hencefoorth to frequent those Coasts to Trade or Traffique at all
with the Native people of those Countreys, or to intermeddle with the
Woods, or Grounds of any of the Planters, or English Inhabitants there,
otherwise then by the Licence of the sayd President and Counsell, or
for the necessary use of their Fishing on those Coasts, in which case
of Fishing, or under colour thereof, they are not to use any Trade or
Traffique there, nor to challenge any Right to the Soyle there, or
the Woods growing or beeing thereon, and especially Wee doe charge
and command, that neither any Interlopers, Fisher-men, or Mariners,
or any other of Our Subjects whatsoever, being of the said Company
of New England or otherwise, doe at any time hereafter dare to Sell,
Barter, or any wayes to deliver or convey unto any of the Salvages or
Natives of America, where any of Our English Colonies are or shall bee
planted, any Weapons or Habiliments of Warre of any kinde whatsoever,
or to teach them or any of them the use of Gunnes, or how to make,
or amend them, or any thing, belonging to them, upon paine of Our
high indignation, and the Confiscation, Penalties and Forfeitures
expressed in the said Royall Graunt of Our sayd Father, wherein Wee
shall proceede against those who have offended, or shall offend in any
of the premisses, in such manner and measure as the qualitie of their
Offences shall deserve. And yet further Wee leave it to the discussion
of the said President and Counsell for New England, and to other the
Governours and Counsell in any other Forreigne English Colonie in their
severall places respectively, to proceede against the Offenders in any
the kindes aforesaid, according to the powers already granted unto
them, and according to Our Lawes in that behalfe.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the foure and twentieth day of
November, in the sixt yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France
and Ireland.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majestie: and by the Assignes of John Bill. 1630.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., Crawf., P. C., and P. R. O. Entered
on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xix, 210. A photographic
fac-simile of this proclamation was printed by the Museum Book Store of
London, about 1898._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Refers to proclamation of November 6, 1622.

[2] The Privy Council, September 29, 1630, had acted upon a petition
from Massachusetts and had requested the attorney-general to draw up
a proclamation (see _Acts of Privy Council_, i, 154, and _Cal. State
Papers, Colonial, 1574-1660_, p. 120).




1631, January 6.

[Restricting Importation of Tobacco.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION CONCERNING TOBACCO.

Whereas in the Reigne of Our most deare and Royall Father, King James
of blessed memory, et since Our accesse to the Crowne, severall
Proclamations have been made and published concerning Tobacco, Yet
notwithstanding all the care and providence which hath hitherto been
used, We finde the unlimited desire of gaine, and the inordinate
appetite of taking Tobacco, hath so farre prevailed, that Tobacco hath
been continued to bee planted in great quantities, in severall parts of
this Our Realme, and a vast proportion of unserviceable Tobacco made
and brought from Our Colonies of Virginia, Summer Ilands, and other Our
Forreigne Plantations, besides an incredible quantity of Brasill and
Spanish Tobacco imported hither, and secretly conveyed on Land. And it
is now come to passe, That those Our Forreigne Plantations, that might
become usefull to this Kingdome, lingering onely upon Tobacco, are in
apparant danger to be utterly ruined, unlesse Wee speedily provide for
their subsistence; The bodies and manners of Our people are also in
danger to bee corrupted, and the wealth of this Kingdome exhausted by
so uselesse a Weede as Tobacco is; which beeing represented unto Us by
the humble Petition of Our loving Subjects the Planters and Adventurers
in Virginia, and also by the like humble Petition of the Retailers and
Sellers of Tobacco in and about Our Cities of London and Westminster,
Wee have thought it worthy of Our Princely care, as a matter not only
fit for Our profit, et the profit of Our people, but much concerning
Us in Our honour and government so to regulate the same, and compell
due obedience thereto, that Our forreigne Plantations and Colonies
may bee supported and encouraged, and they made usefull to this
Kingdome, by applying themselves to more solide commodities, that the
healths of Our Subjects may be preserved, the wealth of this Kingdome
enlarged, and the manners of Our people so ordered and governed, that
the world may not justly taxe Us, that these are at once endangered
only by the licentious use of Tobacco. And therfore having seriously
advised hereof, Wee, by the advice of Our Privie Councell, have now
resolved upon, and published these Our Commands following concerning
Tobacco, which Our Royall will and pleasure is, shall be in all things
observed upon paine of Our highest displeasure, and of such paines,
penalties and punishments, as by Our Court of Exchequer, and Court of
Starre-Chamber, and by any other Courts and ministers of Justice, or by
Our Prerogative Royall can be inflicted upon the offenders.

And first, Our will and Command is, that no person whatsoever doe at
any time hereafter plant, preserve, or maintaine any Tobacco, which is,
hath been, or shall be planted in Our Kingdomes of England or Ireland,
or Dominion of Wales, or in the Islands of Jersey or Guernesey, but
that the same bee utterly displanted and destroyed, and that none
presume or adventure to Buy, Sell, or utter any such Tobacco, the same
being utterly unwholesome to bee taken.

And further, that no Tobacco whatsoever be from hencefoorth imported
into these Our realms, or any Haven, Port, Creeke or place therof,
which is, or shal be of the growth of any the parts or places beyond
the Seas, belonging to, or under the obedience of any foreine King,
Prince, or State whatsoever; But such, and so much thereof onely, as
Wee shall specially allow to be imported, untill it shal be fully
setled betweene those Forreine Princes and Us, according to those
Treaties which are betweene Us, that Our Subjects may not unthriftily
vent the solide Commidities of Our owne Kingdomes, and returne the
proceed thereof in Smoake.

And further We will and command, that no Tobacco of the growth of any
of Our English Plantations in Virginia the Sommer Islands, Caribee
Islands, or other Islands or places in America, or the Coasts thereof,
be at any time hereafter imported or brought into Our Kingdomes of
England or Ireland, or Dominion of Wales, at any other Port then
at, or in Our Port of London onely, and the same duely entred in
Our Custome-houses there, nor that any greater quantitie thereof
bee imported there, then Wee by the advice of Our Privie Councell
shall hold fit, and under Our Privie Seale, shall declare to bee
competent for the expence of these Our Kingdomes, Wee not thinking
it fit to admit of an immeasurable expence of so vaine and needlesse
a Commoditie, which ought to bee used as a Drugge onely, and not so
vainely and wantonly as an evill habite of late times hath brought it
unto.

And these sorts of Tobacco which shall be thus brought from Our owne
Colonies, Wee will take present order shall bee well ordered and made
up, and so certified to bee, under the hand of the Governour of that
place, and when the same shall be brought hither, shall bee againe
Searched, Tryed and Sealed, that Our Subjects be not abused by corrupt
Tobacco.

And Our expresse Command is, that whatsoever Tobacco shall bee taken,
which shall be imported contrary to this Our Proclamation, the same
shall be forfeited and confiscate, and by the Officers of that Port or
place where it shall bee taken, shall be immediately burnt.

And for the ordering and governing of the expence and use of Tobacco
when it shall be imported, Wee, by the advice of Our Privie Councell,
shall speedily direct such a course as Wee shall hold fit, which Wee
expect shall be also in all things observed.

And Wee straitly charge and Command all Our Customers, Comptrollers,
Searchers, and all other the Officers and Ministers of Our Ports, that
they and every of them in their severall places, doe carefully and
faithfully observe Our Royal Command, in, and concerning the premisses;
and if any of them shall be found remisse or negligent therein, or to
connive at any such offender, that hee or they shall for such their
fault, without any remission be remooved from the place or places of
his or their attendance on Our service.

And to the end Our pleasure and Command hereby published, may be the
better executed, Wee doe hereby will, require and Command, all Maiors,
Sheriffes, Justices of peace, Bayliffes, Headboroughs, and other Our
Officers and loving Subjects whatsoever, to be aiding and assisting,
and so much as in them lyeth, to take care that the premisses herein
mentioned, be duly put in execution, as they tender their duetie and
allegeance to Us, and will answere the contrary at their uttermost
perils.[1]

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the sixt day of January, in the sixt
yeere of Our Reigne.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majestie: and by the Assignes of John Bill. 1630.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Canterbury, Crawf., and P. C.;
also in Va. State Library. Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's
"Foedera," xix, 235._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] A communication from the Privy Council to the Governor of
Virginia, inclosing the proclamation and directing the observance of
its regulations, is preserved among the records in the Public Record
Office. An order from the Council to the farmers and officers of
customs, issued at the same time, directs that Spanish tobacco will
pay a duty of 2_s._ per pound, St. Christopher's, Barbadoes, and
the adjacent islands 12_d._ per pound, and Virginia and the Somers
Islands 9_d._ per pound. (_Cal. State Papers, Colonial, 1574-1660_, p.
125). For the various restrictions upon the growth of tobacco in the
plantations, see Bruce, _Economic History of Virginia_, i, 304-309.




1633, October 13.

[Restricting Sale of Tobacco.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION FOR PREVENTING OF THE ABUSES GROWING BY THE UNORDERED
RETAILING OF TOBACCO.

Whereas the Plant or Drugge called Tobacco scarce knowne to this
Nation in former times, was in this Age first usually brought into
this Realme in small quantity, as Medicine, and so used, and by divers
taken as Medicine, but in processe of time, to satisfie the inordinate
appetite of a great number of men and women it hath been brought in
in great quantity, and taken for wantonnesse and excesse, provoking
them to drinking and other inconveniences, to the great impairing of
their healths, and depraving of their manners, so that the care which
His Majesty hath of his people hath enforced Him to thinke of some
meanes for the preventing of the evill consequence of this immoderate
use thereof. And albeit His Majesties dearest father of blessed
memorie had given directions therein, as well by Proclamation as
otherwise, yet those waies tooke not so good effect as was desired,
for that therein was no restraint of the number of those that should
sell Tobacco by retaile, nor care taken of the quality of those that
should make such sale, but Victuallers, Taverners, Alehouse-keepers,
Tapsters, Chamberlaines, Hostlers and others, of the meanest condition
have promiscuously used to regrate the same as allurements to other
naughtinesse, keeping therein no Assize, to the prejudice of the rest
of His Majesties loving Subjects. For repressing therefore of all such
excesses and for preventing of future inconvenience, Our Soveraigne
Lord the King, by the advice of the Lords and others of His Privie
Councell hath resolved to reduce the venting, selling and uttering of
Tobacco into some good order, and that none but men of sufficiency, and
such as shall bring certificate of their meetnesse, shall hereafter
sell or utter any Tobacco by retaile. And to that purpose His Majestie
hath lately caused Letters from His Lords, and others of His Privie
Councell to bee directed unto the Justices of Peace of the severall
Counties of this Kingdome, and Dominion of Wales, and also unto the
Maiors, Bailiffes and other chiefe Officers of divers Cities and Townes
Corporate; Commanding them to certifie in what Townes and places it may
bee fit to suffer selling and retailing of Tobacco, and how many in
each place were fit to bee licensed to use that Trade. In answere of
which Letters, Certificates have beene made from divers of the Justices
of Peace, and from the Maiors, Bailiffes, and other Magistrates of
divers Cities and Townes Corporate, who therein have acknowledged the
abuses that daily arise by the ungoverned selling and retailing of
Tobacco, expressing their desire of reformation.

Whereupon His Majestie by like advice of his Counsell hath caused other
Letters to be directed to the Justices and Conservators of the Peace in
severall Counties; thereby declaring in what Townes and places Tobacco
shall be permitted to be sold or uttered by Retayle, and hath Commanded
the said Justices and Conservators of the Peace, to cause the names of
those Townes and places specified in those Letters, to be written and
affixed in publique places where the Assises and Sessions of the peace
shall be kept, in those Counties, to the end that all His people may
take notice that other places are not admitted or allowed for selling
or uttering of Tobacco by Retaile. And by Letters directed to the said
Maiors, Bayliffes, and other head Officers of Cities and Townes, His
Majestie hath given notice unto them of the names of those that are
permitted there to sell or deliver Tobacco in that manner, and hath
Commanded them to give publique notice in the said Cities and Townes,
of the names of those persons that are so admitted to sell or deliver
it.

Now our said Sovereigne Lord the King doth straightly prohibite all His
people, that after the feast of Candlemas next[1] comming after the
date of these presents, none of them out of the said Cities or Townes
so appointed as aforesaid, or within the said Cities, or Townes, no
others but those named as aforesaid, and such as from time to time
shall bee permitted in like manner, doe sell or deliver any Tobacco by
Retayle, and that none of them that are permitted or allowed in this
behalfe, keepe any Taverne, Alehouse, or Victualling, or otherwise
sell any distilled or hot Waters, Wine, Ale, Beere, or Cyder in their
houses, so long as they shall bee permitted to sell Tobacco by Retayle:
And for that the necessities of these times require it, His Majestie
doth charge and command all His Subjects to obey these His Ordinances,
under the paines to bee inflicted upon contemners of the same, and
of His Royall will and pleasure, being for the good of His people:
All which His pleasure is shall bee observed untill Hee shall by His
Proclamation, or Letters of His Privie Counsell make other publique
signification of His pleasure herein. And Hee doth charge and command
all Justices of Peace, and all Maiors, Bayliffes, and head Officers
of all His Cities and Townes within His said Kingdome of England, and
Dominion of Wales, and all those who are permitted to sell Tobacco
by Retaile, that they make diligent enquirie of all those that shall
presume to doe against this Command, and from time to time to make
certificate of their names, and places of their residence, with the
particular of their contempts, to the Lords of His Majesties Privie
Councell.

Given at the Court at Whitehall the thirteenth day of October,[2] in
the ninth yeere of the Reigne of our Sovereigne Lord Charles by the
grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majestie: and by the Assignes of John Bill. M.DC.XXXIII.

_2 pp. folio. There are two issues, varying only in the cut of the
royal arms. Copies in Antiq., Bodl., B. M., Camb., Crawf., Dalk.,
P. C., P. R. O., and Q. C. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xix, 474._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] February 2, 1634.

[2] This proclamation is entered in the Privy Council Register under
date of August 14 (_Acts of Privy Council_, i, 191), probably the
date of the original draft by the attorney general. Rushworth, in his
_Historical Collections_, ii, 191, lists it under the date of August
13. Rymer's _Foedera_ assigns to it the date of October 13, as given
in the printed proclamation.




1634, March 13.

[Requiring Licenses from Tobacconists.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION RESTRAINING THE ABUSIVE VENTING OF TOBACCO.

Whereas the Kings most excellent Majestie being informed of the abuses
dayly arising of the ungoverned Selling and Retailing of Tobacco, by
his Proclamation lately published, did prohibit all his people, that
after the feast of Candlemas, which is now last past, none of them
out of certaine Cities and Townes therein specified to have beene
appointed, and within those Cities and Townes no other but certaine
persons named, as in the said Proclamation is expressed, and such as
from time to time as should be permitted, should sell or deliver any
Tobacco by Retaile, herein requiring due obedience untill his Majestie
should make other declaration, as by the same Proclamation appeareth.

Sithence which, a great number of his Majesties loving subjects have
repaired to some Lords, and others of his Majesties Privie Councell,
being his Majesties Commissioners appointed to treat with them, and
have humbly desired Letters Patents of Licence to sell Tobacco by
Retaile, whereunto his Majesties said Commissioners have consented:
but because it is both convenient and necessary that the number of
those that be Licensed to sell Tobacco by Retaile, and also their
names be knowne, that in time convenient notice may be taken from
them how much Tobacco in each yeere they Retaile and Vent: that upon
knowledge thereof, his Majesty for preventing of the issuing out of
the Realme too great a proportion of the Stocke of this Kingdome, may
give order for the quantity of Tobacco that shall be yeerely brought
in: And being resolved that any who from henceforth shall presume to
utter or sell Tobacco, not being Licensed, shall severely be proceeded
against: For these and for other causes, the King our Soveraigne
Lord straightly defendeth and commandeth, that neither such as by
pretext of being formerly nominated as meet men to Retaile Tobacco,
nor any other from henceforth presume to sell or utter Tobacco by
Retaile, untill they shall have obtained his Majesties Licence in that
behalfe, any permission or tolleration that may be pretended by the
said Proclamation, or any other signification notwithstanding, upon
such paines of censure in the Court of Star-Chamber and elsewhere, as
may be inflicted upon contemners of his Majesties commands publiquely
proclaimed. Wherein his Majestie is pleased, that a part of the Fines
set upon the Contemners of this Command, be conferred upon those that
give notice of the Offenders, so as they may be brought to judgement.

Given at Our Court at Newmarket, the thirteenth day of March, in the
ninth yeere of Our Reigne.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of John Bill. 1633.

_1 p. folio. There are two issues, varying only in the cut of the
royal arms. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Crawf., Hodg., P. C., and Q. C.
Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xix, 522._




1634, May 19.

[Concerning Tobacco.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION CONCERNING TOBACCO.

Whereas in the Reigne of Our late deare Father, and since Our accesse
to the Crowne, upon mature deliberation there have been sundry
Proclamations published for restraining the landing of Tobacco to
certain Ports and Harbours within this Kingdome, and against planting
of the same within this Realme; And for that they have not been put in
due execution, divers fraudes and abuses have beene of late invented
and put in execution by mixing of Tobacco, not onely with other Tobacco
of worse condition, but also with other Materials, falsifying and
corrupting the same, to the great hurt and damage of Our people, both
in their estates and persons, which growing evill may in some measure
bee prevented, if the Tobacco brought into this Our Realme shall be
layd or landed onely in one Port and place.

For remedie therefore in that behalfe, and to the end Wee may bee the
more truely answered of the Custome, Impost, and other dueties due
unto Us for Tobacco brought into this Realme by way of Merchandize,
whereof Wee have been sundry times defrauded by landing the same at the
pleasures of the Owners: Wee doe hereby publish and declare Our Royall
will and pleasure, That no Tobacco bee hereafter landed, or imported to
bee landed at any other Porte, then in Our Port of London, and at no
other place of the sayd Port then at the Key and Wharfe commonly called
the Custome-house Key, scituate in Our Citie of London, and other Port
or place for landing of Tobacco Wee doe not admit or allow, but them
inhibite.

And Wee doe hereby straitly charge and command all and singular
Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, Waiters and other Officers,
attending in all Our Ports, Creekes, or places of lading or unlading,
(except Our said Port of London) not to take entries of any Tobacco,
nor suffer the same to be taken, landed, or layd on shoare in any other
Harbour, Port, Creeke or place within this Kingdome, upon paine that
every of the said Officers that shall bee found negligent, corrupt or
remisse herein, shall undergoe such paines and penalties, as by the
Lawes or Censure of our Court of Starre-chamber may bee inflicted upon
them for the same.

And it is Our further will and pleasure, that if any Ship or Barque
wherein Tobacco shall be loaden shall arrive at any other Port or place
then at Our sayd Port of London, Wee doe hereby give full power and
Authoritie to all and every the Customers, Comptrollers, Surveyours,
Searchers and Waiters, and every of them there attending, and doe
command them to take and arrest the same Tobacco, and forthwith to make
Certificate to the Customers of the Port of London, of the Owners name
of such Ship or other Vessell, and his place of dwelling, the number
and names of the Officers, and Mariners in the same, the place from
whence the same Tobacco came, with the quantitie of Tobacco that shall
bee contained therein.

And also, that Our said Officers, or some of them, shall with all
convenient speed cause and procure the Tobacco so by them arrested, to
bee carefully transmitted to the said Port of London, to the Customer
there, that the same may bee there viewed, and the dueties thereof
belonging unto Us, may be duely payed and satisfied, and such further
order taken with the same, and with the Owners thereof, as shall be fit.

And whereas notwithstanding former Proclamations published to the
contrary, yet Wee are informed, that Tobacco is still planted and sowen
in divers parts of Our Realmes of England and Ireland, in contempt of
Us and Our Royall Commands declared to the contrary; We do therefore
hereby againe absolutely prohibit the Planting thereof in Our said
Kingdomes, as also the bringing into the same of any Seed for the
increase thereof, from the parts beyond the Seas; The Tobacco growing
in the Northerne and moist Climats being not onely unwholesome for mans
body, but the same maketh fertill grounds become for a long space lesse
fruitfull, that might otherwise produce Corne, Herbes and Rootes for
the sustenance of Our Subjects.

And for the more certaine depressing of the same, We doe hereby
straitly command Our Justices of Assize within their severall Circuits,
Our Justices of Peace within Our severall Counties of this Kingdome,
Maiors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, and other Our Officers within each Cittie
and Towne Corporate, that they at their severall Sittings, Quarter
Sessions, and meetings, give the same in charge as an Offence, whereof
Wee expect due reformation, requiring a Returne thereof amongst other
the grievances of the Countrey in their Presentments, And the names and
dwelling places of any Offenders herein, and the qualities of their
Offences, to present to the Lords of Our Privie Councel, the then next
Tearme after every such Sitting or meeting, to the end the Offenders
may bee proceeded against by sentence in Our Court of Starre-chamber,
or otherwise, as in justice shall be thought fit.

And lastly, We doe by these Presents will and require all and
singular Maiors, Sheriffes, Justices of Peace, Bayliffes, Constables,
Headboroughes, Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, Waiters, and all
other Our Officers and Ministers whatsoever, that they and every of
them in their severall places and Offices, be diligent and attendant
in the execution of this Our Proclamation, as they will answere the
contrary at their uttermost perils.

Given at Our Court at Greenewich, this nineteenth day of May, in the
tenth yeere of Our Reigne of England, Scotland, France and Ireland.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of John Bill. 1634.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Crawf., P. C., P. R. O., and
Q. C. Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xix, 553._




1636, May 16.

[Limiting Whale-trade to Muscovy Company.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION INHIBITING THE IMPORTATION OF WHALE FINNES, OR WHALE
OILE, INTO HIS MAJESTIES DOMINIONS BY ANY, BUT THE MUSCOVIA COMPANY.

Whereas Our late deare and Royall Father, of ever blessed memory, King
James, by His Proclamation, bearing date the eighteenth day of May, in
the seventeenth yeere of His Reigne, for the reasons therein expressed,
and for the encouragement of His welbeloved Subjects, the Company of
Merchants trading for Muscovia, Greenland,[1] and the parts adjoyning,
commonly called the Muscovia Company, did inhibite the Importation of
Whale Finnes, into any of His Kingdomes or Dominions, by any persons
other then by that Company, and that in their Joynt-stock only, under
the penalties therein mentioned; We now being minded to give the like
encouragement and assistance to the said Company, and for the better
support of the Fishing-Trade to Greeneland, and the parts adjacent,
which by the increase of Navigation conduceth much to the common good
of Our Kingdome and People, have thought fit to publish Our Royall
pleasure therein; And therefore We do by these presents straightly
Charge, prohibite, and forbid, as well all Aliens and Strangers
whatsoever, as Our naturall borne Subjects and Denizens, That they, nor
any of them, (other then the said Muscovia Merchants only, and that
in their Joynt-stock for the Whale-Fishing;) shall from henceforth
directly or indirectly Import or bring any Whale Oyle, or Whale Finnes,
(whether the said Finnes be whole, or cut, in what manner soever)
into any Our Kingdomes or Dominions, upon Paine of the forfeiture and
confiscation of the same; whether they bee found on Board of any Ship,
Hoye, Boat, or Bottom, or laid on land in any Ware-house, Store-house,
Shop, Cellar, or any other place whatsoever; and upon Paine of Our high
Indignation and displeasure, and such other punishments, as by Our
Court of Starre-Chamber shall bee thought meet to be inflicted upon
them, or any of them, as Contemners of Our Royall Will and Commandment
in this behalfe.

And Wee do likewise straightly Charge, prohibite, and forbid, as well
all Aliens and Strangers, as Our naturall borne Subjects and Denizens,
(other then the said Muscovia Merchants in their Joint-stock as
aforesaid) that they, nor any of them do presume to Buy, Utter, Sell,
Barter, or Contract, for any Whale Oyle, or Whale Finnes, knowing
the same to bee Imported into any Our Realmes or Dominions, contrary
to Our Will and Pleasure herein declared; whether the said Finnes
bee whole, or cut as aforesaid, upon Paine of Our high Indignation
and displeasure, and such further punishments, as by Our said Court
of Starre-Chamber shall bee thought meet to bee inflicted upon such
Offendours, as Contemners also of Our Royall Commandments.

And to the end, that Our Pleasure hereby declared may take the better
effect; Wee do hereby Charge and Command, all Customers, Collectours,
Farmours, Comptrollers, Searchers, Waiters, and all other Our Officers
and Ministers whatsoever, in all or any Our Ports, Havens, or Creekes;
that they and every of them in their severall places, do carefully
attend and see to the due execution hereof; and in no wise to permit
or suffer any Whale Oile, or Whale Finnes whole, or cut, directly,
or indirectly, openly, or covertly, to be brought or imported into
any Our Kingdomes or Dominions contrary to Our Royall pleasure herein
expressed; or being so imported, that they do not permit, or suffer
the same to be colourably Customed for other Goods and Merchandise;
but that they forthwith do seise, and take to Our use all such Whale
Finnes, and Whale Oyle as shall bee so Imported, contrary to Our
pleasure herein declared, upon Paine to undergo such punishments as
shall be thought meet by the Lords of Our Privie Councell.

Neverthelesse, Our intent and meaning is, That the said Muscovia
Company in their Joynt-stock only, and none other, shall or may Buy and
Sell, Barter, or Contract, for any such Whale Finnes, or Whale Oyle, as
being imported contrary to this Our Proclamation, shall be confiscate
and seised, and the same being sold by the said Company, may be
afterwards bought, contracted for, and used by any other Our Subjects,
at their will and pleasure; Any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Given at Our Palace of Westminster, the sixteenth day of May, in the
twelfth yeere of Our Reigne.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of John Bill. 1636.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in B. M., Crawf., Guild., and P. C. Entered on
Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xx, 16._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Spitzbergen, rather than Greenland proper.




1637, April 30.

[Regulating Emigration to America.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION AGAINST THE DISORDERLY TRANSPORTING HIS MAJESTIES
SUBJECTS TO THE PLANTATIONS WITHIN THE PARTS OF AMERICA.

The Kings most Excellent Majestie being informed that great numbers
of His Subjects have bin, and are every yeare transported into those
parts of America, which have been granted by Patent to severall
persons, and there settle themselves, some of them with their families
and whole estates: amongst which numbers there are also many idle
and refractory humors, whose onely or principall end is to live as
much as they can without the reach of authority: His Majestie having
taken the premisses into consideration, is minded to restraine for
the time to come such promiscuous and disorderly departing out of the
Realme; And doth therefore straitly charge and command all and every
the Officers and Ministers of his severall Ports in England, Wales,
and Barwick, That they doe not hereafter permit or suffer any persons,
being Subsidie men, or of the value of Subsidie men,[1] to embarque
themselves in any of the said Ports, or the members thereof, for any of
the said Plantations, without Licence from His Majesties Commissioners
for Plantations first had and obtained in that behalfe; Nor that
they admit to be embarqued any persons under the degree or value of
Subsidymen, without an Attestation or Certificate from two Justices of
the Peace living next the place where the party last of all, or lately
then before dwelt, that he hath taken the Oaths of Supremacie, and
Allegiance, and like Testimony from the Minister of the Parish of his
conversation and conformity to the Orders and discipline of the Church
of England.[2] And further His Majesties expresse will and pleasure
is, That the Officers and Ministers of his said severall Ports, and
the Members thereof, do returne to His Majesties said Commissioners
for Plantations every halfe yeare a particular and perfect List of the
names and qualities of all such persons as shall from time to time be
embarqued in any of the said Ports for any of the said Plantations. And
of these His Majesties Royall Commands, all the Officers and Ministers
of His said Ports, and the Members thereof are to take care, as they
will answer the neglect thereof at their perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the last day of Aprill, in the
thirteenth yeare of Our Reigne.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of John Bill. 1637.

_1 p. folio. Copies in B. M., Camb., Canterbury, Crawf., and P. C.;
also in Boston Public Library. Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in
Rymer's "Foedera," xx, 143._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Men who could pay the "subsidy," or tax assessed in favor of the
Crown.

[2] Adam Anderson, the early historian of British commerce, in
referring to this proclamation, says: "This was levelled against
the Puritans, then going in great numbers to New England, to avoid
persecution at home; and a better example need not be desired of
the wisdom and character of this King, and his favourites and
ministers" (_Origin of Commerce_, ii, 492). The proceedings against
the Massachusetts charter had just been brought to a close in April,
1637, with a judgment decreeing that it should be vacated. On April 30
came this proclamation. On May 3 the Privy Council ordered that the
attorney-general should "call in" for the patent for New England and
present it to the Committee for Foreign Plantations (_Acts of Privy
Council_, i, 217). A commission was issued which arrived at Boston,
June 3, establishing a general government for New England (Winthrop,
_History of New England_, i, 269). Among the papers in the Public
Record Office is the draft of a "Manifesto" of the King, dated July 23,
1637, establishing a general government in New England and declaring
his intention of appointing Sir Ferdinand Gorges as governor (_Cal.
State Papers, Colonial, 1574-1660_, p. 256). These various restrictive
measures all grew out of the Anglican unwillingness to countenance this
Puritan asylum in the New World.




1638, March 14.

[Importation of Tobacco.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION CONCERNING TOBACCO.

Whereas We have had especiall care to provide, That Our loving
Subjects the Planters of and in Virginia, the Summer Islands, Caribee
Islands, et other Our Forrein Plantations might be encouraged to apply
themselves to staple Commodities, fit for the establishing of Colonies,
that so the said Plantations might the better flourish and become
usefull to Our Kingdomes, and the Planters might be enabled to fortifie
and secure themselves as well against the invasion of Forrein Enemies,
as the assaults and incursions of the Natives; yet notwithstanding
this Our care, the said Planters finding a present though small return
of profit for Tobacco, have hitherto wholly betaken themselves to
the planting thereof, little minding more solid commodities, their
own safetie, or any better or other way or means of supportation and
subsistence.

And whereas Our Merchants working upon the necessities of the Planters,
have from time to time bought their Tobacco at low and small prices,
thereby occasioning the said Planters to grow negligent and carelesse
of the well ordering their Tobacco, by means whereof much unserviceable
Tobacco hath from Our said Colonies been imported hither, and hath
been sophisticated, mixed and stamped with rotten fruits, stalks of
Tobacco, and other corrupt ingredients, and afterwards sold and uttered
to Our people.

And whereas the vain and wanton taking of Tobacco being at length
grown to an excesse, and this excesse having begotten an inordinate
desire thereof in those that use it, and much of the Tobacco of Our
said Colonies imported hither, being unserviceable as aforesaid, divers
of Our Merchants for their own private gain have returned the proceed
of the solid Commodities of Our Kingdoms by them vented in Forreign
parts in Spanish Tobacco, et many of Our Subjects here have planted
great quantities of Tobacco in severall parts of this Our Realme,
which Tobacco here planted through the coldnesse of the Climate,
and unaptnesse of the Soil, not coming to a perfect maturitie, is
altogether unwholesome to be taken. By all which means the forreigne
Plantations of Our Subjects remain unfortified, and are in apparant
danger to be ruined, the Planters are grieved and discouraged, the
Colonies of other Nations do flourish, the wealth of Our Kingdoms
is exhausted, the immoderate use of a vain and needlesse weed is
continued, the health of Our Subjects is much impaired, and their
manners in danger to be depraved.

And although Wee out of Our Princely care of Our said Plantations
abroad, and the good of Our Subjects at home, have formerly as well
by Proclamation as otherwise, given direction in the premisses, and
have provided against all the afore-mentioned evils, yet this Our
care hath not hitherto produced that good effect which We intended
and desired, for that fit, diligent and able Agents have not hitherto
been imployed in these Our services, to see Our purposes deduced into
Act: For these causes, and for divers other weighty considerations
tending to the honour of Our said Plantations, et to the good as wel
of Our said Planters, as of Our people here, Wee by the advice of the
Lords and others of Our Privy Councell, have resolved to regulate Our
said Plantations, and the planting, making up, and ordering of Tobacco
there, and to limit and appoint what quantities of Tobacco shall
henceforth be imported into Our Kingdoms, as well for the expence of
Our Realmes, as for Our own services, and also to buy and take into Our
own hands and mannaging all Tobacco from henceforth so to be imported,
at such reasonable prices to be given for the same, as shall be
expedient for the relief and better encouragement of the said Planters,
and likewise to regulate the trade and sales of Tobacco here at home,
and to commit the care and trusts of the premisses unto such fit Agents
as Wee shall nominate in that behalf; All which Wee intend to put in
speedy execution.[1]

And to the end Our Royall intentions touching the premisses may the
better take effect, Wee do hereby will and command, That no person
whatsoever, do at any time hereafter plant or cause to be planted any
Tobacco within Our Kingdoms of England and Ireland, or either of them,
or within Our Dominion of Wales, or Town of Barwick, or within Our
Islands of Jersey and Gernesey, or either of them, or within Our Isle
of Man: And that all Tobacco already planted, and now growing there, be
presently displanted and utterly distroyed.

And to the end the doing hereof be not in any wise omitted or
neglected, Wee do charge and command all Constables, Tithingmen,
Headboroughs, and other Officers within their severall limits and
jurisdictions carefully to see the same executed accordingly. And
further Wee do will and command all Justices of Peace, Maiors,
Sheriffes, and other principall Officers in their severall places,
within the compasse of their severall jurisdictions and authorities,
upon complaint to them made, to cause the same to be duly performed,
without partialitie, and they and every of them will answer their
Contempts at their perils.

And Wee do further will and command, that no person or persons
whatsoever, within our said Realms and Dominions, do from henceforth
presume to buy, sell, or utter any Tobacco of the growth of our said
Kingdomes of England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, Town of Barwick,
and Islands of Jersey, Gernsey and Man, or any of them, or to let
their grounds to Farm to any person or persons, to plant the same with
Tobacco, or to stamp, beat, or mixe any Tobacco whatsoever with rotten
fruits, the stalks of Tobacco, or any other bad or corrupt Ingredient,
the same being utterly unwholesome to be taken as aforesaid. And Wee do
likewise will and command, That no Tobacco of the growth of any parts
or places beyond the Seas, belonging to, or under the obedience of any
Forreigne King, Prince or State whatsoever, or of the growth of Our
said Colonies and Forreign Plantations, be from henceforth imported
into Our Kingdomes of England, and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, or
any of them, or into any other Our Dominions, or into any Port, Haven,
Creek, or place to them or any of them belonging, more or other, then
only such and so much of the Tobacco of the growth of the Plantations
of the King of Spaine, as We by Our Letters under Our Privie Seal,
or otherwise shall be pleased to allow; and such and so much of the
Tobacco of the growth of Our own Colonies, as We shall in like manner
declare to be competent for the expence of Our Kingdomes, and fit for
Our own services, and for the better relief and encouragement of the
said Planters.

And We do further will and command, That no Tobacco of the growth of
Our said Plantations, or any of them be from thence transported in any
English or other Ship or Bottome unto any Forreigne parts under the
obedience of any Forreigne King, Prince, or State whatsoever; but that
the same Tobacco be first imported unto Our Port of London, and entred
in Our Custome-house there: And that no Tobacco of what sort soever be
from henceforth imported, landed, or unladed to, in, or at any other
Port, Haven, Creek, or place within Our said Kingdomes of England and
Ireland, and Our Dominion of Wales, or any of them, or within any
other Our Dominions, then to, in, or at Our Port of London onely. And
that all Merchants, Masters and Owners of any Ship or Ships, and other
persons whatsoever within or under Our obedience, do take notice of Our
Royall command and pleasure herein, and do carefully and duely observe
the same accordingly.

And We do hereby further will and command, That all Tobacco so imported
and entred as aforesaid (other then such as shall be imported and
entred by Our said Agents) shall from henceforth be sold and delivered
unto the hands of Our said Agents to Our own immediate use, at, and
for such valuable rates and prices to be given for the same, as shall
be reasonably agreed upon between the Planters, Owners and Factours
thereof, and Our said Agents on Our behalfe.

And Our pleasure further is, and We do hereby charge and command, That
none of Our loving Subjects comercing, or any way trading in or about
Tobacco, no other person or persons whatsoever, do from henceforth
presume to buy any Tobacco in grosse of what sort soever, in any Port,
Haven, Creek, or place within Our said Realms and Dominions, at the
first hand, or of any person or persons whatsoever, other then of Our
said Agents onely; And that all Tobacco bought of Our said Agents,
shall be sealed with a seal to be appointed for that purpose, and that
the quantity and quality thereof with the time when the same was bought
be expressed, in and by a Note in writing indented between the Buyer
and Seller, if to Our said Agents it shall seem fitting for this Our
service.

And Wee do further charge and command, That no Tobacco whatsoever be
from henceforth shipped or laded to be transported from any Port,
Haven, Creek, or other place of Our Realm of England, Dominion of
Wales, Port or Town of Barwick, or from any other Port within Our
Dominions, without the Licence and consent of Our said Agents, and the
same to be done in such manner, and upon such security to be given to
the use of Us, Our Heirs and Successours, as to Our said Agents in
their discretions shall seem expedient for Our service in that behalf.

And further Wee do hereby strictly command, That Our Royall pleasure
hereby declared be in all things duely and truely observed upon pain of
confiscation and forfeiture of all Tobacco of what sort soever imported
or exported, laded or unladed, bought or sold contrary to the effect
and true meaning of this Our Proclamation, and under such further
pains and penalties, as by the Lawes of Our Realms, or Our Prerogative
Royall may be inflicted upon the Offenders. Which Tobacco so forfeited
and confiscated, shall be immediately brought to Our Custome-house in
London, or to such other place as shall hereafter bee appointed in that
behalfe, there to bee valued or apprized; and after such valuation
or apprizement made, the Officer or other person by whose diligence
such forfeiture was discovered, shall have the one moity of the same
forfeiture or value for his service and future encouragement, and the
other part therof shall go to Our own use.

And Wee do hereby straitly charge and command all Customers,
Controllers, Searchers, Waiters, and all other Officers and Ministers
of and belonging to Our Customes; And also all Justices of Peace;
Maiors, Sheriffs, Constables, and other Our Officers, Ministers, and
loving Subjects in their severall places and degrees, to take notice of
this Our Royal pleasure and commandment, and to be aiding, helping and
assisting to Our said Agents and their Deputies, Factours and servants
in all things touching and concerning this Our service, whereof Wee
are resolved to require a due and strict account.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, this fourteenth day of March, in the
thirteenth yeer of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of John Bill. 1637.

_4 pp. folio. Copies in B. M., Crawf., Dalk., and P. C. Entered on
Patent Rolls._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] The Privy Council on the day of the issuance of this proclamation,
March 14, took action providing for a conference regarding tobacco
between those interested in its growth and sale (_Acts of Privy
Council_, i, 226).




1638, May 1.

[Requiring Licenses for New England.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION TO RESTRAIN THE TRANSPORTING OF PASSENGERS AND
PROVISIONS TO NEW ENGLAND, WITHOUT LICENCE.

The Kings most Excellent Majestie, for divers weighty and important
causes well known to His Majesty, doth hereby straitly charge and
command all Merchants, Masters and Owners of Ships whatsoever, That
from henceforth they or any of them do not presume to set forth any
Ship or Ships with Passengers or Provisions for New England, untill
they shall have first obtained speciall Licence from His Majestie,
or such of the Lords, and others of His Privy Councell, as by His
Majesties speciall Commission now are or shall be appointed for the
Businesse of Forrain Plantations, upon pain of His Majesties high
displeasure, and such penalties and punishments as shall be thought
meet to be inflicted on offenders herein for their contempt of His
Majesties Royall Commands.[1] And His Majesty doth hereby further
require and command all the Customers and other Officers and Ministers
of or belonging to all or any His Ports within the Realm of England,
and Dominion of Wales, That they and every of them in their severall
Offices and places do take speciall care of the due execution of His
Majesties Royall will and pleasure herein declared, as they will answer
for the contrary at their uttermost perils.

Given at the Court at Whitehall, the first day of May, in the
fourteenth yeer of His Majesties Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of John Bill. 1638.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Crawf. and P. C.; also in N. Y. Public Library.
Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xx, 223._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Since the issuance of the proclamation of April 30, 1637, the tide
of emigration to New England had not perceptibly slackened. After the
receipt of a letter informing Archbishop Laud that a convoy of ships
was preparing to sail for New England (_Cal. State Papers, Colonial,
1574-1660_, p. 266), the Privy Council ordered, March 30, 1638, that
eight ships in the Thames should be detained and their passengers
and provisions landed. Two days later a more comprehensive order was
passed, applying to all ships bound for New England. On April 6 the
Council relented and allowed the ships to depart, but ordered that a
proclamation should be issued requiring a special license before such
voyages were made (_Acts of Privy Council_, i, 227-229).




1639, March 25.

[Concerning Tobacco.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION CONCERNING TOBACCO.

Having been heretofore informed, that thorow the immoderate taking
of Tobacco, provoking the takers thereof to excessive Drinking and
other inconveniences, the health of many of Our Subjects had been much
impaired, which had the rather been occasioned for that no restraint
had been made of the number, nor regard had of the quality of those
that sold Tobacco by Retail but persons of the meanest condition had
promiscuously used to Retail the same, keeping no order or assize
therein: Whereupon We out of Our Princely care, to represse all such
excesses, and to prevent such future inconveniences as might occur
thereby, did by the advice of the Lords and others of Our Privy
Councell, resolve to regulate the ungoverned Selling and Retailing
of Tobacco, and to reduce the same into some good order; and that
none but men of sufficiency, and such as should bring certificate of
their meetnesse, should from thenceforth be permitted to sell or utter
Tobacco by Retail, and those onely in certain fit places, and to a
certain number in every such place, which places and number We did
by the like advice of the Lords, and others of Our Privie Councell,
appoint accordingly: And afterwards by Our Proclamation, dated the
thirteenth day of March, in the ninth yeer of Our Reign, for the
reasons therein expressed We did straitly charge and command, that none
should from thenceforth presume to sell or utter Tobacco by Retail,
untill they should have obtained Our Licence in that behalf.

In conformity whereunto, divers of Our loving Subjects have since taken
severall and respective Licences under Our great Seal of England, to
sell and utter forrain Tobacco by Retail, in such respective Cities,
Towns, and places, as in the same Licences are expressed, rendring to
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, such Rents as in and by Our said Licences
are respectively reserved in that behalf: By which means not onely the
afore mentioned excesses have in some good measure been repressed,
and many inconveniences prevented, but also some small addition and
improvement hath been made to Our Revenue.

But notwithstanding the Premisses, divers ill affected persons,
endeavouring for some small advantage to themselves, to bring the
Retailing of Tobacco to that confused and ungoverned liberty it had
before, have in contempt of Our said Proclamation presumed without Our
Licence to vent and utter Tobacco by Retail, as well in London, and the
parts adjacent, as in divers other Cities, Towns, and places of this
Our Realm, thereby discouraging, and in some sort disabling Our said
Subjects, who have taken Our Licences, as aforesaid, to pay their Rents
thereon reserved, and likewise dis-heartning others (that is to say)
some from suing forth the Licences for which they have respectively
contracted, others from contracting with Our Agents appointed in that
behalf; and the better to colour their practises, have spread abroad,
especially within Our City of London, and the parts adjacent, false
reports and rumours, as if We intended to desist from Our aforesaid
course of reformation: which their practises and bold attempts We have
just cause to take in ill part, and not to suffer the same to passe
unpunished.

Yet because some of Our Subjects, through the false reports and rumours
so spread abroad, as aforesaid, may make some doubt of Our Royall
intention in the Premisses, therefore We have thought meet hereby
to declare and publish to all Our people, that We will not leave
unfinished so great a work begun with such advice and care, and so much
tending to their health and welfare, neither will We suffer Our Revenue
in any part thereof by the wilfull opposition of some few refractory
persons to be impaired.

And therefore We do hereby straitly charge and command all Our loving
Subjects, that none of them do from henceforth presume directly or
indirectly, to sell, utter, or deliver any Tobacco by Retail, in any
place or places within Our said Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales,
and Town of Barwick, or any of them, without Our speciall Licence under
Our great Seal of England, to be obtained in that behalf.

And We do likewise will and command all Pedlers who wander up and
down, not making their constant abode in any one place, and all and
every other Interloper or Interlopers whatsoever, that none of them do
from henceforth directly or indirectly, sell, utter, or deliver any
Tobacco by Retail, or under colour or pretext of giving Tobacco, do by
themselves, or any other, take or receive any recompence for the same.

And whereas divers of Our Subjects, who are licensed to retail Tobacco
in their own houses onely, do notwithstanding retail Tobacco in Fairs
and Markets abroad, to the prejudice of such persons as are licensed
to sell Tobacco in those places, Our will and pleasure is, and We do
hereby straitly charge and command that from henceforth they and every
of them do forbear to sell, utter, or deliver Tobacco by Retail, in any
other places then according to the purport and true meaning of their
respective Licences under Our great Seal.

And whereas We are informed that much English Tobacco, which through
the coldnesse of the climate and unaptnesse of the soil not coming
to perfect maturity, is altogether unwholsome to be taken, and other
Tobacco adulterate and mixed with rotten fruits and other corrupt
ingredients is dayly sold and uttered to Our people; We do hereby
charge and straitly command, that no person whatsoever within Our said
Kingdom of England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Barwick,
or any of them, do from henceforth presume to buy, sell, or utter,
directly or indirectly, any Tobacco of the growth of Our Kingdoms of
England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Barwick, Islands
of Jersey, Garnsey, and Man, or any of them, or any mixed or adulterate
Tobacco whatsoever: And the better to prevent the great abuse offered
and done to Our loving Subjects in the sale of English Tobacco, We
do also straitly charge and command that no person whatsoever do at
any time hereafter plant, or cause to be planted, any Tobacco within
Our Kingdoms of England and Ireland, or either of them, or within Our
Dominion of Wales, or Town of Barwick, or within Our Islands of Jersey,
Garnsey and Man, or any of them, and that all Tobacco already planted,
and now growing there, be presently displanted and utterly destroyed.

And to the end the doing hereof be not in any wise omitted or
neglected, We do charge and command all Constables, Tithingmen,
Headboroughs, and other Officers within their severall limits and
jurisdictions, carefully to see the same executed accordingly.

And further, We do will and command all Justices of Peace, Maiors,
Sheriffs, and other principall Officers in their severall places,
within the compasse of their severall jurisdictions and authorities,
upon complaint to them made, to cause the same to be duly performed
without partiality, as they and every of them will answer their
contempts at their perils.

And We do further will and command, that no Tobacco whatsoever be from
henceforth imported, landed, or unladed to, in, or at any other Port,
Haven, Creek, or place within Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of
Wales, and Port and Town of Barwick, or any of them, then to, in, or at
Our Port of London, without speciall warrant to be obtained from Our
Lord high Treasurer of England for the time being in that behalf: And
that all Merchants, Masters, and Owners of any Ship or Ships, and other
persons whatsoever within or under Our obedience, do take notice of Our
Royall command and pleasure herein, and do carefully and duly observe
the same accordingly.

And We do hereby straitly charge and command all Our Subjects to yeeld
their due obedience in all and singular the Premisses, as they tender
Our pleasure, and will answer the contrary at their perill.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the five and twentieth day of March,
in the fourteenth yeer of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of John Bill. 1638.

_3 pp. folio. There are two issues, varying only in the spelling of
"thorow" and "through" in the first line. Copies in Antiq., Bodl., and
Crawf. Entered on Patent Rolls._




1639, August 19.

[Licensing of Tobacconists.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION DECLARING HIS MAJESTIES PLEASURE TO CONTINUE HIS
COMMISSION, AND LETTERS PATENTS FOR LICENSING RETAILORS OF TOBACCO.

Whereas by His Majesties Proclamation dated at York the ninth day of
April last, it was declared, That (amongst sundry other Commissions
and Grants obtained upon untrue surmises) a Commission for compounding
with Offendors touching Tobacco, was thereby revoked and determined;[1]
under colour whereof, and by a wilfull mistaking of His Majesties
said Proclamation, sundry persons have pretended, that His Majesties
Commission to the Lord Goring, and others, for licensing Retailors of
Tobacco within England, Wales, and Barwick, was thereby called in: And
thereupon His Majesties Commissioners have been interrupted in their
proceedings in that service for His Majesty; Tobacco in divers parts
of the kingdome (contrary to His Majesties Proclamation of the five
and twentieth of March last) hath been retailed without His Majesties
Licence; and many of those persons who have Licences have forborn to
make paiment of their Rents: His Majesty therefore, to remove all
doubts and questions touching the Premisses, Hath thought fit (with
the advice of His Councell) to make publike declaration of His Royall
intention and meaning therein, which was, That His Majesties Letters
Patents, and Commission to the Lord Goring, and others, concerning
the licensing of Retailors of Tobacco, was not impeached, or meant to
be impeached by His Majesties said Proclamation of the ninth of April
last; But that the same Letters Patents and Commission are still in
force, and no way infringed or restrained thereby, but are still to
be proceeded in and executed according to the tenour and true meaning
thereof. And His Majesty doth further declare hereby, That His Majesty
by His said Proclamation in April last, did repeal and determine a
Commission to Lawrence Louns, and others, to compound with such, as
from the ninth of April in the first yeer of His Majesties reign,
untill the date of that Commission, had offended in defrauding His
Majestie of His Customes and other duties for Tobacco imported, or in
planting Tobacco in England, or Ireland, or by importing Tobacco of
the growth of other forraign parts, or in greater quantities then were
limitted, or in buying or selling the same contrary to His Majesties
Proclamations before that time published, and none other Commission
touching Tobacco. And therefore His Majesty doth hereby require and
command all manner of persons whatsoever whom it may concern, to take
knowledge of this His Majesties Declaration and Confirmation of His
said Letters Patents and Commission to the Lord Goring, and others,
for the licensing Retailors of Tobacco, and that accordingly they
yeeld all conformity thereunto as is meet, upon pain of His Majesties
high displeasure, and such punishments as their contempt or neglect
of His Majesties Royall commands herein shall deserve. And lastly,
His Majesty doth hereby require and command all Justices of Peace,
Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and all others
His Officers and Ministers whatsoever, to be aiding and assisting in
the full accomplishment and execution of His Majesties Royall pleasure
herein declared.

Given at His Majesties Court at Whitehall the nineteenth day of
August, in the fifteenth yeer of His Majesties Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Imprinted at London, by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty: And by the Assignes of John Bill. 1639.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Bodl., and Crawf. Entered on Patent Rolls.
Printed in Rymer's "Foedera," xx, 348._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] The proclamation of April 9, 1639, revoked, among many other
grants, licenses, and commissions, the "Commission for compounding with
Offenders touching Tobacco." This proclamation is printed in Rymer's
_Foedera_, xx, 340, and in Rushworth's _Historical Collections_, ii,
915.




1643, November 24.

[Requiring Loyalty from America.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION TO GIVE ASSURANCE UNTO ALL HIS MAJESTIES SUBJECTS IN
THE ISLANDS AND CONTINENT OF AMERICA, OF HIS MAJESTIES ROYALL CARE
OVER THEM, AND TO PRESERVE THEM IN THEIR DUE OBEDIENCE.

Charles, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France
and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, etc. Whereas We have seen a
Paper, called an Ordinance of the pretended Houses of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, ordered to be Printed the second day of this
instant November,[1] Whereby Robert Earle of Warwick is made Governor
in chiefe, and Lord High Admirall of all those Islands and other
Plantations inhabited, Planted, or belonging to any of Our Subjects
within the Bounds, and upon the Coasts of America, and a Committee
appoynted to be assisting unto him in the Government thereof: The
intention of which Ordinance cannot reasonably be conceived to be
other, then to spread the contagion of this horrid Rebellion, even unto
those remoter parts, and that the continuers thereof (foreseeing how
little prosperous their wicked Designes are likely to prove here in Our
Realme of England) may provide for themselves a place of Retreat and
Security in those Westerne Countries: The consequences whereof would
be the disturbance of that quiet, which those Our Subjects in America
doe yet injoy under Our Government, and instead of Peace, to introduce
amongst them the like Oppressions, Bloodshed, Rapine, Disorders and
Confusion in Church and State, as they have brought already into
some parts of this Our Kingdome, and would have gone farther on, if
the Goodnesse of Almighty God, giving strength to Our Forces, and
successe to Our Enterprises, had not given a stop to their Malitious
and Rebellious attempts. To prevent which inconveniences from those
Westerne parts, out of Our Royall care of Our good Subjects there, We
have thought good hereby to give timely notice unto them, not only that
the said Ordinance was made without Our Royall assent, and therefore
that it ought not to bind any of Our Subjects, but also that the said
Earle of Warwick: hath been justly Proclaimed a Traitor by Us, and
that he still persists in his Treason and Rebellion against Us; and
therefore We doe require and Command all Our Subjects whatsoever,
That they doe not give obedience to the said Ordinance, nor unto him
the said Earle, as their Governor, or Admirall, nor to any other by
pretence of any Authority from him, or from any of the said Committee,
but that they shall endeavour the suppression of all such Rebellious
Attempts, as they shall have means and Opportunity to doe it. And We
doe farther declare, That as We have given unto all Our faithfull
Subjects in generall all possible testimonies and assurances of Our
care of their wellfare and happinesse, in preservation of the true
Protestant Religion established by the Lawes, the Liberty of their
Persons, the Propriety of their Goods, and the just Priviledges of
Parliaments, which We have done by such Professions before Almighty
God, and such Acts of Grace, as have exceeded all the Precedents of
former times: So shall Our Subjects in the said Islands, and Continent
of America in particular, find the constant fruits and effects of Our
gratious Government and Protection, and of those assurances, in as full
and ample measure as any other Our Subjects whatsoever. And therefore
We doe strictly charge and Command all Governors and Magistrates, who
exercise any authority under Us in the said Islands and Plantations,
That they doe not only publish unto Our good People there, these Our
gratious intentions towards them, but that they let them feel the
benefit thereof, by due administration of Justice amongst them, and
by seasonable Provisions of all things needfull for their defence and
prosperity. And We doe in like manner require all Our said Subjects,
that they persist in their due Allegiance and Obedience unto Us,
whereto they are obliged by all Lawes Divine and Humane; and that
they receive not any Governors nor Commanders, or obey any Ordinances
contrary to, or without Our Royall consent, but that they pursue and
apprehend them as Traytors to Our Royall Person and Dignity; and that
as they tender their duty to God, the avoyding of Our High Displeasure,
and the preservation of their own Peace and Happinesse. Given at Our
Court at Oxford, the Twenty fourth day of November, in the Nineteenth
yeare of Our Raigne. 1643.

GOD SAVE THE KING.[2]

_1 p. folio. Copy in Bodl._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] This ordinance, appointing the Earl of Warwick governor of the
Plantations, is printed in the _Journal of the House of Lords_,
vi, 291, and in Husband's _Collection of Orders, Ordinances and
Declarations_, p. 378.

[2] The imprint in the only known copy of the original is missing, but
it was undoubtedly "_Oxford: L. Lichfield: 1643_," as in proclamations
immediately preceding and following this date.




1655, October 10.

[Encouraging Settling in Jamaica.]


BY THE PROTECTOR.

A PROCLAMATION

GIVING ENCOURAGEMENT TO SUCH AS SHALL TRANSPLANT THEMSELVES TO
JAMAICA.

Whereas the Island of Jamaica in America, is by the Providence of
God, in the hands and possession of this State,[1] the Enemy which
was found upon it, being fled into the Mountains with an intention
to escape into other places, save such of them as do daily render
themselves to our Commander in chief there, to be disposed of by him;
and We being satisfied of the Goodness, Fertility, and Commodiousness
for Trade and Commerce of that Island, Have resolved, by the blessing
of God, to use Our best endeavours to secure and plant the same. For
which end and purpose, We have thought it necessary to publish, and
make known unto the People of this Commonwealth, and especially to
those of the English Islands, Plantations and Colonies in America, our
Resolutions and Intentions on that behalf, as also to declare unto
them the Encouragements which We have thought fit to give unto such
as shall remove themselves, and their habitations into the aforesaid
Island of Jamaica, within the time mentioned and expressed in these
Presents. And first, concerning the securing thereof against the Enemy,
We have already upon the Island, which landed there in May last, above
six thousand Souldiers, and the beginning of July after, we sent from
hence a Regiment of eight hundred more, drawn out of Our old Regiments
in England, with eight Ships of War, besides Victualers, to be added to
twelve others, that were left there by General Pen, under the command
of Captain Will. Goodson, all which are appointed to remain in those
Seas for the Defence of the said Island; and We shall from time to time
take care to send thither other, both Land and Sea Forces, that We may
have alwaies in those parts, such a strength as may be able, through
the blessing of God, to defend and secure it against any Attempt of the
Enemy; that whereas the Planters in other Places have been at Great and
vast expences at their first sitting down, and in the very beginning
of their Plantations for their necessary defence, as well against
the Natives of the Countrey as other Enemies, those who shall remove
thither, will be under the immediate Protection of this State, and so
eased both of the danger and charge which other Plantations are subject
to, and shall have, for their further encouragement, the terms and
conditions following.

1. Those who shall transport themselves as aforesaid shall have
land set forth unto them, according to the proportion of twenty
Acres, besides Lakes and Rivers, for every Male of twelve years old
and upwards, and ten Acres for every other Male or Female, in some
convenient place of the said Island; and in case any whole Plantation,
That is to say, the Governours and greatest part of the people shall
remove themselves, they shall be preferred in respect of the place of
their sitting down, that it may be near some good Harbour commodious
for Commerce and Navigation.

2. That the said Proportion of Land shall be set forth unto them,
within six Weeks after notice given by them under their hands, or the
hands of some of them on the behalf of the rest, unto his Highness
Commander in chief, or Commissioners there, appointed for that purpose
of their resolutions to remove, and of the time they intend to be upon
the place.

3. That they shall have Liberty for the space of seaven years to hunt,
take and dispose of to their own use such Horses, and other cattle as
are, or shall be upon the said Island, the same not being marked by,
or belonging to other Planters, subject nevertheless to such Rules and
Directions as to their hunting, and taking of Horses, Cattle, and other
Beasts out of their own bounds and limits, as shall from time to time
be made by the Persons authorized by his Highnesse, for mannaging the
affairs of the said Island.

4. That they shall hold the said Land with all Houses, Edifices, Woods,
Trees, Profits and Advantages thereupon, to them and their Heirs for
ever, to be held in free, and common Soccage, without any Rent for the
first seven years, and then one penny an Acre, and by no other rent,
tenure, or service whatsoever.

5. That after the said Proportions of Land are set forth as aforesaid,
His Highness, or his Successors, upon the desire of the Owners thereof,
shall by Letters Pattents, under the Great Seal of England, or by such
other sure ways as shall be devised by their Counsel learned in the
Law, give, grant, and confirm unto him or them, their heirs and assigns
the said Proportions of Land, together with all and singular the
Privileges, Jurisdictions, Profits and advantages which are intended
hereby to be enjoied by them, with power to erect and create any
Mannour or Mannors, with tenures in free and common Soccage within such
Plantation, or Plantations, as shall be capable thereof.

6. That they shall hold and enjoy all, and singular Mines of Copper,
Iron, Tin, or other Minerals whatsoever (excepting Gold, and Silver
Mines) and all Mines of Quarries, Coal, Stone, Allum, or other Mines,
whatsoever (except as aforesaid) within the circuit, Meets or bounds
of the said several and respective proportions of Land; and also all
Fishings, and Piscaries whatsoever upon or within any of the Lakes,
Streams or Rivers within their Meets, and bounds; and also full power,
and authority to man, and send forth to Sea, and unto any the Coasts,
and Shores, Roads, Harbours or Creeks within or near the said Island,
any Ships, Boats or other Vessels to fish for, find out, or take any
Pearls, precious Stones, or Jewels therein being, and to enjoy the
same to his and their own use or uses, rendering and paying to the
Governour of the said Island for the time being, or to such other
person or persons, for the time being, as His Highnesse shall authorize
to receive the same, to his Highness use, the full fifth part only, and
no more of all such Pearls, precious Stones and Jewels as shall be got,
found, and taken, as aforesaid; and also one tenth part of all such
Mettal as shall be had, found, and gained in the Mines, granted hereby
to the aforesaid Planters.

7. That no Custom, Excise, Impost, or other duty shall be set or
imposed for the space of three years to be accounted from the 29. day
of September, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1656. upon any of
their Goods and Merchandizes of the growth, production or Manufacture
of the said Island, which they shall transport into this Commonwealth:
Nor shall they or their Servants, without their own consent, be drawn
out into the Wars, unlesse it be in case of Invasion, or Rebellion, and
for the defence of the Island.

8. That they shall have power to build Walls, and raise Bulwarks and
Castles upon their own Land for the defence, and security of their own
plantations, and also to arme themselves, and servants, and to lead,
and conduct them against any Enemies, or Rebels within the said Island;
Subject nevertheless to such Orders, and directions as they shall on
this behalf receive from the Governour or Commander in chief of the
said Island for the time being.

9. That all and every person and persons, that shall hereafter happen
to be born within the said Island, shall be, and shall be deemed, and
accounted to be free Denizons of England, and shall have and enjoy
all and every such benefits, privileges, advantages and immunities
whatsoever, as any of the Natives or People of England born in England
now have and enjoy in England.

That all such professing the Protestant Religion, who shall transport
themselves into the aforesaid Island within two years to be accounted
from the said 29. day of September 1656. and shall make a beginning
therein by transporting to the said Island one third part of their
number before the 29. day of September next, shall have, and enjoy the
aforesaid Privileges, and Advantages. And for the more certain carrying
on of this businesse, and answering Our intentions herein, We do hereby
authorize and require Our Commander in chief of the said Island, for
the time being, and also the aforesaid Commissioners that they take
notice of the Premisses, and cause a due and effectual execution of
the same from time to time as there shall be occasion, according to
the purport, et true meaning hereof, for which these presents shall be
their sufficient warrant. Given at White-Hall the 10. of October 1655.

London Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His
Highness, MDCLV.

_2 pp. folio. Copy in Guild. Manuscript draft in P. R. O., State
Papers, Dom. Interreg. 76A, pp. 152-154. Printed in Thurloe's "State
Papers," iii, 753, and in "Interesting Tracts relating to the Island
of Jamaica," 1800, p. 1._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] The English forces, soon after the declaration of war against
Spain, sailed for the conquest of the Spanish West Indies. After an
unsuccessful attack on Hispaniola, they landed at Jamaica and on May
10, 1655, took possession of the island. It now became the cherished
plan of Cromwell to settle Jamaica, especially with the colonists of
the other plantations in America. Numerous entries regarding Jamaican
affairs are to be found in the records of the Council of State during
this period. In the Interregnum Entry Book, p. 328, there is an
order of October 10, 1655, approving the draft of this particular
proclamation (_Cal. State Papers, Colonial, 1574-1660_, p. 431).




1658, March 9.

[Limiting Greenland Trade to Muscovy Company.]


BY THE PROTECTOR.

A PROCLAMATION

DECLARING THE RIGHT OF THE FELLOWSHIP AND COMPANY OF ENGLISH
MERCHANTS FOR DISCOVERY OF NEW TRADES (COMMONLY CALLED THE MUSCOVIA
COMPANY) TO THE SOLE FISHING FOR WHALES UPON THE COASTS OF GREEN-LAND
AND CHERY-ISLAND, AND FOR RESTRAINING AND PROHIBITING OF ALL OTHERS.

Whereas the Discovery of the Island called Chery-Island, and the
Continent of Green-land, with the fishing for Whales upon the Seas and
Coasts thereof, and of the Islands and places thereto adjacent, (having
been made by the Fellowship of English Merchants, for Discovery of New
Trades commonly called the Muscovia Company, and at their own great
charges and hazards) hath by experience been found to be, and is a
very great honour and advantage to this Nation and Commonwealth, aswel
in the inlargement of the Dominions and Territories thereof, as also
in the advancement and increase of Navigation, and the entring upon
and gaining of the Trade of Whale-fishing, whereby great quantities
of Whale-Oyl, Whale-Fins and other Commodities are yearly hither
imported, to the enriching of this Nation, without the Exportation
of any Commodities from hence: And whereas upon consideration of the
Premises, and for recompence of the said charge and hazards in the said
Discovery, and for the encouragement of the said Company and others
in time to come, several Grants and Letters Patents under the Great
Seal of England, have been heretofore made and granted to the said
Fellowship, and particularly in the Raign of the late King Philip and
Queen Mary, by which all main Lands, Isles, Havens, Ports, Creeks and
Rivers, by the said Company then discovered or to be after discovered,
were forbidden to be traffiqued unto, or visited by any the People of
this Nation, without the License of the said Company; which Letters
Patents were afterwards confirmed by Act of Parliament in the Eighth
year of the Raign of the late Queen Elizabeth, under the penalty of
forfeiting the Ships and Goods of any Trading thither without License,
and with addition of divers others Priviledges and Liberties unto the
said Fellowship and Company. And the late King James, for the further
encouragement of the said Company, and preventing others to interrupt,
distract or disturb their said Trade-fishing and Discoveries, did,
in pursuance of the said Act of Parliament, and the true intent and
meaning of the same, by his Letters Patents grant unto the said
Fellowship, the sole Trading and Fishing in those Seas and places so
discovered by them, And all others were forbidden to fish in those Seas
and Coasts, or to sail thither for Trade without License of the said
Company. Notwithstanding which, the said Company as We are given to
understand, have of late received some disturbance by the interloping
and intruding of some persons into the said Whale-fishing, upon those
Seas and Coasts of Green-land and Chery-Island, whereupon the said
Company having addressed their humble Petition unto Us, And the matter
having been by Us referred to the consideration of our Privy Council,
and fully heard and debated before a Committee of Our said Council,
as well on behalf of the said particular Traders, as also on behalf
of the said Fellowship and Company. And the Act of Parliament and the
Grants and Charters made to the said Fellowship and Company shewed
forth and read, and the whole matter having been fully considered, and
thereupon made evident, that such particular fishing for Whales upon
those Seas, Harbours and Coasts, by persons separate from the said
Company, and trading therein by themselves apart, with like power and
strength, did not onely disturb the main Trade of Fishing and taking
of Whales by the Company, but did tend to the ruine and destruction of
that Fishing, and unless prevented, might occasion Forraigners to come
in and gain away that fishing and Trading from this Nation, which might
tend to the great damage and dishonour of Us and this Nation, besides
the particular damage of the said Company. And whereas the whole
state of the matter having been again represented to Our said Privy
Council and by them also fully considered, it was by them conceived
to be for the good of this Nation, to encourage the carrying on of
the said Whale-fishing and Trade, by the said Fellowship and Company
onely, and to forbid all others, except such as the said Company should
License, to intrude or meddle therein. And the said Company having
further declared, that they appropriating those parts of the said Seas
called Bell Sound, and Horn Sound, with such other places as they shall
fish in, to themselves onely, were well contented, and do promise
to grant Licenses gratis to all and every person of this Nation and
Commonwealth, that shall or will but ask or desire to fish for Whales,
or Trade in any other of the said Seas, or Coasts of Green-land, or
Chery-Island, where they themselves fish not. We therefore taking the
Premises into Our consideration (with the advice of Our said Privie
Council) Do hereby publish and Declare, That the whole and sole Trade
and fishing for Whales, and absolute fishing in and upon the said Seas,
Coasts and parts of Green-land,[1] and Chery-Island, and in and upon
the said Bell Sound, and Horn Sound, being part of the said Seas and
Coasts, doth and ought to belong unto the said Fellowship of English
Merchants for discovery of New Trades, commonly called the Muscovia
Company, and that no other Person or Persons of this Commonwealth
(other then the said Fellowship of English Merchants for discovery of
New Trades, called the Muscovia Company) shall fish for Whales in and
upon the said Seas, Coasts of Green-land and Chery-Island, or in and
upon the said Bell Sound and Horn Sound, being part of the said Seas
and Coasts. Yet so, as nevertheless the said Company, upon their own
offer and agreement aforesaid, be and shall be, and are hereby obliged
to grant License and Licenses, to all and singular the People and
Subjects of this Commonwealth, upon request in that behalf to be made
(without delay or paying anything for the same) to fish for Whales, or
trade or fish in all or any other parts or places, of the said Seas or
Coasts of Greenland and Chery-Island, Except the Harbours and places of
Bell Sound and Horn Sound aforesaid, or where the said Company shall
set out Ships to fish, And We do hereby command, That all persons
whatsoever (other then the said Fellowship and Company) do forbear
to enter into the said Bell Sound or Horn Sound, or to fish or trade
within Three Leagues of either of them, but clearly and absolutely
leave the said Bell Sound and Horn Sound, and all the sole and whole
fishing and trading thereof, unto the said Fellowship and Company,
and their Ships and Agents, and such as shall be set forth, hired or
imployed by them, without making any disturbance or interruption, or
giving the said Company or their Ships or Vessels, any impediment or
hinderance therein, under pain of Our high displeasure, and such other
pains and penalties as by the Laws of this Land may be inflicted upon
them for their disobedience and contempt therein, Leaving all other
the People and Subjects of this Commonwealth free notwithstanding, to
take Licenses from the said Company to trade or fish for Whales or
otherwise, in and upon all other of the said Seas, Coasts and places,
Except the said Bell Sound and Horn Sound, and such other places of
Green-land, as the said Fellowship or their Agents shall fish in,
as aforesaid. And We do hereby further will and command, aswel Our
Generals at Sea, Admirals of Our Fleet, Vice-Admirals, Commanders of
Squadrons, and other Commanders, Captains and Officers whatsoever, of
any Our Ships, as also Our Judges of the High Court of Admiralty of
England, and all other Our Officers and Ministers, in their several
places to be aiding and assisting, unto the said Fellowship and
Company, and all such as they shall set out and imploy in their said
sole Trade and fishing, and in hindring all others hereby forbidden to
use the said Trade and fishing, otherwise then as is before mentioned.
And likewise to be aiding and assisting unto the said Fellowship and
Company and their said Agents, in doing and executing of all and
singular the premises. And lastly, We do hereby charge and Command the
said Fellowship and Company, That in all Ships and Vessels which shall
from time to time be sent out by them, or imployed under them, into
or in the Seas and parts aforesaid, they do imploy for Harpineers,
Steersmen and Mariners, the People and Subjects of this Commonwealth,
and no other.

Given at Our Palace of Westminster the 9th day of March, in the year
of Our Lord, 1657.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His
Highness, 1657.

_3 pp. folio, pasted together to form one long sheet. Copy in B. M._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] This name refers to Spitzbergen, which was then called Greenland,
and which was thought by the voyagers of the day to be connected with
Greenland proper. The early maps show Spitzbergen, which they term
"Greenland or Spitzbergen," with Bell and Horn Sounds on the west
coast and Cherie Island, named after Sir Francis Cherie, a few miles
to the south. The country was also sometimes called East Greenland,
while the modern Greenland was termed "Groenland." See especially the
map of 1613 in _Amer. Antiquarian Society Transactions_, iv, 314; the
map in Edward Pelham's _God's Power and Providence_, 1631, reproduced
in _A Collection of Documents on Spitzbergen and Greenland_ (Hakluyt
Society), 1855; and map no. xiv in H. Moll's _World Described,
1708-20_.




1660, September 22.

[For Apprehension of Whalley and Goffe.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR APPREHENSION OF EDWARD WHALLEY AND WILLIAM GOFFE.

CHARLES R.

Forasmuch as Edward Whalley, commonly known by the name of Colonel
Whalley, and William Goffe, commonly called Colonel Goffe, are, amongst
others, by an Act of this present Parliament, Entituled, An Act of
Free and General Pardon, Indempnity and Oblivion,[1] wholly excepted
from Pardon, and left to be proceeded against as Traytors, for their
execrable Treasons in sentencing to death, signing the Instrument for
the horrid Murder, or being instrumental in taking away the precious
Life of Our late dear Father of Blessed Memory.

And forasmuch as they the said Edward Whalley and William Goffe,[2]
having absented and withdrawn themselves, as We have been informed, to
the parts beyond the Seas, are now, as We certainly understand, lately
returned into Our Kingdom of England, and do privately lurk and obscure
themselves in places unknown; We therefore have thought fit, by, and
with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to publish the same to all Our
loving Subjects, not doubting of their Care and forwardness in their
apprehension; And We do hereby Require and Command, as well all and
singular Our Judges, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bayliffs,
Constables and Headboroughs, as also the Officers and Ministers of our
Ports, and other Our Subjects whatsoever, within Our Realms of England,
Scotland, Ireland, or Dominion of Wales, and all Our Dominions and
Territories, to be diligent in Inquiring, Searching for, Seizing and
Apprehending them, the said Edward Whalley, and William Goffe, in all
places whatsoever, as wel within Liberties as without, whom if they
shall happen to Take and Apprehend Our further Will and pleasure is,
That they cause them and either of them so Apprehended, to be safely
carried to the next Justice of the Peace, to the place where they or
either of them shall be Arrested, whom We straitly Command to Commit
them and either of them to Prison, and presently Inform Us or Our Privy
Council of their or either of their Apprehensions.

And We do hereby further Declare and Publish, That if any Person or
Persons after this Our Proclamation published, shall Directly or
Indirectly Conceal, Harbor, Keep, Retain, or Maintain the said Edward
Whalley and William Goffe, or either of them, or shall Contrive or
Connive at any means whereby they or either of them shall or may Escape
from being Taken or Arrested, or shall not use their best Endeavor
for their and either of their Apprehensions, as well by giving the
Advertisement thereof to Our Officers, as by all other good means;
We will (as there is Just Cause) proceed against them that shall so
neglect this Our Commandment with all severity.

And lastly We do hereby Declare, That whosoever shall discover the said
Edward Whalley or William Goffe, either within Our Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, Ireland, or Dominions of Wales, or in any other our Dominions
and Territories, or elsewhere, and shall cause them, or either of them,
to be Apprehended, and brought in alive or dead, if they or either of
them, attempting Resistance, happen to be slain, shall have a Reward
of One hundred pounds in money for each of them so brought in, dead or
alive, as aforesaid, to be forthwith paid unto him in recompence of
such his Service.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Two and twentieth day of
September, in the Twelfth year of Our Reign.

London, Printed by Christopher Barker and John Bill, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1660.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Adv., Antiq., Bodl., B. M., Camb., Ch., Crawf.,
Dalk., Dubl., Guild., Hodg., P. R. O., Q. C., and T. C. D.; also in
N. Y. Public Library. Entered on Patent Rolls. Abstract printed in
"Parliamentary Intelligencer," Sept. 24, 1660, and in "Mercurius
Publicus," Sept. 27. 1660._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Statutes of the Realm_, vol. 5, p. 226, 12 Chas. II, ch. 11.

[2] Several documents concerning the attempt to apprehend Whalley and
Goffe are calendared in the _Cal. State Papers, Colonial, 1661-1668_.
See also _Dictionary of National Biography_ under Edward Whalley and
William Goffe, and "Memoranda respecting Edward Whalley and William
Goffe," by F. B. Dexter, in _New Haven Colony Historical Society
Papers_, ii, 117.




1661, March 29.

[Prohibiting Planting of Tobacco in England.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

PROHIBITING THE PLANTING, SETTING AND SOWING OF TOBACCO IN ENGLAND
AND IRELAND, ACCORDING TO AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT HEREIN SPECIFIED.

CHARLES R.

Whereas by an Act of Parliament made in Our late Parliament begun and
held at Westminster in the County of Middlesex, the Five and Twentieth
day of April in the Twelfth year of Our Reign, for and upon the reasons
and grounds therein expressed, it was Enacted by the Authority of the
same Parliament, That no person or persons whatsoever should, or do
from and after the First day of January, in the Year of our Lord One
thousand six hundred and sixty, Set, plant, improve to grow, make or
cure any Tobacco either in Seed, plant or otherwise, in or upon any
ground, earth, field, or place within Our Kingdom of England, Dominion
of Wales, Islands of Guernsey or Jersey or Town of Berwick upon Tweed,
or in Our Kingdome of Ireland, under the penalty of the forfeiture
of all such Tobacco, or the value thereof, or of the Sum of Forty
shillings for every Rod or Pole of Ground so planted, set or sowen as
aforesaid, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity of
ground, One moyety thereof to Us Our Heirs and Successors, and the
other moyety to him or them that shall sue for the same to be recovered
by Bill, Plaint or Information in any Court of Record, wherein no
Essoign, protection or wager in Law shall be allowed: And it was
thereby further enacted, That all Sheriffs, Justices of the peace,
Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables, and every of them, upon information or
complaint made unto them or any of them, by any the Officers of the
Customes, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, that there was
any Tobacco set, sown, planted, or growing within their jurisdictions
or precincts contrary to the same Act should within ten dayes after
such information or complaint cause to be burnt, plucked up, consumed,
or utterly destroyed all such Tobacco so set, sowen, planted, or
growing. And it was thereby further enacted, That in case any person or
persons should resist or make forcible opposition against any person or
persons in the due and through execution of the same Act, That every
such person or persons for every such offence should forfeit the sum
of Five pounds to be divided and recovered in manner aforesaid; And in
case any person or persons should not pay the summs of money by them to
be paid, by vertue of the same Act, that in every such case distress
should be made and sale thereof, returning the overplus to the owners;
And in case no distress shall be found, that then every such party
should be committed to the common Gaol in the County where such offence
should be committed, there to remain for the space of two moneths
without Bail or Mainprise. Provided always, and it was thereby enacted,
That the same Act nor any thing contained therein should extend to the
hindering of the planting of Tobacco in any Physick-garden of either
University, or in any other private garden for Physick or Chirurgery,
only so as the quantity so planted exceed not one half of one pole
in any one place or garden, as in et by the same Act it doth and may
more fully appear.[1] Now to the end that all Our loving Subjects in
all parts of Our said Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and Dominion
of Wales, and in the said Islands of Guernsey and Jersey, and in our
said Town of Berwick upon Twede, may the better take notice of and
more duely observe the said Act, and not ignorantly offend against the
same for the future, We have thought good to publish et declare the
same to all Our loving Subjects by this Our Royal Proclamation, And
do withall likewise signifie and declare, that for the future We shall
expect, and do hereby require all dutiful observance thereof, and ready
conformity thereunto, and that not onely upon the pains, penalties,
and forfeitures therein expressed, but also of Our high indignation
and displeasure, justly and deservedly to be inflicted upon all those
that shall knowingly and presumptuously offend against so just and
reasonable a Law. And we do hereby streightly charge and command all
Our Judges of Assise and Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer in their
several Circuits, and all Our Justices of Peace in their several and
respective Quarter-Sessions, that they give the same Law in charge
to the several et respective Juries in their several and respective
Inquests before them, to the end that the offences and offenders
against the same, both in the setting, planting, or sowing of Tobacco,
contrary to the true intent and meaning of the same Act, and also
all forcible opposition et resistance made or to be made against any
person or persons in the due execution of the same Act, may be punished
according to Law and the demerit of their offences in this behalf. And
We do further command and require all Sheriffs, Justices of the peace,
Mayors, Bayliffs, Constables, and all other Our Officers and ministers
whatsoever whom the premisses shall or may concern, that they from
time to time as occasion shall require, be diligent, circumspect, and
careful in the due execution of the same Act in all things according to
the true intent and meaning, thereof, as they will answer the contrary
at their perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twenty ninth day of March, in
the Thirteenth Year of Our Reign, One thousand six hundred sixty one.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1661. At the King's Printing-House in Black-Friers.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Adv., Antiq., Bodl., B. M., Camb., Crawf.,
Dalk., Dubl., Guild., P. R. O., Q. C., and T. C. D. Abstract printed
in "Kingdomes Intelligencer," April 8, 1661, and in "Mercurius
Publicus," April 11, 1661._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] This act, entitled "An Act for Prohibiting the Planting Setting or
Sowing of Tobaccho in England and Ireland," passed the House of Commons
on December 17, 1660 (_Commons Journals_, viii, 212), the House of
Lords on December 20 (_Lords Journals_, xi, 218), was read in Council
on December 21 (_Acts of Privy Council_, i, 303), and is printed in
_Statutes of the Realm_, 12 Chas. II, ch. 34, vol. 5, p. 297.




1661, May 9.

[Suppressing Vagrancy.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR THE DUE OBSERVATION OF CERTAIN STATUTES MADE FOR THE SUPPRESSING
OF ROGUES, VAGABONDS, BEGGERS, AND OTHER IDLE DISORDERLY PERSONS, AND
FOR RELIEF OF THE POORE.

CHARLES R.

The Kings most Excellent Majesty being watchful for the publick good
of his loving Subjects, and taking notice of the great and unusual
resort of Rogues, Vagabonds, Beggers, and other idle Persons of all
Ages and Sexes, from all parts of the Nation to the Cities of London
and Westminster and the Suburbs of the same, where they make it their
trade to beg and live idlely, and to get their living by Begging,
Stealing, and other wicked and lewd practises, to the great offence of
Almighty God, and to the dishonour of His Majesties Royal Government;
And his Majesty taking it into His Princely consideration, that this
Realm is furnished with excellent Laws and Orders for redress of such
Enormities, yet through negligence of Officers, and presumption of
the Offenders, the same nevertheless do rather grow then abate. His
Majesty hath therefore thought fit at this present by advice of his
Privy Councel, to cause some necessary Laws formerly made for the
reforming the Abuses aforesaid, to be duely executed and observed. And
for that end, whereas by the Laws of this Land all Vagabonds, Beggers,
and idle persons are to be sent to the place of their Birth, or of
their last abode, there to be relieved and kept if they be impotent,
or otherwise made to labour: His Majestie doth by this Proclamation
publish and declare His Royal Pleasure and Commands, that all such
Vagabonds, Beggers and Idle persons within the Cities of London and
Westminster and the Suburbs of the same, which by Law are not there to
be provided for (to the wrong of the native poor, and a burden to the
several Parishes where now they are) but that they forthwith at their
Perils depart from the same and speedily resort to the place of their
Birth or last abode, that they may be there provided for as they ought
to be. And if any such Vagabonds, Beggers, or idle persons shall or
may be found within the Cities of London and Westminster, or in any of
the Suburbs or Precincts of the same, or in the Borough of Southwark,
or in any Town near adjoyning, upon the four and twentieth day of this
moneth of May, His Majesty streightly chargeth and commandeth, as well
the Lord Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Sheriffs of the said City of
London, and all other Officers of the said City, and all other His
Majesties Justices of the Peace, Magistrates and Officers whatsoever
within the City of Westminster, Borough of Southwark, or within the
County of Middlesex, to cause all such persons to be apprehended, and
openly whipped, and sent away (except such as are willing to go to the
English Plantations) And that in all things they do speedily execute,
and cause to be put in execution the Statute made in the Thirty ninth
yeare of Queene Elizabeth Chap. the 4^{th} concerning the punishment
of Rogues and Vagabonds: And to the end that all such persons may not
only be setled and kept from wandring, but also made to labour and so
kept from idleness, his Majesty doth streightly charge and command
all and singular Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers
and Ministers in the several Counties of this Realm, and all Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bayliffs, Aldermen and other Magistrates, Officers and
Ministers of all other Cities and Towns Corporate, that they and every
of them within their several Limits and Jurisdictions respectively
do carefully and diligently put in due and speedy Execution the same
Statute of the Thirty ninth of Elizabeth, Chapter the Fourth, both
for erecting houses of Correction, and for punishing such Vagabonds
and idle persons; as also the Statutes of the I. Jacob. Chap. 7. made
for the explanation of the said Statute made in the Seventh year of
King James Chapter Fourth, for the ordering such houses of Correction.
And to the end that not onely sturdy Rogues and Vagabonds may be
duely kept from wandering and idleness, and held to labour, but that
also poor and Fatherless Children and Widows, the Aged and Impotent
may be also carefully provided for and relieved, and not permitted
to wander and be in the Streets begging from door to door; It is
His Majesties express Charge and Command to all Mayors, Sheriffs,
Bayliffs, Justices of the Peace, Magistrates, Officers and Ministers
in the several Counties of this Realm, and in all Cities and Towns
Corporate, that they diligently and carefully put in execution that
excellent Statute made in the Fourty third Year of Elizabeth, Chapter
the second, concerning the Overseers of the Poor, and their duty for
raising a Stock for maintenance of the Poor, and for binding forth
Children Apprentices, which His Majesty commends in an especial manner
to their Care: Their neglecting this so great a work, in not carefully
providing for poor Fatherless Children and Infants for their teaching
and instructing them, and for fitting them for Trades and Services, and
in not binding them forth Apprentices; all which neglect is a great
cause of poor childrens idleness, wandring, and wickedness in the whole
course of their lives; And to the end that convenient Stocks may be
raised in all Parishes, especially for the ends aforesaid, His Majesty
requireth the several Overseers of the Poor to be diligent in raising
such Stocks according to the Power given them, And also His Majesty
requireth all Mayors, Bayliffs, Justices of the Peace, Magistrates
and other Officers aforesaid, to be careful in putting in speedy and
due Execution all the Statutes concerning Tipling and Drunkenness,
and concerning unlawful or irregular Inns or Alehouses, and all other
Statutes, the penalties whereof are disposed to the use of the Poor of
the several Parishes; and to cause the said several penalties to be
delivered to the Overseers of the Poor respectively for the increase
of the said Stock, to buy materials to imploy the said Poor, and also
to be careful in diligent calling to account the said Overseers, and
to see the said sums so raised may be carefully imployed for the good
education and instruction and binding out of such poor Infants and
Fatherless Children, and providing for relief of the Poor aforesaid,
which may in probability encourage some charitable and well disposed
Persons voluntarily to contribute and add to such Stocks by their free
and weekly contributions (which they dayly bestowed on idle begging
Poor) or otherwise. His Majesty therefore expects all Mayors, Justices,
Magistrates and other His Officers to whom the Execution of the Law
aforesaid is particularly concerned, that they be very careful in the
due and speedy execution of every one of them, as they will avoid
His Majesties just indignation for their neglect of their duties in
hindring this so great a National work, and for the Contempt of His
Royal Commandments: His Majesty being resolved to have an account,
both from the said Justices, and the several Judges of Assizes in their
several Circuits, of the due observation hereof, until His Majesty
shall take a further Course by the advice of His Parliament, which he
determines to do, that no poor shall be permitted to be Vagrant or
Begging, but all such as are Impotent and not able to work, may be
provided for, so as to live comfortably, and yet be kept from profess'd
idleness, and such as are able may have means provided to set them on
work.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Ninth day of May, One thousand
six hundred sixty one, and in the Thirteenth year of His Majesties
Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty, 1661. At the Kings Printing-House in
Black-Friers.

_3 pp. folio. Copies in Adv., Antiq., Bodl., B. M., Camb., Ch., Crawf.,
Dalk., Dubl., Guild., P. R. O., Q. C., and T. C. D. Abstract printed in
"Mercurius Publicus," May 16, 1661, and in "Kingdomes Intelligencer,"
May 20, 1661._




1661, December 14.

[Encouraging Settling in Jamaica.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR THE ENCOURAGING OF PLANTERS IN HIS MAJESTIES ISLAND OF JAMAICA IN
THE WEST-INDIES.

CHARLES R.

We being fully satisfied, that Our Island of Jamaica, being a pleasant
and most fertile soyl, and scituate commodiously for Trade and
Commerce, is likely, through Gods blessing, to be a great Benefit and
Advantage to this and other Our Kingdoms and Dominions, have thought
fit, for encouraging of Our Subjects, as well such as are already
upon the said Island, as all others that shall transport themselves
thither, and Reside and Plant there, to declare and publish, And We
do hereby declare and publish, That Thirty Acres of Improveable Lands
shall be granted and allotted to every such Person, Male, or Female,
being Twelve years old or upwards, who now Resides, or within Two
years next ensuing, shall Reside upon the said Island, and that the
same shall be assigned and set out by the Governor and Council within
Six weeks next after notice shall be given in Writing, subscribed by
such Planter or Planters, or some of them, in behalf of the rest, to
the Governor, or such Officer as he shall appoint in that behalf,
signifying their resolutions to Plant there, and when they intend to
be on the place. And in case they do not go thither within Six moneths
then next ensuing, the said Allotment shall be void, and free to be
assigned to any other Planter; And that every person and persons to
whom such Assignment shall be made, shall hold and enjoy the said
Lands, so to be assigned, and all Houses, Edifices, Buildings, and
Inclosures, thereupon to be built or made, to them and their Heirs
for ever, be and under such Tenure as is usual in other Plantations
subject unto Us. Nevertheless they are to be obliged to serve in Arms
upon any Insurrection, Mutiny, or Foreign Invasion; and that the
said Assignments and Allotments shall be made and confirmed under
the publick Seal of the said Island, with power to create any Mannor
or Mannors, and with such convenient and suitable Priviledges and
Immunities as the Grantee shall reasonably devise and require; And a
draught of such Assignments shall be prepared by Our Learned Council in
the Law, and delivered to the Governor to that purpose; And that all
Fishings and Piscaries, and all Copper, Lead, Tin, Iron, Coals, and all
other Mines (except Gold and Silver) within such respective Allotments,
shall be enjoyed by the Grantees thereof, reserving only a Twentieth
part of the Product of the said Mines to Our use. And we do further
publish and declare, That all Children of any of Our Natural born
Subjects of England to be born in Jamaica, shall from their respective
Births be reputed to be, and shall be free Denizens of England, and
shall have the same Priviledges to all Intents and Purposes as Our
Free-born Subjects of England; And that all Free persons shall have
liberty without Interruption, to transport themselves and their
Families, and any their Goods (except only Coyn and Bullions) from any
of Our Dominions and Territories to the said Island of Jamaica. And we
do straitly charge and command all Planters, Soldiers, and others upon
the said Island, to yield obedience to the lawful Commands of Our Right
Trusty and Welbeloved Thomas Lord Windsor, now Our Governor of the
said Island, and to every other Governor thereof for the time being,
under pain of Our displeasure, and such penalties as may be inflicted
thereupon.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal the Fourteenth day of December, 1661.
In the Thirteenth year of Our Reign.[1]

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. 1661.

_2 pp. folio. There are two issues, varying slightly in set-up. Copies
in Adv., Antiq., Bodl., B. M., Camb., Ch., Crawf., Dalk., Dubl.,
Guild., Hodg., P. R. O., Q. C., T. C. D., and in N. Y. Historical
Society. Entered on Patent Rolls. Printed in "Interesting Tracts
relating to the Island of Jamaica," 1800, pp. 135, 136, and in preface
to "Laws of Jamaica," 1792._




1667, August 23.

[Recalling Dispensations of Navigation Act.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR RECALLING DISPENSATIONS, WITH SOME CLAUSES IN THE ACTS FOR
ENCOURAGEMENT AND INCREASING OF SHIPPING AND NAVIGATION, AND OF TRADE.

CHARLES R.

Whereas We by an Order in Council[2] of the Two and twentieth day
of March, One thousand six hundred sixty four, have dispenced for
some time with certain Clauses in the late Acts of Parliament for
Encouraging and Increasing of Shipping and Navigation, and for the
Encouragement of Trade; and therein also Declared, That when We
should think fit to determine that Dispensation, We would by Our
Royal Proclamation give Six moneths notice thereof, to the end no
Merchant, or other Person therein concerned should be surprised. In
order whereunto, We taking the same into consideration, have thought
fit (with the advice of Our Privy Council) to publish this Our Royal
Proclamation; and do hereby Declare, That the said Order of the Two
and twentieth of March, One thousand six hundred sixty four, and all
and every the Dispensations, Clauses, Matters, and things therein
contained, shall from and after the end of six moneths next ensuing the
Date of this Proclamation, Cease, Determine, and be Void to all intents
and purposes whatsoever; Whereof all Persons concerned are to take
notice, and to conform themselves accordingly.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 23. day of August, 1667. In the
Nineteenth year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

In the Savoy, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher
Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1667.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., Bodl., B. M., Camb., Ch., Crawf., Dalk.,
Guild., P. C., P. R. O., Q. C., and T. C. D. Entered on Patent Rolls._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] There is a series of documents in the Public Record Office
regarding the publication of this proclamation in Barbadoes (see
abstracts in _Cal. State Papers, Colonial, 1661-1668_, pp. 97, 103).

[2] Since this order does not appear among the printed _Acts of the
Privy Council, 1613-1680_, it is here noted. On March 22, 1665, it
was ordered that the "Act for encouraging and encreasing of Shipping
and Navigation" should be suspended so far as concerned commerce with
Norway and the Baltic Sea, also with Germany, Flanders, or France,
provided the merchants and owners were English natural-born subjects.
The order further allowed the merchants of any nation in amity with
England to import hemp, pitch, tar, masts, saltpeter, and copper,
paying only such duties as were imposed by the Act of Tonnage and
Poundage. The clauses relating to America follow:

  "And His Majesty doth further Order, That notwithstanding the said
  Act for Encouraging and encreasing of Shipping and Navigation, and
  one other Act made in the said Parliament begun at Westminster the
  eighth day of May in the thirteenth year of His Majesties Reign,
  intituled [An Act for the Encouragement of Trade] or either of them,
  or any Clause or Clauses in them, or either of them to the contrary,
  It shall and may be lawful for any English Merchants, and they are
  hereby authorised, freely and without interruption, to make use
  of, and employ any Foreign Ships or Vessels whatsoever, Navigated
  by Mariners or Seamen of any Nation in Amity with His Majesty, for
  importing or exporting of Goods and Commodities, to or from any Port
  in England or Wales, to or from any of His Majesties Plantations.

  "Provided, That no Goods or Commodities whatsoever, be by them
  imported into any of His Majesties said Plantations, but what shall
  be without fraud, Laden and Shipped in England or Wales, and thence
  directly carried, and from no other place to His Majesties said
  Plantations.

  "Provided also, That such Goods and Commodities as shall be by them
  laden or taken on Board at His Majesties said Plantations, or any
  of them, be brought directly from thence to some of His Majesties
  said Ports in England or Wales. And all Governours, and Officers of
  the Customs are hereby charged and required, strictly to observe all
  Rules, Directions and Orders for taking of Bonds or other Securities,
  and exacting all Forfeitures, and Penalties by the said Acts or
  either of them required or enjoyned: save only in the Two Clauses
  concerning English Ships or English Mariners herein before dispensed
  with.

  "And lastly, His Majesty doth declare, That this shall continue and
  be in force during His Majesties pleasure: And when His Majesty shall
  think fit to determine the Dispensation hereby granted, He will by
  His Royal Proclamation give six moneths notice thereof, To the end no
  Merchant or other person herein concerned, may be surprized."

This order in Council was printed as a broadside by John Bill and
Christopher Barker, and copies of it are in Antiq., B. M., Crawf., P.
R. O., and Q. C.




1671, December 22.

[Concerning the Planters at St. Christophers.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

TOUCHING THE PLANTERS IN THE ISLAND OF SAINT CHRISTOPHERS.

CHARLES R.

Whereas it hath been Our care before and since the Restitution of that
part of the Island of Saint Christophers,[1] which formerly belonged
to Us and Our Subjects, to provide for the Plantation and Improvement
thereof, by giving all manner of Encouragements to Our good Subjects
to return thither, and to Re-establish the former Trade and Commerce:
In order whereunto We lately sent thither Sir Charles Wheeler Baronet,
with Our Commission to be Our Lieutenant-General, and General Governour
of Our Leeward Islands in America; and for the better execution of so
important a Charge, gave him such Directions and Instructions as were
most suitable to these Our Royal Intentions, and might best tend to
the advancement of the general Good and Welfare of all Our Subjects
there, so that We might reasonably have expected before this time,
some Account of the good success of these Our endeavours in the happy
and peaceable Settlement of Our Subjects in their former Proprieties
and Possessions; nevertheless, to the utter disappointment of Our just
expectations, and the general Discouragement of such of Our Subjects
who formerly Inhabited that Island, We are given to understand, That
on or about the Twenty fourth of August last past, Sir Charles Wheeler
hath caused a certain Proclamation to be published in that Island,
thereby endeavouring to oblige the former Inhabitants and Proprietors
to appear before a certain Court of Claims by him there Erected,
and to return with a Stock sufficient for the quantity of Land they
Claim, on peril of losing such part of their Estates they shall not be
able to Stock, which shall be given to them who are better able; And
moreover, to be Contributory to all Levies to be made for satisfaction
of the French Demand, upon any Article of the Peace at Breda, or for
satisfaction of any other disbursments concerning Fortifications, or
any other Publick Expences; with a further menacing intimation to
all such as shall be found to have Acted or Counselled in the late
Rendition of the Island to the French, or have been guilty of any
Cowardise or Folly in that War, That they are not to expect the like
advantages with the rest of Our Subjects: And a Declaration, That upon
every mans Estate a Quit-Rent shall be reserved, greater or lesser,
according to the merit or demerit of the person Restored, with an
allowance of no longer time to such of Our Subjects who were in the
Barbadoes and Caribee Islands, for putting in their Claims, then
One Moneth, and but Three Moneths to those who were in any part of
Europe, Virginia, Jamaica, Carolina, Bermuda's, or New England, Then
which nothing could have been done more contrary to the Commission
and Instructions We had given him, nor more repugnant to Our Royal
Intentions, and the just Interests and Advantages of the antient
Planters and Proprietors: Wherefore, and for the better prevention of
the ill consequences which might otherwise ensue upon that Proclamation
so issued out by the said Sir Charles Wheeler, if the same should
be allowed to have any force or effect, We have thought fit, by
Advice of Our Council, to Publish this Our Royal Proclamation, and do
hereby Declare Our Will and Pleasure, That the said Proclamation, and
everything therein contained, is, and shall be null and void, to all
intents and purposes whatsoever, as if the same had never been had
nor made; And because the Return and Re-settlement of the antient
Planters and Proprietors hath been many ways obstructed, not onely
by the Severities of the said Illegal Proclamation, but by several
accidents which for a long time did very much retard the Surrender of
the said Island, We therefore out of the just sense We have of the
great Sufferings of the said late Planters and Proprietors, do by these
presents, for their ease, and in their favour, further Declare, That
all and every the late Planters and Proprietors, their Heirs, Executors
and Assigns, or their Agents respectively, shall be admitted to enjoy
their several and respective Plantations, carrying with them such Stock
onely as they are able, or can conveniently provide: Which Grace and
Favour of Ours We would have to be understood with these Qualifications
and Restrictions onely (That is to say) That such who have sold their
Plantations to the French, or Claim under those who did Sell the same
to the French, shall be obliged to re-imburse the Purchasers the Price
or Money they or those under whom they Claim, did actually receive
for their respective Possessions and Estates, within the space of
one whole year, to be accounted from the Re-delivery of the English
part of the said Island, which We are informed, was upon the 5/15 of
July 1671. And all such who have not Sold to the French and their
Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and their Agents respectively, shall be
obliged to return unto the said Island before the Twenty fifth day of
December, which shall be in the year of Our Lord, One thousand six
hundred seventy two. And We do further Publish and Declare Our Royal
Will and Pleasure, That no Taxes, Tallages, Aides, or other Impositions
whatsoever, shall at any time hereafter be Assessed or Imposed, nor any
Quit-Rents Reserved or Required, nor any Moneys Levied, nor any kind
of Charge be laid upon, or raised out of any Lands or Tenements in the
said Island, unless it be by vertue of some Publick Law made or to be
made by the Assembly of the said Island, and with the consent of the
Governour and Counsel there Assembled. And moreover, of Our further and
more especial Clemency and Favour unto Our good Subjects in the said
Island, We are Graciously pleased to Declare, That all and every the
Inhabitants, Planters and Proprietors of the said Island, and all and
every person and persons Claiming by, from, and under them, or any of
them, and all other Our Subjects in the said Island, shall be, and are
hereby Freed, Indempnified, and Discharged, as against Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, of and from all Crimes, Offences, Miscarriages, and
Misdemeanours whatsoever, which happened, and were committed in the
said Island during the late War in the said Island, and of and from all
Pains and Penalties incurred for or by reason of any matter or thing
done, or omitted to be done during the said late War; And of and from
all Prosecutions, Molestations, or Inquiries touching or concerning
the same; All which matters and things shall be, and are hereby put
into perpetual Oblivion, nor shall the same be ever mentioned to the
prejudice of any of Our Subjects, either in their Persons, Estates, or
Reputations. All which We Command to be Obeyed in all Our Dominions,
and all Our Officers Civil and Military, to be Assisting in the
Premises, as they will answer the contrary at their utmost perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Two and twentieth day of December
1671. in the Twenty third year of Our Reign, 1671.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

In the Savoy, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher
Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1671.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., Bodl., B. M., Crawf., Guild., P. C.,
P. R. O., Q. C., and T. C. D. Abstract printed in "London Gazette,"
Dec. 28, 1671._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Although the Island of St. Christophers, occupied by both the
French and the English, was given to England in 1667 according to the
seventh article of the Treaty of Breda, the next few years were filled
with constant controversies in the effort to compose the differences
between the two nations (see the _Calendar of State Papers, Colonial,
1669-1674_, and the _Acts of the Privy Council_, vol. 2). The above
proclamation was reported as advisable by the Council for Plantations
on December 7, 1671 (_Cal. State Papers_, p. 285).




1674, March 11.

[Recalling Dispensations of Navigation Act.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR RECALLING DISPENSATIONS WITH SOME CLAUSES IN THE ACTS FOR
ENCOURAGEMENT AND INCREASING OF SHIPPING AND NAVIGATION, AND OF TRADE.

CHARLES R.

Whereas We by an Order in Council of the Tenth day of May One thousand
six hundred seventy two,[1] have Dispensed for sometime with certain
Clauses in the late Acts of Parliament for Encouraging and Increasing
of Shipping and Navigation, and for the Encouragement of Trade; And
therein also Declared, That when We should think fit to determine that
Dispensation, We would by Our Royal Proclamation give Six Moneths
notice thereof, to the end no Merchant, or other Person therein
concerned should be Surprized. In order whereunto, We taking the same
into Consideration, have thought fit (with the Advice of Our Privy
Council) to Publish this Our Royal Proclamation; And do hereby Declare,
That the said Order of the Tenth of May One thousand six hundred
seventy two, and all and every the Dispensations, Clauses, Matters and
Things therein contained, shall from and after the end of Six moneths
next ensuing the Date of this Proclamation, cease, determine, and
be void to all intents and purposes whatsoever: Whereof all Persons
concerned are to take notice, and to conform themselves accordingly.

Given at our Court at Whitehall the Eleventh day of March 1673/4 in
the Six and twentieth year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1673/4.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., Bodl., B. M., Camb., Crawf., Dalk.,
Guild., P. R. O., Q. C., and T. C. D. Entered on Patent Rolls._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] See _Acts of Privy Council, Colonial_, 1613-1680, p. 576.




1674, November 30.

[Prohibiting African Trade to Plantations.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

CHARLES R.

Whereas it is found by Experience, That Traffique with Infidels and
Barbarous Nations not in Amity with Us, and who are not holden by
any League or Treaty, cannot be carried on without the Establishment
of Forts and Factories in places convenient, the maintenance whereof
requires so great and constant Expence, that it cannot be otherwise
defrayed, then by Managing the whole Trade by a Joynt Stock; We in Our
Royal Wisdom taking the same into Our serious Consideration, and more
especially having found by experience, That the whole Trade of the
Coast of Guiny, Buiny and Angola, and other parts and places of Africa,
so much importing our Service, and the Enriching of this Our Kingdom,
was very much abated, and attempted to be Ingrossed by Foreigners,
and in eminent danger to be utterly lost, and taken from Us, and Our
loving Subjects, not onely by Foreign Force, but by the Violence and
Inconstancy of the Heathen Natives: For the Recovery and Preservation
whereof, We were Graciously pleased to encourage and invite Our loving
Subjects to Raise a Joynt Stock to be used and imployed therein: And in
consideration thereof, and for the better Securing of such as should
come in and be concerned in the said Joynt Stock and Trade, We did by
Our Letters Patents under Our Great Seal of England, bearing date the
Seven and twentieth day of September, in the Four and twentieth year
of Our Reign,[1] Grant unto several of Our loving Subjects, the whole
entire and onely Trade into and from Africa, from the Port of Sally
in South Barbary inclusive, to the Cape de Bona Esperanza inclusive,
with all the Islands near adjoyning to those Coasts, and comprehended
within the Limits aforesaid, and did Incorporate them by the name of
The Royal African Company of England; And the said Company having
raised a very great Stock sufficient to Manage the Trade thereof, have
since, at their great Expence and Charge, Fortified and Setled divers
Garisons, Forts and Factories, by which means they have so Secured
the said Trade, that the same doth now begin to flourish, and if not
disturbed, is likely to be further improved to the great benefit of
this Our Kingdom; Nevertheless, We are Informed by the humble Petition
of the said Company, That divers of Our Subjects in several of Our
Plantations in America, who are not Members of the said Company, nor
any ways concerned in their Stock, do endeavour to reap the Benefit and
Fruit thereof; and to that end have already sent several Ships into
those parts to Trade, and are providing more, the which if it should be
permitted, and not strictly and presently prevented, will disable the
said Company from supporting the great Charge of maintaining the said
Forts, Garisons and Factories, and consequently, unavoidably occasion
the loss of the whole Trade of those Countreys: Wherefore for remedy
thereof We have thought fit, with Advice of Our Privy Council,[2] to
Publish and Declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure to be, And We do hereby
strictly Prohibit and Forbid all and every of Our Subjects whatsoever,
Except the said Royal Company and their Successours, at any time or
times hereafter, to send or Navigate any Ship or Ships, Vessel or
Vessels, or Exercise any Trade from any of Our Plantations, Dominions,
or Countreys in America, to any of the Parts or Coasts of Africa, from
Sally to Cape de Bona Esperanza, or any of the Islands near thereunto,
as aforesaid, or from thence to carry any Negro Servants, Gold,
Elephants Teeth, or any other Goods or Merchandizes of the Product or
Manufacture of the said Places, to any of Our American Dominions or
Plantations, upon pain of Our high Displeasure, and the forfeiture and
loss of the said Negros, Gold, Elephants Teeth, and all other Goods
and Merchandizes, and the Ships or Vessels which shall bring or carry
the same. And We do hereby also strictly Require and Command all Our
Governours, Deputy-Governours, Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Generals,
Judges of Our Courts of Admiralty, Commanders of Our Forts and Castles,
Captains of Our Royal Ships, Justices of the Peace, Provost-Marshals,
Marshals, Comptrollers, Collectors of Our Customs, Wayters, Searchers,
and all other Our Officers and Ministers Civil and Military, by Sea
or Land, in every of Our said American Dominions or Plantations, to
take effectual care, That no person or persons whatsoever within their
respective Limits or Jurisdictions (except the said Company and their
Successours) do send or Navigate any Ships or Vessels, or Exercise any
Trade from any of Our said Dominions or Plantations, to any part of
the said Coast of Africa, within the Limits aforesaid, or from thence
to Import any Negro Servants, Gold, Elephants Teeth, or other Goods
of the Product of any of those Parts, into any of Our said Dominions
or Plantations in America; And if any person or persons shall presume
to act or do in any wise contrary to this Our Royal Proclamation, to
the end Our Will and Pleasure herein may be the better observed, We do
further Will, Require, and strictly Command all Our said Governours,
Deputy-Governours, Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Generals, Judges of Our
Court of Admiralty, Commanders of Our Forts and Castles, Captains of
Our Royal Ships, Justices of the Peace, Provost-Marshals, Marshals,
Comptrollers, Collectors of Our Customs, Wayters, Searchers, and all
other Our Officers and Ministers Civil and Military, by Sea or Land,
in every of Our said American Dominions and Plantations, That as often
as need shall require, they be Aiding and Assisting to the said Royal
African Company, their Successors, Factors, Deputies or Assigns, to
Attach, Arrest, Take and Seize all such Ship or Ships, Vessel or
Vessels, Negro Servants, Gold, Elephants Teeth, or Goods, Wares and
Merchandizes, wheresoever they shall be found, for Our Use, according
to Our Royal Charter Granted to the said Company, upon pain of Our high
Displeasure, and as they will answer the contrary at their Perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Thirtieth day of November, in
the Six and twentieth year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1674.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., Bodl., B. M., Crawf., Dalk., P. C.,
P. R. O., Q. C., and N. Y. Historical Society. Entered on Patent Rolls.
Abstract printed in "London Gazette," Dec. 10, 1674._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] An abstract of this charter, dated September 27, 1672, is printed
in the _Cal. State Papers, Colonial, 1669-1674_, p. 409.

[2] The action of the Privy Council, November 4, 1674, resulting from
a petition of the Royal African Company that American interlopers be
kept out of the African trade, is in the _Acts of the Privy Council_,
i, 614. The proclamation was approved on November 25, and on December
2, letters were sent to the various colonial governors forwarding
directions regarding it (_Idem_, pp. 615, 616).




1675, October 1.

[For Apprehending Don Philip Hellen.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR THE DISCOVERY AND APPREHENSION OF CAPTAIN DON PHILIP HELLEN,
ALIAS FITZ-GERALD.

CHARLES R.

Whereas it hath been represented unto Us by the humble Petition
of Martin Stamp, and due proof made by the Testimony of credible
Witnesses, That Timothy Stamp, Brother of the said Martin, being a
Merchant, was in December 1672, taken by a Spanish Man of War, and
his Ship, called the Humility of London, and the Goods therein, to
the value of Five thousand pounds, carried into the Port of Havana;
But the Governour of the place not finding cause for the Detainer of
the said Ship, restored the same, with promise of Satisfaction for
the Damage sustained, and a Protection against all Spanish Ships; Yet
during the restraint of the said Ship, a Man of War was fitted out
under the Command of Don Philip Hellen, alias Fitz-gerald[1] (Our
Natural born Subject) who retook the said Ship within Musquet shot
of the Castle of Havana, and after Tortured and Murdered the said
Timothy Stamp, and most of his men; some they hanged until they were
half dead, and then cut them with their swords, afterwards hung them
up again until they were almost dead, then cut them in pieces with
an Ax; others had their Arms cut off, and were cleft down with Axes;
And afterwards the said Don Philip Hellen, alias Fitz-gerald, and his
Company shared the said Ship and Goods; And the like Barbarous cruelty
the said Don Philip Hellen, alias Fitz-gerald, hath since exercised
upon other Our Subjects: We have therefore thought fit (with the
advice of Our Privy Council) to publish the same to all Our loving
Subjects, and doubt not of their care and forwardness in the discovery
and apprehension of the said Fitz-gerald: And We do by this Our
Proclamation (whereof he ought and shall be presumed to take notice)
Enjoyn and Command the said Don Philip Hellen, alias Fitz-gerald,
within Six Moneths after the publication hereof, to render himself to
one of Our Principal Secretaries of State, or to the chief Governour
of the Island of Jamaica, or to the chief Governour of some other of
Our Foreign Plantations, to receive and undergo such Order as shall be
given concerning him. And We do hereby further publish and declare,
That if the said Don Philip Hellen, alias Fitz-gerald, shall not within
the time aforesaid, render himself accordingly, then if any person or
persons whatsoever shall at any time after apprehend and bring him
dead or alive to one of Our Principal Secretaries of State, or to
the Governour of Our Island of Jamaica, or to the chief Governour of
any other of Our Foreign Plantations, he or they so apprehending and
bringing him, shall have a reward of One thousand pieces of Eight. And
We do also strictly Charge and Command all Our Officers and Ministers,
as well Military as Civil, and other Our Subjects whatsoever, to be
diligent, and use their best endeavours to search for and apprehend the
said Don Philip Hellen, alias Fitz-gerald, in all places whatsoever,
as they will answer the neglect therof at their perils. And We do
hereby further publish and declare, That if any of Our Subjects shall
after the publication of this Our Proclamation, directly or indirectly
conceal or harbour the said Don Philip Hellen, alias Fitz-gerald,
or shall not use his or their best endeavours for his discovery and
apprehension, as well by giving due advertisement to Our Officers,
as by all other good means, We will (as there is just cause) proceed
against them that shall so neglect this Our Command, with all severity.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the First day of October 1675. In the
Seven and twentieth year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1675.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., Bodl., B. M., Ch., Crawf., Dalk.,
P. C., P. R. O., T. C. D., and in N. Y. Historical Society. Entered on
Patent Rolls. Printed in "London Gazette," Oct. 14, 1675._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] For various documents regarding Fitz-gerald's piracies in the West
Indies, see _Cal. State Papers, Colonial, 1669-1674_, pp. 505, 537,
557, 608; _Idem_, _1675-1676_, pp. 205, 293; and _Acts of the Privy
Council_, i, pp. 594, 595, 600, 613, 632.




1675, November 24.

[Enforcing Navigation Acts.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR PROHIBITING THE IMPORTATION OF COMMODITIES OF EUROPE INTO ANY OF
HIS MAJESTIES PLANTATIONS IN AFRICA, ASIA, OR AMERICA, WHICH WERE
NOT LADEN IN ENGLAND, AND FOR PUTTING ALL OTHER LAWS RELATING TO THE
TRADE OF THE PLANTATIONS, IN EFFECTUAL EXECUTION.

CHARLES R.

Whereas by one Act of Parliament made in the Fifteenth year of His
Majesties Reign, Entituled, (An Act for the Encouragement of Trade)[1]
it is Enacted, That from and after the Twenty fifth day of March 1664,
no Commodities of the growth, production or manufacture of Europe,
shall be Imported into any Land, Island, Plantation, Colony, Territory
or Place to His Majesty belonging, or which shall belong unto, or
be in the possession of His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, in
Asia, Africa, or America, (Tanger onely excepted) but what shall be
bona fide, and without fraud Laden and Shipped in England, Wales, or
the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and which shall be carried directly
thence to the said Lands, Islands, Plantations, Colonies, Territories
and Places, and from no other place whatsoever, any Law, Statute, or
Usage to the contrary notwithstanding, under the Penalty of the Loss
of all such Commodities of the Growth, Production or Manufacture of
Europe, as shall be Imported into any of them, from any other place
whatsoever, by Land, or by Water; and if by Water, of the Ship or
Vessel also in which they were Imported, with all her Guns, Tackle,
Furniture, Ammunition and Apparel; the said forfeitures to be disposed
as by the said Act is directed: Provided, that it shall be lawful to
Ship and Lade in such Ships, and so Navigated, as in the said Act
is expressed, in any part of Europe, Salt for the Fisheries of New
England and New-found-land; and to ship and lade in the Maderas, Wines
of the growth thereof; and ship and lade in the Western Islands, or
Azores, Wines of the growth of the said Islands; and to ship and take
in Servants or Horses in Scotland or Ireland; and to ship or lade in
Scotland, all sorts of victual of the growth or production of Scotland;
and to ship or lade in Ireland, all sorts of victual of the growth
or production of Ireland, and the same to transport into any of the
said Lands, Islands, Plantations, Colonies, Territories, or Places;
Any thing in the foregoing Clause to the contrary notwithstanding.
And whereas His Majesty is well informed, that notwithstanding the
said Act of Parliament, great quantities of other Commodities of the
growth, production and manufacture of Europe (then what are by the
said Act permitted) have been, and are daily Imported into several
of His Colonies, Plantations, and Territories, in Asia, Africa and
America, (besides Tanger;) and that His Majesties Subjects of some of
His Colonies, and Plantations, have not onely supplied themselves with
such Commodities not Shipped in England, Wales or Berwick, but have
conveyed them by Land and Water, to other of His Majesties Colonies and
Plantations, to the great prejudice of His Majesties Customs, and of
the Trade and Navigation of this Kingdom: His Majesty therefore for the
prevention thereof for the future, doth by this His Royal Proclamation,
(with the Advice of His Privy Council)[2] Require and Command all and
every his Subjects, that they do not for the future presume to Import
any Commodities of the growth, production, or manufacture of Europe,
(except what may be Imported by vertue of the Proviso aforesaid) by
Land, or Water, into any Land, Island, Plantation, Colony, Territory
or Place to His Majesty belonging, or which hereafter shall belong
unto, or be in the possession of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors,
(Tanger onely excepted) but which shall be bona fide, and without
fraud laden and Shipped in England, Wales, or the Town of Berwick, and
carried directly from thence, according to the true meaning of the
said Act; whereof all persons concerned are to take notice, and yield
due obedience thereunto. And His Majesty doth further strictly direct
and require all Governours of His Colonies, and Plantations, and of
all Lands, Islands, and Places in His possession in Asia, Africa, and
America, (Tanger onely excepted) to take care that this His Royal
Proclamation be put in due Execution: and also that one Act made in
the Twelfth Year of His Majesties Reign, Entituled, An Act for the
Encouraging and Increase of Shipping and Navigation, and one Act made
in the Two and twentieth and Three and twentieth years of His Reign,
Entituled, (An Act for the Regulating the Plantation Trade,) and also
one other Act made in the Five and twentieth year of His Majesties
Reign, Entituled, (An Act for the better Securing the Plantation
Trade)[3] together with all other the Laws of this His Kingdom of
England, relating to the Trade of His Plantations, be duely observed
and put in execution in their respective Governments; And His Majesty
doth further require all His said Governours, and that they Command
all Officers, Civil and Military under their respective Commands,
to be aiding and assisting therein, and to the Collectors and other
Officers of His Majesties Customs under them, in the Execution of their
respective Offices in order thereunto, as they and every of them will
answer the contrary at their utmost perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Twenty fourth day of November,
In the Seven and twentieth year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1675.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., Bodl., B. M., Crawf., Dalk., Guild.,
P. C., P. R. O., Q. C., and T. C. D. Printed in "London Gazette," Dec.
6, 1675._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The second Navigation Act of 1663, cited as 15 Chas. II, ch. 7,
printed in _Statutes of the Realm_, vol. 5, p. 449.

[2] Ordered published by the Council, November 24, 1675 (_Acts of Privy
Council_, i, 638).

[3] The above three acts are (1) "An Act for the Encourageing and
increasing of Shipping and Navigation," 12 Chas. II, ch. 18, of the
year 1660, printed in _Statutes of the Realm_, v, 246; (2) "An Act to
prevent the Planting of Tobacco in England, and for Regulating the
Plantation Trade," 22-23 Chas. II, ch. 26, of the year 1670, printed in
_Statutes of the Realm_, v, 747; and (3) "An Act for the incouragement
of the Greeneland and Eastland Trades, and for the better secureing
the Plantation Trade," 25 Chas. II, ch. 7, of the year 1672, printed
in _Statutes of the Realm_, v, 792. For a general description of
the Navigation Acts, see Channing, _History of the United States_,
ii, 27; Channing's "Navigation Laws" in _Amer. Antiquarian Society
Proceedings_, vi, 160; and Beer's "Commercial Policy of England toward
the American Colonies," in _Columbia University Studies_, ii, pt. 2.
The acts themselves are reprinted in MacDonald's _Select Charters_.




1676, April 1.

[Concerning Passes for Ships.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

CONCERNING PASSES FOR SHIPS.

CHARLES R.

His Majesty (with the Advice of His Privy Council) doth by this His
Royal Proclamation publish and declare, That all Passes for Ships
Entred out for the East or West Indies, or the parts of Africa beyond
Cape Verde, which were granted before the date hereof, shall determine
upon their return, and being unladen in some Port of England or Wales,
or at the Town of Berwick upon Tweed; And that all Passes by vertue
of any other Treaties then those of Algiers, Tunis and Tripoly,[1]
for Ships Entred for the Mediterranean Sea, or Trading there, granted
before the 25^{th} of March 1675, shall determine at Michaelmas 1676.
And that all such Passes for such Ships, granted after the 25^{th} of
March 1675, and before the date of this Our Royal Proclamation, shall
determine on the 25^{th} day of March 1677. And that if any of the said
Ships shall be in any Port of this Kingdom, or in any Member or Creek
thereof, at the time of the publishing of this Our Royal Proclamation,
their Passes shall be then void; And if any of the said Ships shall
happen to come into any Port of England, after the publishing of this
Our Royal Proclamation, and before the expiring of the said Periods,
and unlade, their Passes shall thereupon determine; And also that
all Passes granted to Ships Entred to any other part of the World, or
Coastwise, such Passes shall determine on the 29^{th} day of September
1676. And hereof all persons concerned are to take notice at their
perils.

Given at Our Court at Newmarket the First day of April 1676. In the
Eight and twentieth year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1676.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., Bodl., B. M., Crawf., Dalk., Guild.,
P. C., P. R. O., Q. C., and T. C. D. Printed in "London Gazette," No.
1084._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Two treaties had been recently entered into, viz.: "Articles of
Peace between Great Britain and Tunis, concluded October, 1662. Renewed
and confirmed February 4, 1674/5," and "Capitulations and Articles of
Peace between Great Britain and the Ottoman Empire, September, 1675"
(_Several Treaties of Peace and Commerce_, London, 1686, pp. 157, 203.
See also Playfair's _Scourge of Christendom_, pp. 115-119). One of
the clauses of these treaties required that all Englishmen traveling
in foreign ships should be provided with passports. A proclamation of
December 22, 1675, ordered that all passes issued before 1675 should
expire on May 1, 1676, and that all new passes, except those for Guinea
or the East or West Indies, should be in force for only one year.
Another proclamation of January 28, 1676, explained that the passes
referred to as expiring on May 1 concerned only the Mediterranean trade
(see proclamation calendared in Lord Crawford's _Tudor and Stuart
Proclamations_). The proclamation above printed was issued to determine
the expiration of passes granted for the English colonial trade.




1676, October 27.

[Suppressing the Rebellion in Virginia.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR THE SUPPRESSING A REBELLION LATELY RAISED WITHIN THE PLANTATION
OF VIRGINIA.

CHARLES R.

Whereas Nathaniel Bacon[1] the Younger, of the Plantation of Virginia,
and others his Adherents and Complices (being Persons of mean and
desperate Fortunes) have lately in a Traiterous and Rebellious manner
levyed War within the said Plantation, against the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and more particularly being Assembled in a Warlike manner to
the number of about Five Hundred Persons, did in the Moneth of June
last past, Inviron and Besiege the Governor and Assembly of the said
Plantation (then met together about the Publique affairs of the same
Plantation) and did by Menaces and Threats of present Death compel the
said Governor and Assembly to pass divers pretended Acts: To the end
therefore that the said Nathaniel Bacon and his Complices may suffer
such punishment as for their Treason and Rebellion they have justly
deserved; His Majesty doth (by this His Royal Proclamation) Publish and
Declare, That the said Nathaniel Bacon, and all and every such Persons
and Person, being His Majesties Subjects within the said Plantation,
as have taken Arms under, willingly joyned with, or assisted, or shall
hereafter take Arms under, willingly joyn with, or assist the said
Nathaniel Bacon, in raising or carrying on the War (by him as aforesaid
levyed) are and shall be guilty of the crime of High Treason. And
His Majesty doth hereby strictly Charge and Command all His Loving
Subjects, That they do use their utmost endeavour to Apprehend and
Secure the Persons of the said Nathaniel Bacon, and of all and every
the said Complices, in order to the bringing of them to their Legal
Tryal. And for the better encouragement of His Majesties said Loving
Subjects to Apprehend and bring to Justice the said Nathaniel Bacon
(who hath been chief Contriver and Ring-leader of the said Rebellion)
His Majesty doth hereby Declare, That such Person or Persons as shall
Apprehend the said Nathaniel Bacon, and him shall bring before His
Majesties Governor, Deputy Governor, or other Commander in Chief of His
Majesties Forces within the said Plantation, shall have as a Reward
from His Majesties Royal Bounty, the sum of Three Hundred Pounds
Sterling, to be paid in Money by the Lieutenant Governor. And because
it may be probable that many of the Adherents and Complices of the said
Nathaniel Bacon may have been seduced by him into this said Rebellion,
by specious, though false pretences; His Majesty out of His Royal Pity
and Compassion to his seduced Subjects, doth hereby Declare, That if
any of His Subjects who have or shall have ingaged with, or adhered to
the said Nathaniel Bacon in the said Rebellion, shall within the space
of Twenty days after the publishing of this His Royal Proclamation,
submit himself to His Majesties Government, and before the Governor,
Deputy Governor, or other Commander in Chief of His Majesties Forces
within the said Plantation, take the Oath of Obedience mentioned in the
Act of Parliament made in England in the Third year of the Reign of
His Majesties Royal Grandfather, and give such Security for his future
good behaviour, as the said Governor, Deputy Governor, or Commander
in Chief shall approve of, That then such Person so submitting, taking
such Oath, and giving such Security, is hereby pardoned and forgiven
the Rebellion and Treason by him committed, and shall be free from
all punishments and forfeitures for or by reason of the same. And His
Majesty doth hereby further Declare, That if any of His Subjects who
have engaged, or shall engage with, or have adhered, or shall adhere
to the said Nathaniel Bacon in the said Rebellion, shall not accept of
this His Majesties gracious offer of Pardon, but shall after the said
Twenty days expired, persist and continue in the said Rebellion, That
then such of the Servants or Slaves of such persons so persisting and
continuing such Rebellion, as shall render themselves to, and take up
Arms under His Majesties Governor, Deputy Governor, or other Commander
in Chief of His Majesties Forces within the said Plantation, shall have
their Liberty, and be for ever Discharged and Free from the Service of
the said Offenders. And to the intent His Majesties Loving Subjects
within the said Plantation may understand how desirous and careful
His Majesty is to remove from them all just Grievances, His Majesty
doth hereby make known to all His said Subjects, That he hath not only
alrady given particular Instructions to His Governor, to reduce the
Salaries of the Members of the Assembly to such moderate rates as may
render them less burthensom to the Countrey, but hath also appointed
and sent into the said Plantation, Herbert Jeffreys Esq; Sir John
Berry Knight, and Francis Morison Esq; His Majesties Commissioners, to
inquire into, and report to His Majesty all such other Grievances as
His Majesties subjects within the said Plantation do at present lye
under, to the end that such relief and redress may be made therein, as
shall be agreeable to His Majesties Royal Wisdom and Compassion. And
although the pretended Acts or Laws made in the said Assembly of June
last (being in manner aforesaid obtained) are in themselves null and
void, yet to the intent no Person may pretend ignorance, His Majesty
hath thought fit hereby to Declare and Publish His Royal Pleasure to
be, That all and every Acts and Act, made or pretended to be made by
the said Governor and Assembly in the late Grand Assembly held at James
City in the Moneth of June last past, shall be taken and held as null
and void, and shall not for the future be observed or put in execution.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall this Seven and Twentieth day of
October, 1676. In the Eight and twentieth year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1676.

_2 pp. folio. Two copies in P. R. O._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] The most comprehensive account of Bacon's Rebellion is to be found
in Osgood's _American Colonies_, iii, ch, 8. The above proclamation
was ordered by the King in Council, Sept. 20, 1676, and altered and
approved Oct. 25 (see _Cal. State Papers, Colonial, 1675-1676_, pp.
455, 474).




1681, April 2.

[Granting Pennsylvania to William Penn.]


CHARLES R.

Whereas His Majesty, in consideration of the great Merit and Faithful
Services of Sir William Penn deceased, and for divers other good Causes
Him thereunto moving, hath been Graciously pleased by Letters Patents
bearing Date the Fourth day of March last past,[1] to Give and Grant
unto William Penn Esquire, Son and Heir of the said Sir William Penn,
all that Tract of Land in America, called by the Name of Pennsilvania,
as the same is Bounded on the East by Delaware River, from Twelve Miles
distance Northwards of Newcastle Town, unto the Three and fourtieth
Degree of Northern Latitude, if the said River doth extend so far
Northwards, and if the said River shall not extend so far Northward,
then by the said River so far as it doth extend: And from the Head of
the said River, the Eastern Bounds to be determined by a Meridian Line
to be Drawn from the Head of the said River, unto the said Three and
fourtieth Degree, the said Province to extend Westward Five Degrees
in Longitude, to be Computed from the said Eastern Bounds, and to be
Bounded on the North, by the Beginning of the Three and fourtieth
Degree of Northern Latitude, and on the south by a Circle Drawn at
Twelve Miles distance from Newcastle Northwards, and Westwards unto the
Beginning of the Fourtieth Degree of Northern Latitude, and then by
a straight line Westwards to the limit of Longitude above mentioned,
together with all Powers, Preheminencies and Jurisdictions necessary
for the Government of the said Province, as by the said Letters
Patents, Reference being thereunto had, doth more at large appear.

His Majesty doth therefore hereby Publish and Declare His Royal Will
and Pleasure, That all Persons Settled or Inhabiting within the Limits
of the said Province, do yield all Due Obedience to the said William
Penn, His Heirs and Assigns, as absolute Proprietaries and Governours
thereof, as also to the Deputy or Deputies, Agents or Lieutenants,
Lawfully Commissionated by him or them, according to the Powers and
Authorities Granted by the said Letters Patents; Wherewith His Majesty
Expects and Requires a ready Complyance from all Persons whom it may
concern, as they tender His Majesties Displeasure.

Given at the Court at Whitehall the Second day of April 1681. In the
Three and thirtieth year of Our Reign.

  To the Inhabitants and
  Planters of the Province
  of Pennsilvania.

  By his Majesties Command,
  CONWAY.

London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and
Henry Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1681.

_1 p. folio. Copy in B. M. Printed in "Charter to William Penn, and
Laws of the Province of Pennsylvania," 1879, p. 466, from original in
Land Office at Harrisburg. Reproduced in lithograph fac-simile in J. J.
Smith's "American Historical and Literary Curiosities," 1860, series 2,
pl. 43._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] The charter of Pennsylvania, March 4, 1681, is printed in the
_Charter to William Penn, and Laws of the Province of Pennsylvania_,
Harrisburg, 1879, where a fac-simile of the original document is also
reproduced. In the Public Record Office is a draft of the charter,
dated February 28, 1681, and signed by the clerk of the Chapel of the
Rolls (_Cal. State Papers, Colonial, 1681-1685_, p. 14; see also _Acts
of Privy Council_, ii, 17). For the founding of Pennsylvania, see
Shepherd's _History of Proprietary Government in Pennsylvania_.




1685, February 6.

[Continuing Officers in the Colonies.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION.

JAMES R.

Forasmuch as it hath pleased Almighty God lately to call unto his
infinite Mercy the most High and Mighty Prince, Charles the Second of
most Blessed Memory, the Kings Majesties most Dear and most Entirely
Beloved Brother, by whose Decease the Authority and Power of the most
part of the Officers and Places of Jurisdiction and Government within
his Majesties Dominions did cease and fail, the Soveraign Person
failing, from whom the same were derived. The Kings most Excellent
Majesty in His Princely Wisdom and Care of the State (reserving to
His Own Judgment hereafter, the Reformation and Redress of any Abuses
in Mis-government, upon due Knowledge and Examination thereof) is
Pleased, and hath so expresly Signified, That all Persons that at the
time of the Decease of the late Kings His dearly beloved Brother,
were Duly and Lawfully Possessed of, or Invested in any Office, or
Place of Authority or Government, either Civil or Military, within His
Majesties Realm of England and Ireland, Islands of Jerzey and Guernsey,
Sark or Alderney, or within His Majesties Colonies and Plantations in
America; And namely, all Governors, Lieutenants or Deputy-Governors,
Councellors, Judges, Justices, Provost-Marshals, Sheriffs, Justices
of the Peace, and all others in place of Government, either Meaner or
Superior, as aforesaid; And all other Officers and Ministers, whose
Interests and Estates in their Offices are determined, shall be, and
shall hold themselves continued in the said Places and Offices, under
the same Condition as formerly they held and enjoyed the same, until
His Majesties Pleasure be further known, or that other Provision be
made pursuant to His late Majesties Commission and Instructions to
His Governors and Officers of the Islands, Colonies and Plantations
aforesaid. And that in the mean while, for the Preservation of the
State, and necessary Proceedings in matters of Justice, and for the
Safety and Service of the State; All the said Persons of whatsoever
Degree or Condition may not fail, every one severally, according
to his Place, Office or Charge, to proceed in the Performance of
all Duties thereunto belonging, as formerly appertained unto them,
while the late King was living. And further, His Majesty doth hereby
Will and Command all and singular His Highnesses Subjects, of what
Estate, Dignity, and Degree, they or any of them be, to be Aiding,
Helping and Assisting, and at the Commandment of the said Officers and
Ministers, in the Performance and Execution of the said Offices and
Places, as they and every of them Tender His Majesties Displeasure,
and will answer the Contrary at their uttermost Perils. And further,
His Majesty's Will and Pleasure and Express Commandment is, That all
Orders and Directions Made or Given by the Late King, of most Blessed
Memory, the Lords of His Privy-Council, or His Principal Secretaries
of State, or other Legal Authority, derived from His said Majesty in
His Lifetime, shall be Obeyed and Performed by all and every Person and
Persons, and all and every Thing and Things to be done thereupon, shall
Proceed as Fully and Amply as the same should have been Obeyed or Done,
in the Life of the said Late King, His Majesty's most Dearly and most
Entirely Beloved Brother, until His Majesties Pleasure be further known
thereupon.[1]

Given at the Court at Whitehall, the Sixth Day of February, In the
First Year of His Majesty's Reign of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, and other His Majesties Territories and Dominions.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceas'd: And by Henry
Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1684.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Bodl., B. M., Ch., Crawf., Dalk., Guild., P. C.,
Q. C., and T. C. D.; also in Mass. State Archives. Entered in Privy
Council Register, II James, vol. 1, p. 6._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] A letter to the several Governors of the Plantations was drawn
up in the Council, February 6, 1685, announcing the death of King
Charles, ordering that the new King be proclaimed in the colonies, and
transmitting the above proclamation (_Acts of Privy Council_, ii, 74;
see also _Cal. State Papers, Colonial, 1685-1688_, p. 1).




1685, April 1.

[Prohibiting African Trade to Plantations.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

TO PROHIBIT HIS MAJESTIES SUBJECTS TO TRADE WITHIN THE LIMITS
ASSIGNED TO THE ROYAL AFRICAN COMPANY OF ENGLAND, EXCEPT THOSE OF THE
COMPANY.

JAMES R.

Whereas Our Dearly Beloved Brother the late King of ever Blessed
Memory, for the Supporting and Managing of a Trade very beneficial
to this Our Kingdom, and Our Foreign Plantations upon the Coasts of
Guiny, Buiny, Angola, and other Parts and Places in Africa, from the
Port of Sally in South-Barbary inclusive, to the Cape De Bona Esperanza
inclusive, by His Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England,
bearing Date the Twenty seventh day of September, in the Four and
twentieth year of His Reign, did Incorporate divers of His Loving
Subjects, by the Name of the Royal African Company of England;[1] and
did thereby Grant unto the said Company the whole, intire, and onely
Trade into, and from Africa aforesaid, and the Islands and Places near
adjoyning to the Coast of Africa, and comprehended within the Limits
aforesaid, with Prohibition to all other His Majesties Subjects to
Trade there: And that in pursuance to such Grant, the said Company
have Raised a very Great Stock Sufficient to Manage the Trade thereof;
and have since been at great Charges and Expence in Fortifying and
Settling divers Garrisons, Forts and Factories for the better Securing
of the said Trade, whereby the same began to flourish, to the great
Commodity of this Kingdom, and Our Foreign Plantations, until of late
disturbed by several ill disposed Persons, who preferring their private
profit before the Publick Good, have contrary to the said Royal Grant,
and the Express Proclamation of the King Our Dearly Beloved Brother,
bearing Date the Thirtieth day of November, in the Six and twentieth
year of His Reign, in a Clandestine and Disorderly manner, Traded
into those Parts, to the apparent danger of the Decay and Destruction
of the said Trade, and in manifest Contempt and Violation of the
undoubted Prerogative of the Crown, whose Right it is by the known Laws
of these Our Realms, to Limit and Regulate such Foreign Trades into
those Remote Parts of the World; We taking the same into Our Princely
Consideration, Do not onely give Leave and Direct, That the Persons who
have so Contemptuously Violated the said Companies Charter, and the
said Proclamation, be Prosecuted in Our Name at Law, in order to their
Condign Punishment according to their Demerits: But for the Prevention
of the like evil Practices for the future, We have thought fit, with
Advice of Our Privy Council, to Publish and Declare Our Royal Will and
Pleasure to be, And We do hereby strictly Prohibit and Forbid all and
every of Our Subjects whatsoever, except the said Royal Company and
their Successors, and such as shall be Imployed or Licenced by them,
at any time or times hereafter to Send or Navigate any Ship or Ships,
Vessel or Vessels, or Exercise any Trade to or from any of the Parts
or Coasts of Africa from Sally, to Cape De Bona Esperanza, or any of
the Islands near adjoyning thereunto as aforesaid, or from thence to
carry any Negro Servants, Gold, Elephants Teeth, or any other Goods
and Merchandizes of the Product or Manufacture of the said Places upon
Pain of Our High Displeasure, and the Forfeiture and Loss of the said
Negroes, Gold, Elephants Teeth, and all other Goods and Merchandizes,
and the Ships and Vessels which shall be taken or found Trading in any
Place or Places upon the Coast of Africa aforesaid, within the Limits
aforesaid: And We do hereby also strictly Require and Command all Our
Governours, Deputy-Governours, Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Generals,
Judges of Our Courts of Admiralty, Commanders of Our Forts and Castles,
Captains of Our Royal Ships, Justices of the Peace, Provost-Marshals,
Marshals, Comptrollers, Collectors of Our Customs, Waiters, Searchers,
and all other Our Officers and Ministers Civil and Military, by Sea
or Land, in every of Our said American Dominions or Plantations, to
take effectual Care That no Person or Persons whatsoever, within
their respective Limits or Jurisdictions, (except the said Company
and their Successors, and such as shall be Employed or Licenced by
them) do Send or Navigate any Ships or Vessels, or Exercise any Trade
from any of Our said Dominions or Plantations, to any Part of the
said Coast of Africa, within the Limits aforesaid; Or from thence to
Import any Negro Servants, Gold, Elephants Teeth, or other Goods of
the Product of any of those Parts, into any of Our said Dominions or
Plantations in America; And if any Person or Persons shall presume to
Act or Do in any wise Contrary to this Our Royal Proclamation, To the
end Our Will and Pleasure herein may be the better Observed, We do
further Will and Require and strictly Command all Our said Governours,
Deputy-Governours, Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Generals, Judges of Our
Court of Admiralty, Commanders of Our Forts and Castles, Captains of
Our Royal Ships, Justices of the Peace, Provost Marshals, Marshals,
Comptrollers, Collectors of Our Customs, Waiters, Searchers, and all
other Our Officers and Ministers Civil and Military, by Sea or Land,
in every of Our said American Dominions and Plantations, That as often
as need shall require, They be Aiding and Assisting to the said Royal
African Company, their Successors, Factors, Deputies or Assigns, to
Attach, Arrest, Take, and Seize all such Ship or Ships, Vessel or
Vessels, Negro Servants, Gold, Elephants Teeth, or Goods, Wares and
Merchandizes wheresoever they shall be found, for Our use, according to
Our Royal Charter Granted to the said Company, upon Pain of Our High
Displeasure, and as they will Answer the Contrary at their Perils: And
We do hereby Require and Command all and every of Our Subjects who are
or reside in Africa aforesaid, within the Limits aforesaid, or who are
upon the Sea in their Voyage thither, Except such who are Imployed or
Licenced by the said Company, That they do within Four Months next
ensuing the Date hereof, Depart thence, and Return into this Kingdom,
upon Pain and Peril that may fall thereon.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the First Day of April, 1685. In the
First Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceas'd: And by Henry
Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, 1685.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Bodl., B. M., Ch., Crawf., Guild., P. C., Q. C.,
and T. C. D. Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in Privy Council
Register, II James, vol. 1, p. 55. Noted in "London Gazette," April 9,
1685._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] See _ante_, p. 121.




1688, January 20.

[Suppressing Pirates in America.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR THE MORE EFFECTUAL REDUCING AND SUPPRESSING OF PIRATES AND
PRIVATEERS IN AMERICA.

JAMES R.

Whereas frequent Robberies and Piracies have been, and are daily
committed by great numbers of Pirates and Privateers as well on the
Seas as on the Land of and in America, which hath occasioned a great
prejudice and obstruction to the Trade and Commerce as well of Our
Subjects, as of the Subjects of Our Allies, and hath given a great
Scandal and Disturbance to Our Government in those Parts. And whereas
We being resolved to take some effectual course for the putting an end
to all such Outragious Insolencies, have therefore thought it requisite
to send a Squadron of Ships into the Parts aforesaid, under the Command
of Our Trusty and Welbeloved Servant Sir Robert Holmes,[1] Knight,
Our Governor of Our Isle of Wight, and have otherwise given him all
necessary Powers for Suppressing of the said Pirates and Privateers,
either by force, or assurance of Pardon, and have Constituted and
Appointed the said Sir Robert Holmes Our Sole Commissioner in that
Affair; Now to the end that this Our Royal Purpose may be the better
put in Execution, and that none of the said Offenders may have any
cause of excuse or pretence left for want of a due Advertisement of
Our Intended Mercy and Clemency towards them, upon their withdrawing
themselves from their said wicked and Piratical courses for the future:
We are Graciously pleased hereby to Promise and Declare, That in case
any such Pirate or Privateer Pirates or Privateers shall within the
space of Twelve months next ensuing the Date of this Our Proclamation,
either in Person, or by their Agents Surrender, or become obliged
to Surrender him or themselves unto the said Sir Robert Holmes, or
any other person or persons appointed by him, or such other person
or persons as in case of his Death shall be further Constituted and
Appointed by Us, within any of Our said Islands, Plantations, Colonies,
or other Places on the Sea or Land, lying between the Tropiques of
Cancer and Capricorn in America, and in case any Pirate or Privateer,
Pirates or Privateers shall within the space of Fifteen months next
ensuing the Date of these Presents, Surrender, or become obliged to
Surrender him or themselves to the said Sir Robert Holmes, or any
others Appointed as aforesaid, in any other parts of America, or
within Our Kingdom of England, and shall give sufficient Security to
be approved of by the said Sir Robert Holmes, or in case of his Death,
by such other person or persons as shall be further Appointed by Us,
for his or their future good Behaviour, We will, upon such humble
Submission, and after such Security given, Grant unto such Pirate or
Pirates, Privateer or Privateers, Our Gracious, Full and Ample Pardon
for all Piracies or Robberies committed by him or them upon the Sea or
Land before the Date of these Presents. And we do hereby straightly
Charge and Command all and singular Our Admirals, Vice-Admirals,
Chief Governours, Captains, Commanders, Mariners, Seamen, and all
Our Officers and Ministers of and in all and every Our said Islands,
Plantations, Colonies, and Territories whatsoever, and of all and every
Our Ships of War and other Vessels, and all other Our Officers and
Subjects whatsoever, not only to be Aiding, Favouring and Assisting in
their several Places and Stations, unto the said Sir Robert Holmes,
and such other Person or Persons as shall be appointed as aforesaid
in and for the more effectual Reducing and Suppressing of all manner
of Pirates and Privateers within the Limits and Parts aforesaid, or
any of them, but also (upon the producing a Certificate or Instrument
under the Hand and Seal of the said Sir Robert Holmes, or such other
Person as in case of his Death shall be further Appointed by Us,
signifying that any Pirate or Privateer, Pirates or Privateers hath or
have Surrendered him or themselves unto the said Sir Robert Holmes, or
such other Person or Persons appointed as aforesaid, and given Security
for their future good Behaviour according to the Tenor of these
Presents) to permit and suffer the said person or persons lawfully to
Pass and Travel either by Sea or Land, without any Let, Hindrance
or Molestation whatsoever, to or from any of Our said Islands,
Plantations or Colonies, or into Our Kingdom of England, as soon as
conveniently may be, in Order to his or their receiving Our full and
Gracious Pardon as aforesaid, and that in the meantime no Indictment,
Process, or other Proceeding shall be had in any of Our Courts of
Record, or elsewhere, against any such person or persons producing such
Certificate or Instrument, for any Piracy or Robbery by him or them
committed as aforesaid, before the Date of these Presents. Provided
always, That if any of the said Offender or Offenders whatsoever shall
after the Publishing of this Our Proclamation, in contempt thereof, and
of Our Princely Mercy and Clemency to them hereby offered, wilfully
and obstinately persist in their Piracies, Robberies and Outragious
Practices, or shall not Surrender themselves in manner aforesaid;
Then We do hereby expressly Direct and Command, That all and every
such person and persons shall be pursued with the utmost Severity,
and with the greatest Rigour that may be, until they and every of
them be utterly Suppressed and Destroyed; We Declaring it to be Our
Royal Purpose and Resolution, That they and every of them shall from
thenceforth be finally Excluded and Debarr'd from receiving any further
Favour or Mercy. And lastly We do hereby Revoke, Annul and make void
all Proclamations by Us formerly Issued touching the Premisses herein
above mentioned, or any of them.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall this Twentieth Day of January,
1687/8. In the Third Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1687/8.

_2 pp. folio. Copies in Antiq., Bodl., B. M., Ch., Crawf., Dalk.,
Guild., P. C., Q. C., and T. C. D.; also in John Carter Brown Library.
Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in Privy Council Register, II James,
vol. 2, p. 577. Printed in "London Gazette," January 26, 1688._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Holmes was commissioned by the King, August 21, 1687, to command a
squadron to be sent to the West Indies for the suppression of pirates.
On November 12, letters patent were issued granting to him all goods
that he should take from the pirates for three years (_Cal. State
Papers, Colonial, 1685-1688_, pp. 421, 467). In the Colonial Entry
Books in the Public Record Office are entered the orders from the King
to the Governors of the various colonies requiring the publication of
this proclamation (_Idem_, p. 488).




1688, March 31.

[Prohibiting General Trading at Hudson's Bay.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

PROHIBITING HIS MAJESTIES SUBJECTS TO TRADE WITHIN THE LIMITS
ASSIGNED TO THE GOVERNOUR AND COMPANY OF ADVENTURERS OF ENGLAND,
TRADING INTO HUDSON'S BAY, EXCEPT THOSE OF THE COMPANY.

JAMES R.

Whereas Our Dearest Brother King Charles the Second of blessed Memory,
did by His Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, bearing
Date the Second day of May, in the Two and twentieth Year of His
Reign,[1] Incorporate a Governour and Company for carrying on a Trade
in the North-west parts of America within the Streights and Bay,
commonly called Hudson's Streights; and did Grant unto them and their
Successors, the Sole Trade and Commerce of all those Seas, Streights,
Bayes, Rivers, Lakes, Creeks, and Sounds in whatsoever Latitude they
should be, lying within the Entrance of the Streights commonly called
Hudson's Streights, together with all the Lands, Countreys, and
Territories upon the Coasts and Confines of the Seas, Bayes, Lakes,
Rivers, Creeks and Sounds aforesaid, which were not then Possessed
by, or Granted to any of the Subjects of Our said Royal Brother, or
Possessed by the Subjects of any other Christian Prince or State,
Thereby Creating and Constituting the said Governour and Company for
the time being, and their Successors, the true and absolute Lords and
Proprietors of the same Territories, Limits and Places aforesaid, and
of all other the Premisses, with express Prohibition to all other the
Subjects of Our said Royal Brother to Trade to the Parts aforesaid. And
whereas We are satisfied that the said Company hath for many years with
great Industry, and at a very great Charge and Expense, Settled divers
Factories, Erected several Fortifications, and maintained the Trade
in the Parts aforesaid, to the great Honour and Profit of this Our
Kingdom, until of late several ill-disposed Persons not being Members
of the said Company, nor Licensed by them, preferring their private
profit before the publick good, have contrary to the said Royal Grant,
in a clandestine and disorderly manner, Traded into those parts, to the
apparent prejudice, if not destruction, of the Trade aforesaid, and in
manifest Contempt of Our Prerogative Royal; and the better to colour
their evil practices, do frame Designs to Hire, or do Hire themselves
out in the Service of, or in conjunction with Foreigners to Sail to
the Parts aforesaid, to undermine and destroy the said Companies
Trade.[2] We, taking the Premisses into Our Princely Consideration,
do not only give Leave and Direct, That the Persons who have so
contemptuously violated the said Companies Charter, be Prosecuted in
Our Name at Law, in order to their condign Punishment according to
their demerits; But for prevention of the like evil practices for the
future, We have thought fit, with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to
Publish and Declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure to be, and We do hereby
strictly Prohibit and Forbid that none of Our Subjects whatsoever,
except the said Governour and Company and their Successors, and such
as shall be duly Licensed by them at any time or times hereafter do
presume to send or Navigate any Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels, or
exercise any Trade whatsoever directly or indirectly on their own
accounts, or in the Service of, or in conjunction with any Foreigner
or Foreigners whatsoever, to, in or from the said Streights and Bay,
called Hudson's Streights, or to, in or from any Bayes, Rivers, Creeks
or Places whatsoever, by what names or denominations soever they or
any of them have been heretofore, or shall hereafter be called or
distinguished, that now are or lie within the Entrance of Hudson's
Streights aforesaid, in what Latitude or Longitude soever the same or
any of them do, doth or shall lie, remain or be within the Liberties,
Territories, or Priviledges of the said Company, upon pain of Our high
Displeasure, and the forfeiture and loss of the Goods, Merchandizes,
Ships and Vessels which shall be taken or found Trading in any the
Place or Places aforesaid, or within the Limits aforesaid. And We do
hereby strictly Charge and Command all and every Our Subjects of what
degree or quality soever, now Trading or Traffiquing, or designing to
Trade or Traffique to or from the Parts aforesaid, or any of them,
contrary to the true meaning of the said Companies Charter, That
they forthwith do cease and forbear such their Trade and Traffique,
and withdraw themselves from the parts aforesaid. And We do further
hereby streightly Require and Command all and singular Our Governours,
Lieutenant-Governours, Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Generals, Judges of
all Our Courts of Admiralty, Commanders of our Forts and Castles,
Captains of Our Royal Ships, Justices of the Peace, Provost-Marshals,
Marshals, Comptrollers, Collectors of Our Customs, Wayters, Searchers,
and all other Our Officers and Ministers Civil and Military by Sea or
Land, in all and every of Our Dominions or Plantations, and all other
Our Subjects whatsoever and wheresoever, to take effectual care that
no person or persons whatsoever (except the said Company and their
Successors, and such as shall be duly Licensed) do send or Navigate any
Ships or Vessels, or exercise any Trade directly or indirectly from
any of Our Kingdoms, Dominions or Plantations whatsoever, contrary
to the said Charter granted to the said Company as aforesaid, to any
the Places or Limits aforesaid, or from thence to any of Our said
Kingdoms, Dominions, Plantations, or other Places; And if any person
or persons shall presume to act or do in any wise contrary to this Our
Royal Proclamation, We do Will, Require and streightly Command all
and singular Our said Governours, Lieutenant-Governours, Admirals,
Vice-Admirals, Generals, Judges of Our Courts of Admiralty, Commanders
of Our Forts and Castles, Captains of Our Royal Ships, Justices of the
Peace, Provost-Marshals, Marshals, Sheriffs, Comptrollers, Collectors
of Our Customs, Wayters, Searchers, and all other Our Officers and
Ministers Civil and Military by Sea or Land in every of Our said
Dominions and Plantations, and all other Our Officers, Ministers and
Subjects whatsoever and wheresoever, that as often as need shall
require, they and every of them respectively be Aiding and Assisting
to the said Company, their Factors, Deputies, or Assigns, to Attach,
Arrest, Take and Seize all such Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels,
Goods, Wares and Merchandizes of such Person or Persons as shall be
Used, Employed, or Traded in contrary to the Charter Granted to the
said Company, wheresoever they shall be found, for Our Use, upon pain
of Our high Displeasure, and as they will answer the contrary at their
Perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the One and thirtieth day of March
1688. In the Fourth Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1688.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Bodl., B. M., Crawf., Guild., P. C., Q. C., and
T. C. D.; also in John Carter Brown Library. Entered on Patent Rolls;
entered in Privy Council Register, II James, vol. 2, p. 641. Printed in
"London Gazette," April 9, 1688._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The charter of May 2, 1670 is printed in Dobbs', _Account of the
Countries adjoining to Hudson's Bay_, p. 171, and elsewhere. For
the literature regarding the founding of this Company, see Winsor's
_Narrative and Critical History_, viii, 65.

[2] The Hudson Bay Company had petitioned for relief from interruptions
to their trade as early as July 13, 1682 (_Acts of Privy Council_, ii,
37). The Council order approving the above Proclamation was made March
30, 1688 (_Idem_, p. 108).




1689, February 19.

[Continuing Officers in the Colonies.]


BY THE KING AND QUEEN.

A PROCLAMATION

WILLIAM R.

Forasmuch as it hath pleased God to call Us to the Throne, And
that thereby it is incumbent upon Us to prevent any Inconvenience
to Our Subjects that may arise by not executing the Laws necessary
or conducing to the Peace and good Government of Our People, Wee
therefore do hereby Declare Our Royall Pleasure That all Persons being
Protestants, who at the time of the Receipt of these presents shalbe
duly and lawfully possessed of, or invested in any office or Place of
Authority or Governm^t either Civill or Military within Our Island of
[blank left in text] in America, And namely all Governors, Lieutenants,
or Deputy Governors, Councellors, Justices, Provost Marshalls, Sherifs,
Justices of the Peace, and all others in Place of Governm^t either
meaner or superior as aforesaid. And all other Officers and Ministers
whose Interests and Estates in their offices are determined, shall be,
and shall hold themselves continued in the said Places and offices
under the same condition as formerly they held and enjoyed the same,[1]
untill Our Pleasure be further known, or that other Provision be made
pursuant to his late Ma^{ys} Commission and Instructions to [blank
left in text] aforesaid, Which Wee do hereby Declare to be in full
force untill further Order from Us. And that in the mean while for the
Preservation of the State, all the said Persons of whatsoever Degree
or Condition do not fail every one severally according to his Place
Office or Charge, to proceed in the performance of all Dutys thereunto
belonging as formerly apperteyned unto them. And further Wee do hereby
will and command all and singular Our Subjects of what Estate, Dignity
and Degree they or any of them be, to be aiding, helping and assisting,
and at the Commandment of the said Officers and Ministers in the
Performance and Execution of the said Offices and Places, as they and
every of them tender Our Displeasure, and will answer the contrary at
their Perills.

Provided alwaies, that nothing herein shalbe Construed or taken to
Extend to give or continue any Authority, Priviledge, Jurisdiction or
Command to any Papist or Papists with the said [blank left in text].

Given at Our Court at Whitehall this 19^{th} day of February 1688. in
the first year of Our Reigne.

GOD SAVE KING WILLIAM AND QUEEN MARY.

_No printed copy found. Entered in Privy Council Register, III
William, vol. 1, p. 13._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] The Prince of Orange issued a circular to the Governors of the
Colonies, ordering all officers to be continued, on January 12, 1689,
but it was not until February 19, that the proclamation was approved
(_Cal. State Papers, Colonial, 1689-1692_, pp. 4, 7; _Acts of Privy
Council_, ii, 122).




1689, May 7.

[Declaration of War against France.]


THEIR MAJESTIES

DECLARATION

AGAINST THE FRENCH KING.

WILLIAM R.

It having pleased Almighty God to make Us the happy Instruments of
Rescuing these Nations from Great and Imminent Dangers, and to place
Us upon the Throne of these Kingdoms, We think Our Selves obliged to
endeavour to the uttermost to Promote the Welfare of Our People, which
can never be effectually secured, but by preventing the Miseries that
threaten them from Abroad.

When we consider the many unjust Methods the French King hath of late
Years taken to gratifie his Ambition, that he has not only Invaded the
Territories of the Emperor, and of the Empire now in Amity with Us,
laying Waste whole Countries, and destroying the Inhabitants by his
Armies, but Declared War against Our Allies without any Provocation,
in manifest Violation of the Treaties Confirmed by the Guaranty of
the Crown of England; We can do no less then Joyn with Our Allies in
opposing the Designs of the French King, as the Disturber of the Peace,
and the Common Enemy of the Christian World.

And besides the Obligations We lie under by Treaties with Our Allies,
which are a sufficient Justification of Us for taking up Arms at this
time, since they have called upon Us so to do, the many Injuries done
to Us and to Our Subjects, without any Reparation, by the French King,
are such, that (however of late Years they were not taken Notice of,
for Reasons well known to the World, nevertheless) We will not pass
them over without a Publick and Just Resentment of such Outrages.

It is not long since the French took Licences from the English Governor
of New-found-Land, to Fish in the Seas upon that Coast, and paid a
Tribute for such Licences, as an Acknowledgment of the sole Right of
the Crown of England to that Island; and yet of late, the Encroachments
of the French upon Our said Island, and Our Subjects Trade and Fishery,
have been more like the Invasions of an Enemy, then becoming Friends,
who enjoy'd the Advantages of that Trade only by Permission.

But that the French King should Invade Our Charibbee Islands, and
possess himself of Our Territories of the Province of New-York and
of Hudson's-Bay in a Hostile manner, seizing Our Forts, burning Our
Subjects Houses, and enriching his People with the Spoil of their Goods
and Merchandizes, detaining some of Our Subjects under the Hardship of
Imprisonment, causing others to be inhumanely kill'd, and driving the
rest to Sea in a Small Vessel, without Food and Necessaries to support
them, are Actions not becoming even an Enemy; and yet he was so far
from declaring himself so, that at that very time he was Negotiating
here in England by his Ministers, a Treaty of Neutrality and good
Correspondence in America.

The Proceedings of the French King against Our Subjects in Europe
are so Notorious, that We shall not need to enlarge upon them; His
countenancing the Seizure of English Ships by French Privateers,
forbidding the Importation of great part of the Product and
Manufactures of Our Kingdom, and imposing exorbitant Customs upon the
rest, notwithstanding the vast Advantage he and the French Nation reap
by their Commerce with England, are sufficient Evidences of his Designs
to destroy the Trade, and consequently to ruine the Navigation, upon
which the Wealth and Safety of this Nation very much depends.

The Right of the Flag, Inherent in the Crown of England, has been
Disputed by his Orders in Violation of Our Sovereignty of the Narrow
Seas, which in all Ages has been Asserted by Our Predecessors, and
We are resolv'd to Maintain for the Honour of Our Crown, and of the
English Nation.

But that which must nearly touch Us, is his unchristian Prosecution
of many of Our English Protestant Subjects in France, for matters of
Religion, contrary to the Law of Nations, and express Treaties, forcing
them to abjure their Religion by strange and unusual Cruelties, and
Imprisoning some of the Masters and Seamen of Our Merchant Ships,
and Condemning others to the Gallies, upon pretence of having on
Board, either some of his own miserable Protestant Subjects, or their
Effects; And Lastly, as he has for some years last past, endeavoured by
Insinuations and Promises of Assistance to overthrow the Government of
England; So now by open and violent Methods, and the actual Invasion
of Our Kingdom of Ireland, in support of Our Subjects in Arms, and in
Rebellion against Us, he is promoting the utter Extirpation of Our good
and Loyal Subjects in that Our Kingdom.

Being therefore thus necessitated to take up Arms, and Relying on the
help of Almighty God in Our just undertaking, We have thought fit to
Declare, and do hereby Declare War against the French King, and that We
will in Conjunction with Our Allies, Vigorously Prosecute the same by
Sea and Land (since he hath so unrighteously begun it) being assured
of the hearty Concurrence and Assistance of Our Subjects in support
of so good a Cause; Hereby Willing and Requiring Our General of Our
Forces, Our Commissioners for Executing the Office of High Admiral,
Our Lieutenants of Our several Counties, Governours of Our Forts and
Garisons, and all other Officers and Soldiers under them, by Sea and
Land, to do, and execute all acts of Hostility in the Prosecution
of this War against the French King, his Vassals and Subjects, and
to oppose their Attempts, Willing and Requiring all Our Subjects to
take Notice of the same, whom We henceforth strictly forbid to hold
any Correspondence or Communication with the said French King, or his
Subjects; And because there are remaining in Our Kingdoms many of the
Subjects of the French King; We do Declare and give Our Royal Word,
that all such of the French Nation as shall demean themselves dutifully
towards Us, and not Correspond with Our Enemies, shall be safe in their
Persons and Estates, and free from all molestation and trouble of any
Kind.

Given at Our Court at Hampton-Court, the Seventh Day of May, 1689. In
the First Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE KING WILLIAM AND QUEEN MARY.

London, Printed by Charles Bill, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the
King and Queen's most Excellent Majesties, 1689.

_1 p. folio. There are three issues, varying slightly in set-up. Copies
in Antiq., Bodl., B. M., Ch., Crawf., Dalk., Guild., P. C., P. R. O.,
and Q. C.; also in John Carter Brown Library. Printed in "London
Gazette," no. 2452._




1690, July 14.

[For Apprehending William Penn.]


BY THE KING AND QUEEN.

A PROCLAMATION.

MARIE R.

Whereas Their Majesties have received Information That the Persons
herein after particularly Named have Conspired together, and with
divers other disaffected Persons, to Disturb and destroy Their
Government, and for that purpose have Abetted and Adhered to Their
Majesties Enemies in the present Invasion, for which cause several
Warrants for High Treason have lately been Issued out against them,
but they have withdrawn themselves from their usual places of Abode,
and are fled from Justice; Their Majesties therefore have thought
fit by the Advice of Their Privy Council, to Issue this Their Royal
Proclamation: And Their Majesties do hereby Command and Require all
Their Loving Subjects to Discover, Take and Apprehend Edward Henry Earl
of Litchfeild, Thomas Earl of Aylesbury, William Lord Montgomery, Roger
Earl of Castlemaine, Richard Viscount Preston, Henry Lord Belasyse, Sir
Edward Hales, Sir Robert Thorold, Sir Robert Hamilton, Sir Theophilus
Oglethorp, Colonel Edward Sackvile, Lieutenant Colonel Duncan
Abercromy, Lieutenant Colonel William Richardson, Major Thomas Soaper,
Captain David Lloyd, William Pen[1] Esq; Edmund Elliot Esq; Marmaduke
Langdale Esq; and Edward Rutter wherever they may be found, and to
carry them before the next Justice of the Peace, or Chief Magistrate;
who is hereby Required to Commit them to the next Goal, there to
remain until they be thence delivered by due Course of Law: And Their
Majesties do hereby Require the said Justice or other Magistrate
immediately to give Notice thereof to Them or Their Privy Council:
And Their Majesties do hereby Publish and Declare to all Persons that
shall Conceal the Persons above named, or any of them, or be Aiding or
Assisting in the Concealing of them, or furthering their Escape, that
they shall be proceeded against for such their Offence with the utmost
Severity according to Law.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fourteenth Day of July, 1690.[2]
In the Second Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE KING WILLIAM AND QUEEN MARY.

London, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the
King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. 1690.

_1 p. folio. There are two issues, varying slightly in set-up and in
the cut of the royal arms. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Crawf., Dalk.,
D. H., Guild., P. C., P. R. O., and Q. C. Entered on Patent Rolls;
entered in Privy Council Register, III William, vol. 1, p. 479. Printed
in "London Gazette," July 17, 1690; reproduced in January 1909 number
of the "Journal of the Friends Historical Society."_

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Because of his friendship for James II, William Penn fell under
suspicion when William III came to the throne. On February 27, 1689, a
warrant was issued by the Privy Council for his arrest upon suspicion
of high treason (Privy Council Register, III William, vol. 1, p. 24).
In June 1690 the interception of a letter written to him by James II
caused him to be brought before the Privy Council. Upon receiving the
news of the proclamation including him among the King's enemies, he
at once surrenderd himself, but no evidence appearing against him, he
was discharged by the court of King's bench on November 28. (_Dict. of
National Biography_, xliv, 315).

[2] Dixon, in his _William Penn_ (1872 ed., p. 275), is evidently in
error in referring to this proclamation as issued on June 24. J. M.
Rigg, in his article on Penn in the _Dictionary of National Biography_,
gives the date as July 17, possibly because on one of the two copies of
the proclamation in the British Museum someone has written this date,
or because it was printed in the _London Gazette_ on that day.




1691, February 5.

[For Apprehending William Penn.]


BY THE KING AND QUEEN.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR DISCOVERING AND APPREHENDING THE LATE BISHOP OF ELY, WILLIAM
PENN, AND JAMES GRAHME.

MARIE R.

Whereas Their Majesties have received Information, That Francis late
Bishop of Ely, William Penn Esquire, and James Grahme Esquire, with
other Ill-affected Persons, have Designed and Endeavoured to Depose
Their Majesties, and Subvert the Government of this Kingdom, by
procuring an Invasion of the same by the French, and other Treasonable
Practices, and have to that end held Correspondence, and Conspired
with divers Enemies and Traitors, and particularly with Sir Richard
Grahme Baronet, (Viscount Preston in the Kingdom of Scotland) and John
Ashton Gent. lately Attainted of High Treason; For which Cause several
Warrants for High Treason have been Issued out against them, but they
have withdrawn themselves from their usual Places of Abode, and are
fled from Justice: Their Majesties therefore have thought fit, by and
with the Advice of Their Privy Council, to Issue this Their Royal
Proclamation; And Their Majesties do hereby Command and Require all
Their Loving Subjects to Discover, Take and Apprehend the said Francis
late Bishop of Ely, William Penn and James Grahme, wherever they may
be found, and to carry them before the next Justice of the Peace, or
Chief Magistrate, who is hereby Required to Commit them to the next
Goal, there to remain until they be thence Delivered by due Course of
Law; And Their Majesties do hereby Require the said Justice or other
Magistrate, immediately to give Notice thereof to Them or Their Privy
Council. And Their Majesties do hereby Publish and Declare to all
Persons that shall Conceal the Persons above named, or any of them, or
be Aiding or Assisting in the Concealing of them, or furthering their
Escape, that they shall be Proceeded against for such their Offence
with the utmost Severity according to Law.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fifth Day of February, 1690/1. In
the Second Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE KING WILLIAM AND QUEEN MARY.

London, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the
King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. 1690.

_1 p. folio. There are two issues, varying slightly in set-up and in
the cut of the royal arms. Copies in Adv., B. M., Crawf., Dalk., D. H.,
Guild., P. C., P. R. O., and T. C. D. Entered on Patent Rolls; entered
in Privy Council Register, III William, vol. 2, p. 112. Printed in
"London Gazette," February 7, 1691; reproduced in the January number of
the "Journal of the Friends Historical Society."_




1700, January 29.

[For Apprehending Author of Darien Libel.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION.

WILLIAM R.

Whereas We have been Informed, That a False, Scandalous, and Traiterous
Libel, Intituled, An Inquiry into the Causes of the Miscarriage of the
Scotch-Colony at Darien, or, An Answer to a Libel, Intituled, A Defence
of the Scots Abdicating Darien,[1] has been Printed and Dispersed, the
Design of which libel was to Create a Misunderstanding between Our
good Subjects of England and Scotland, and to Stir up Sedition and
Rebellion, and is Injurious to, and Reflects on the Honour of both
Nations: And whereas the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament
Assembled, have humbly besought Us,[2] to Issue Our Royal Proclamation
for Discovering and Apprehending of the Author and Printer of the
said Libel; We therefore (with the Advice of Our Privy Council) have
thought fit to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation, hereby Requiring
and Commanding all Our Loving Subjects whatsoever, to Discover and
Apprehend the Author and Printer of the said Libel, to the end they
may be dealt withal and proceeded against according to Law. And We
do hereby Promise and Declare, That whosoever shall Discover or
Apprehend the Author of the said Libel, so as he may be brought to
Justice, shall Have and Receive, as a Reward for such Discovery and
Apprehending, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds: And that whosoever shall
Discover or Apprehend the Printer thereof, so as he may be brought to
Justice, shall Have and Receive, as a Reward for such Discovery or
Apprehending, the Sum of Two hundred Pounds; Which said respective Sums
of Five hundred Pounds and Two hundred Pounds, the Commissioners of Our
Treasury are hereby Required and Directed to Pay accordingly. And We
do hereby further Promise and Declare, That if any Person (other than
the Author himself) who was any ways Privy to, or Instrumental in the
Printing and Dispersing the said Libel, shall Discover or Apprehend the
Author thereof, the Person making such Discovery, or Apprehending the
said Author, shall not only have the said Sum of Five hundred Pounds,
as aforesaid, but also Our Gracious Pardon for his Offence. And We do
hereby strictly Charge and Command all Our Loving Subjects (as they
will answer the contrary at their Perils) that they do not any ways
Conceal, but Discover and Apprehend the Author and Printer of the
said Libel, to the end they may be Proceeded against with the utmost
Severity according to Law.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Twenty ninth Day of January,
1699. In the Eleventh Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceas'd, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1699.

_1 p. folio. There are two issues varying slightly in set-up and in the
cut of the royal arms. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Dalk., and P. R. O.;
also in John Carter Brown Library. There is also a manuscript draft
of this proclamation in British Museum Additional MSS., 21136, fol.
63. Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in Privy Council Register, III
William, vol. 5, p. 412. Printed in "London Gazette," February 1,
1700._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The tract with this title was published with no place of imprint,
1699, pp. 84, and in another edition with the imprint, Glascow, 1700,
pp. 112. _A Defence of the Scots abdicating Darien_, pp. 50, has 1700
as the date of imprint. A copy of the first tract is in the Library
of Congress, and copies of the last two tracts are in the American
Antiquarian Society and John Carter Brown Library.

[2] The House of Commons, on January 15, 1700, resolved that the book
was "a false, scandalous, and traitorous libel," that it should be
burned by the common hangman, and that an address should be presented
to the King seeking a proclamation to apprehend the author of the book
(_Commons Journals_, xiii, 123).




1701, March 6.

[For the Apprehension of Pirates.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION.

WILLIAM R.

Whereas We have received Information, That notwithstanding the great
Care that hitherto hath been taken to Prevent Piracies, divers Pirates
do continue to Infest the Seas wherein Our Subjects Trade, to the
great Damage of the Merchants, and Discouragement of Navigation;[1]
We therefore (with the Advice of Our Privy Council) have thought fit
to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation;[2] And We do hereby Promise and
Declare, That if any Person or Persons belonging to the Company or
Ships Crew of any Pirate Ship or Vessel, shall at any time, after the
Date hereof, Seize, or cause to be Seized, the Person Commanding such
Ship or Vessel, and any one or more Persons belonging to such Ship or
Vessel, together with the said Ship or Vessel, and Goods, and Deliver
them into the Custody of the Chief Magistrate of any of our Ports in
Our Kingdoms of England or Ireland; Or in America, into the Custody
of Our Governors, or Commanders in Chief of Our Islands, Colonies,
or Plantations of Barbados, the Leeward Islands, Jamaica, Bermudos,
Virginia, Maryland, New yorke or the Massachusetts Bay in New England,
or of the Commander in Chief of Our Ships of War at Newfound Land,
for the time being; Or in Africa, into the Custody of the Chief or
Chiefs of the Royal African Company at Cape Corfe Castle, on the Gold
Coast, at James Fort in the River of Gambia, or at Whiddah in the
South-part of Guinea, for the time being; And shall give Evidence
against the Persons so Seized and Secured, so as they may be Convicted
of Piracy, the Person or Persons so Seizing, or causing to be Seized,
such Pirate or Pirates, and Securing such Ship or Vessel, and Goods,
as aforesaid, shall not only have Our most Gracious Pardon for the
Piracies before that time Committed by him or them, but also, upon the
Conviction of such Pirate or Pirates, receive as a Reward for his or
their good Service, one moiety of Our Thirds of such Ship or Vessel,
and Goods, where no more than those Thirds shall be by Us claimed; But
if the whole Ship and Goods shall belong to Us, for want of a timely
and legal Demand thereof by the first Proprietor, then such Person or
Persons shall Receive, as a Reward, the Sum of Twenty five Pound for
every Hundred Pounds Value of such Ship or Vessel, and Goods; to be
paid unto them by such Chief Magistrate, Governor, Commander, or other
Persons aforesaid, in the Places where such Seizure and Conviction
shall be made; who are hereby Required to Pay the same, upon the
Parties producing a Certificate of such Seizure and Conviction made,
and Ship or Vessel, and Goods Secured, under the Hands and Seals of the
Persons, or the Major Part of them, before whom such Pirates have been
Convicted (which Persons are hereby Required to give such Certificate,
gratis, on Demand) and upon Producing of which Certificate, We do
hereby Require our Judge or Judges of Admiralty in England, or
elsewhere, and all other Persons impowered by Commission to Hear and
Determine Piracies in Europe, Africa and America, to Stay any further
Proceedings against such Person or Persons, who shall produce such
Certificate, until he or they can obtain Our most Gracious Pardon. And
We do hereby further Declare, That if any Person or Persons, belonging
to any Pirate Ship or Vessel, shall Seize and Apprehend the Commanding
Officer of any Pirate Ship or Vessel, or any of the Crew belonging to
such Ship or Vessel, and shall give Evidence against him or them, as
before Directed, so that the said Pirate or Pirates be Convicted, and
shall have a Certificate thereof, as aforesaid, though such Person or
Persons do not Take or Seize the Ship and Goods, yet such Person or
Persons shall have Our most Gracious Pardon for any Piracies before
that time by him or them Committed, and shall also have and receive,
upon the Conviction of such Commanding Officer, or any of the said
Crew of such Pirate Ship, the respective Rewards hereafter mentioned;
viz. One Hundred Pounds for the Commanding Officer of such Pirate Ship
or Vessel, and Twenty Pounds for every Inferiour Person thereunto
belonging, that shall be so Seized and Apprehended, as aforesaid;
which Sum or Sums shall be paid to him or them by the Governors or
other Persons before mentioned. And for the greater Encouragement of
those Persons belonging to any Pirate Ship or Vessel, who shall Seize
and Apprehend any Commanding Officer, or any of the Crew belonging to
such Ship or Vessel, and shall give Evidence against them, in order to
their Conviction, and cause the said Ship or Vessel, and Goods to be
Secured, as aforesaid, We do hereby Direct and Require the Commanders
of all and every Our Ships of War, That upon any Person or Persons
producing to them an Authentick Certificate of his or their having made
such Seizure, and of the Conviction of such Commander or others of the
said Ships Crew, so Seized by him or them, as aforesaid, or of his or
their having Secured the Ship or Vessel, and Goods, as aforesaid, under
the Hands and Seals of the Persons, or the Major part of them, before
whom such Conviction shall have been made (which Certificate the said
Persons are in like manner hereby Required to give, gratis, on Demand)
and Desiring to be Entertained in Our Service, to Enter them on Board
their Ships, for Victuals and Wages, and to Discharge them again when
they shall Desire it. And whereas We are inclined to Believe, That
many ignorant Persons have been drawn into this wicked Course of Life,
and that they would willingly imbrace all Opportunities of freeing
themselves therefrom provided they could be Secure of Pardon, We do
hereby Promise and Declare, That if any Person or Persons, Serving
on Board any Pirate Ship or Vessel, shall at any time, within Twelve
Months after the Date hereof, leave the same, and repair to any of Our
Chief Magistrates, Governors, Commanders, or other Persons aforesaid,
and before them make Affidavit of the Piracies Committed by the Ship
or Vessel whereto they did belong, the Person or Persons, so Leaving
such Ship, and making Affidavit, shall have Our Gracious Pardon for
the Piracies Committed by him or them before the Twenty fourth Day
of June, Seventeen hundred and one, and upon a Certificate of his or
their Surrender, and being so Intituled to this Our Gracious Pardon,
under the Hands and Seals of any of Our Chief Magistrates, Governors,
Commanders, or other Persons aforementioned (which Certificate the said
Chief Magistrates, Governors, Commanders, and other Persons are hereby
Required to give, gratis, on Demand) the Person or Persons, so leaving
such Ship, and making Affidavit, shall in like manner be Intituled
to the Advantage of being Entertained on Board any of Our Ships, for
Victuals and Wages, as aforesaid. And We do hereby further Publish and
Declare, That all such Persons who shall neglect to lay hold of these
Our Gracious Offers of Mercy, or who by Complying herewith shall be
Pardoned for the Piracies by them Committed to the time of such Pardon,
and after such Pardon relapse into the like Evil Practices, shall
immediately upon their being Seized (for which all possible Care and
Diligence shall be taken) be brought to Tryal, and be Proceeded against
with the utmost Severity of Law; We having in pursuance of a late Act
of Parliament for that purpose, sent Commissions under Our Great Seal
into the East and West Indies, for the speedy Tryal, Condemnation and
Execution of all Pirates and Robbers upon the High Seas. Provided
always, that nothing herein contained shall extend to the Pardoning
of any Person or Persons that shall go out of Europe, or that shall
Commit Piracy upon the Seas in Europe, from and after the Date of these
Presents, nor to the Pardoning of such as shall Commit Piracy in any
Place whatsoever, after notice of this Our Gracious Offer of Pardon, or
of Henry Every,[3] alias, Bridgeman.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Sixth Day of March, 1700/1. In
the Thirteenth Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceas'd, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1700/1.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., P. C., and P. R. O. Entered on
Patent Rolls; entered in Privy Council Register, III William, vol. 6,
p. 162. Printed in "London Gazette," March 17, 1701._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The prevalence of piracy in American waters can best be traced in
the documents listed in the _Calendars of State Papers, Colonial_, for
the last decade of the 17^{th} century.

[2] The draft of this proclamation was referred to the Admiralty,
January 23, 1701, to propose the amount of the rewards to be offered,
and was sent to the Board of Trade, February 20, 1701, to fix the time
when pirates should be allowed to make confessions (_Acts of Privy
Council_, ii, 342).

[3] Two proclamations, dated July 17 and August 10, 1696, had been
issued offering a reward for the capture of Every for having committed
piracies in the seas of India and Persia (_Acts of Privy Council_, ii,
300).




1702, March 9.

[Continuing Officers in the Colonies.]


BY THE QUEEN.

A PROCLAMATION.

ANNE R.

Forasmuch as it has Pleased Almighty God, lately to Call unto His
Infinite Mercy, the most High and Mighty Prince William the Third, of
most Blessed Memory; And whereas by an Act of Parliament made in the
Seventh Year of the Reign of the said late King, It is Enacted, That
no Commission, either Civil or Military, should Cease, Determine or
be Void by reason of the Death or Demise of His said late Majesty, or
of any of His Heirs or Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm, but
that every such Commission should Be, Continue and Remain in full Force
and Virtue, for the Space of Six Months next after any such Death or
Demise, unless in the mean time Superseeded, Determined or made Void by
the next and immediate Successor, to whom the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, according to the Act of Settlement therein mentioned is Limited
and Appointed to Go, Remain and Descend; The Queens most Excellent
Majesty,[1] in Her Princely Wisdom and Care of the State, (Reserving
to Her Own Judgment hereafter, the Reformation and Redress of any
Abuses in Misgovernment, upon due Knowledge and Examination thereof) is
Pleased, and doth hereby Signifie and Declare, That all Commissions,
both Civil and Military, Granted by His said late Majesty, and in Force
at the time of His Death, shall Be, Continue and Remain in full Force
and Virtue: And that all Persons, that at the time of the Decease of
the late King, were Duly and Lawfully Possessed of, or Invested in any
Office or Place of Authority or Government, either Civil or Military,
within His Majesties Realms of England, Ireland, the Islands of Jersey
and Guernsey, Sark or Alderney, or within His Majesties Colonies and
Plantations in America; and Namely all Governors, Lieutenants or
Deputy Governors, Counsellors, Judges, Justices, Provost-Marshals,
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and all others in Place of Government
either Meaner or Superior, as aforesaid, and all other Officers and
Ministers shall Be, and hold themselves Continued in the said Places
and Offices, under the same Condition as formerly they Held and Enjoyed
the same, until Her Majesties Pleasure be further Known, or that
other Provision be made, pursuant to His late Majesties Commissions
and Instructions to His Governors and Officers of the Islands,
Colonies, and Plantations aforesaid; And that in the meanwhile, for
the Preservation of the State, and Necessary Proceedings in Matters
of Justice, and for the Safety and Service of the State, all the said
Persons, of whatsoever Degree or Condition, may not fail every one
severally according to his Place, Office or Charge, to Proceed in the
Performance of all Duties thereunto belonging, as formerly Appertained
unto them while the late King was Living; And further Her Majesty doth
hereby Will and Command all and singular Her Highness Subjects, of
what Estate, Dignity or Degree they or any of them be, to be Aiding,
Helping and Assisting, and at the Commandment of the said Officers
and Ministers, in the Performance and Execution of the said Offices
and Places, as they and every of them tender Her Majesties Pleasure,
and will answer the contrary at their utmost Perils. And further Her
Majesties Will and Pleasure, and Express Command is, That all Orders or
Directions Made or Given by the late King of most Blessed Memory the
Lords of His Privy Council, or His late Majesties Principal Secretaries
of State, or other Legal Authority Derived from His said Majesty in
His Life time, shall be Obeyed and Performed by all and every Person
and Persons, and all and every Thing and Things to be done thereupon,
shall Proceed as Fully and Amply as the same should have been Obeyed or
Done in the Life of the said late King, until Her Majesties Pleasure be
further Known thereupon.

Given at the Court at St. James's, the Ninth Day of March, In the
First Year of Her Majesties Reign, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, and other Her Majesties Territories and Dominions.

GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.

London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceas'd; Printers to the Queens most Excellent Majesty. MDCCI.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Crawf., Dalk., P. C., and
P. R. O. Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in Privy Council Register,
Anne, vol. 1, p. 15._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] A form of proclamation of the accession of Queen Anne was provided
for the American colonies. It was sent over as a printed sheet,
with blanks for the name of the colony and the body issuing the
proclamation. Copies of this printed form are in the British Museum
and the Public Record Office. A similar form was provided for previous
accessions, but does not seem to have been printed, being found in the
manuscript Registers of the Privy Council.




1704, June 18.

[Rates of Foreign Coins in Plantations.]


BY THE QUEEN.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR SETTLING AND ASCERTAINING THE CURRENT RATES OF FOREIGN COINS IN
HER MAJESTIES COLONIES AND PLANTATIONS IN AMERICA.

ANNE R.

We having had under Our Consideration the different Rates at which
the same Species of Foreign Coins do Pass in Our several Colonies
and Plantations in America,[1] and the Inconveniencies thereof, by
the indirect Practice of Drawing the Money from one Plantation to
another, to the great Prejudice of the Trade of Our Subjects; And
being Sensible, That the same cannot be otherwise Remedied, than by
Reducing of all Foreign Coins to the same Current Rate within all our
Dominions in America; And the Principal Officers of Our Mint having
laid before Us a Table of the Value of the several Foreign Coins which
usually Pass in Payments in Our said Plantations, according to their
Weight, and the Assays made of them in Our Mint, thereby shewing the
just Proportion which each Coin ought to have to the other, which
is as followeth, viz. Sevill Pieces of Eight, Old Plate, Seventeen
Peny-weight Twelve Grains, Four Shillings and Six Pence; Sevill Pieces
of Eight, New Plate, Fourteen Peny-weight, Three Shillings Seven
Pence One Farthing; Mexico Pieces of Eight, Seventeen Peny-weight
Twelve Grains, Four Shillings and Six Pence; Pillar Pieces of Eight,
Seventeen Peny-weight Twelve Grains, Four Shillings and Six Pence Three
Farthings; Peru Pieces of Eight, Old Plate, Seventeen Peny-weight
Twelve Grains, Four Shillings and Five Pence, or thereabouts; Cross
Dollars, Eighteen Peny-weight, Four Shillings and Four Pence Three
Farthings; Duccatoons of Flanders, Twenty Peny-weight and Twenty one
Grains, Five Shillings and Six Pence; Ecu's of France, or Silver
Lewis, Seventeen Peny-weight Twelve Grains, Four Shillings and Six
Pence, Crusadoes of Portugal, Eleven Peny-weight Four Grains, Two
Shillings and Ten Pence One Farthing; Three Gilder Pieces of Holland,
Twenty Peny-weight and Seven Grains, Five Shillings and Two Pence
One Farthing; Old Rix Dollars of the Empire, Eighteen Peny-weight
and Ten Grains, Four Shillings and Six Pence; The Half, Quarters and
other parts in Proportion to their Denominations, and Light Pieces in
Proportion to their Weight: We have therefore thought fit for Remedying
the said Inconveniencies, by the Advice of Our Council, to Publish and
Declare, That from and after the First Day of January next ensuing
the Date hereof, no Sevill, Pillar, or Mexico Pieces of Eight, though
of the full Weight of Seventeen Peny-weight and an half, shall be
Accounted, Received, Taken, or Paid within any of Our said Colonies or
Plantations, as well those under Proprietors and Charters, as under Our
immediate Commission and Government, at above the Rate of Six Shillings
per Piece Current Money, for the Discharge of any Contracts or Bargains
to be made after the said First Day of January next, the Halfs,
Quarters, and other lesser Pieces of the same Coins to be Accounted,
Received, Taken, or Paid in the same Proportion: And the Currency of
all Pieces of Eight of Peru, Dollars, and other Foreign Species of
Silver Coins, whether of the same or Baser Alloy, shall, after the
said First Day of January next, stand Regulated, according to their
Weight and Fineness, according and in Proportion to the Rate before
Limited and Set for the Pieces of Eight of Sevill, Pillar, and Mexico;
So that no Foreign Silver Coin of any sort be permitted to Exceed the
same Proportion upon any Account whatsoever. And We do hereby Require
and Command all Our Governours, Lieutenant-Governours, Magistrates,
Officers, and all other Our good Subjects, within Our said Colonies and
Plantations, to Observe and Obey our Directions herein, as they Tender
our Displeasure.

Given at Our Castle at Windsor, the Eighteenth Day of June, 1704. In
the Third Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.

London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceas'd; Printers to the Queens most Excellent Majesty. 1704.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., Crawf., Dalk., P. C., P. R. O.,
and in N. Y. Historical Society. Entered in Privy Council Register,
Anne, vol. 2, p. 132. Printed in "London Gazette," June 22, 1704; also
in Boston News-Letter, Dec. 11, 1704._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] The attention of the Council of Trade had been frequently called
to the disorder in the currency in the Plantations (see _Cal. State
Papers, Colonial, 1700_, pp. 108, 393; and Chalmers' _History of
Currency in the British Colonies_, pp. 11-15). On November 18, 1703,
the Privy Council referred to the Lord Treasurer a representation from
the Board of Trade for settling the rates of foreign coins in America,
upon which the Lord Treasurer, May 18, 1704, submitted a report from
the Officers of the Mint with a table of the weights and values of
foreign coins then current in the Plantations (_Acts of Privy Council_,
ii, 452). The proclamation which followed was little observed, however,
and after several reports on the subject had been rendered, an Act of
Parliament was passed April 1, 1708, entitled "An Act for ascertaining
the Rates of Foreign Coins in Her Majesty's Plantations in America."
(_Statutes of the Realm_, viii, 792. See also _Lords Journals_, xviii,
486, 566; _Commons Journals_, xv, 635; _Acts of Privy Council_, ii,
452). For the action of Massachusetts upon this proclamation, see _Acts
and Resolves of the Province of Massachusetts Bay_, viii, 471.




1708, June 26.

[Encouraging Trade to Newfoundland.]


BY THE QUEEN.

A PROCLAMATION.

ANNE R.

Whereas by Act of Parliament made in the Tenth and Eleventh Years of
the Reign of the late King William the Third, Intituled, An Act to
Encourage the Trade to Newfoundland;[1] It was, amongst other Things,
Enacted, That from thenceforth all His Majesties Subjects of this
Realm, or the Dominions thereto belonging, Trading to Newfoundland,
should have Free Trade and Liberty to Take, Bait, and Fish in any the
Rivers, Lakes, Creeks, Harbours, or Roads, in or about Newfoundland,
the Seas, and Islands thereto adjacent, and to go on Shore on any Part
of Newfoundland, or the said Islands, for the Curing, Salting, Drying,
and Husbanding of their Fish, and Making Oyl, and to Cut down Wood
for Building or Repairing of Stages, Ship-Rooms, Train-Fats, Hurdles,
Ships, Boats, and other Necessaries; but that no Alien, or Stranger
should Take any Bait, or Use any sort of Trade or Fishing whatsoever,
in Newfoundland, or in any of the Places above-mentioned; and that
after the Five and twentieth of March, One thousand seven hundred, no
Balast, Prest, Stones, or other Things hurtful to the Harbours, should
be Thrown out of any Ship or otherwise, but shall be Carried on Shore.
And it is thereby further Enacted, That no Person should Destroy or
Damage any such Stage or Cook-Room, or any Thing thereto belonging,
but should be content with such Stage or Stages only as are needful
for them, and leave the same Undamaged; and the same shall be Repaired
with Timber fetcht out of the Woods there, and not by the Ruining of
other Stages. And it is thereby further Enacted, That whoever should,
after the said Five and twentieth Day of March, first Enter with his
Fishing-Ship any Harbour or Creek in Newfoundland, should be for that
Season Admiral of the said Harbour or Creek, and should Reserve so much
Beech or Flakes as should be necessary for his Boats, and One over, as
a Privilege for his first Coming thither; and the Master of the Second
Fishing-Ship Entring such Harbour or Creek, shall be Vice-Admiral;
and the Master of the Third Ship so Entring, Rear-Admiral for that
Season; and that the Master of every Fishing-Ship there, shall take
no more Beech or Flakes than for necessary Use; and Persons Possessed
of several Places in several Harbours there, shall make Election in
which he or they will Abide, within Eight and forty Hours after Demand
by any After-comer; And the Admiral of the respective Harbours shall
determine all Differences touching that Matter. And it is thereby
further Enacted, That all Inhabitants and others, who have Possessed
themselves of any Stage, Cook-Room, Beech, or other Place in the said
Harbours, which before that time belonged to Fishing-Ships, for the
Taking Bait, Fishing, Drying, Curing and Husbanding of Fish, since the
Year One thousand six hundred eighty five, should before the said Five
and twentieth Day of March, leave the same for the Publick Use of the
Fishing-Ships arriving there; and that no Fisherman or Inhabitant in
Newfoundland, or other Person, should after the said Five and twentieth
Day of March, Possess himself of any the Stages, Cook-Rooms, Beeches,
or other Places which, since the Year One thousand six hundred eighty
five, did, or thereafter should belong to any Fishing-Ship, before
the Arrival of the Fishing-Ships from England, Wales or Berwick, and
until such Ships be Provided with Stages, Cook-Rooms, Beeches, and
other Places, for taking Bait and Fishing, and for Drying, Curing and
Husbanding of Fish: Provided that such Persons, as since the Five and
twentieth of March, One thousand six hundred eighty five, have or
thereafter should Build any Houses, Stages, Cook-Rooms, Train-Fats, or
other Conveniencies for Fishing there, that did not, since the Year
One thousand six hundred eighty five, belong to Fishing-Ships, should
peaceably enjoy the same. And it is thereby further Enacted, That
no By-Boat-Keepers should meddle with any House, Stage, Cook-Room,
Train-Fat or other Conveniency, that did, since the Year One thousand
six hundred eighty five, belong to Fishing-Ships, or should be made by
Ships after the Five and twentieth Day of March, One thousand seven
hundred; and that every Master of a By-Boat should carry at least Two
Fresh Men in Six, (viz.) One that has made but One Voyage, and One that
never was at Sea before; and that every Inhabitant should be obliged
to Imploy Two such Fresh Men, as the By-Boat-Keepers are obliged for
every By-Boat kept by them; and the Master of every Fishing-Ship should
Carry One such Fresh Man that never was at Sea before, in every Five
Men they carry; and the Master of every By-Boat, or Fishing-Ship,
should make Oath before the Collector, or Principal Officer of the
Customs of the Port (which Officers are thereby Impowered to give the
said Oath) whence such Ship intends to Sail, That they have such Fresh
Men as the said Act directs, and should have a Certificate thereof
gratis; And that the Master of any Fishing-Ship, going to Newfoundland,
after the said Five and twentieth Day of March, should have One in
every Five that is not a Seaman. And it is thereby further Enacted,
That no Person should after the said Five and twentieth Day of March,
Cut out, or Alter the Mark of any Boat or Train-Fat, to defraud the
Owner, or remove the same whence they were left by the Owner, unless
in case of necessity, and that upon Notice to the Admiral of the
Place; and that no Person should Rind Trees in the Woods growing there,
nor set on fire, or Damage the same, except for Fuel for the Ships
and Inhabitants, or for Building or Repairs of Houses, Ships, Boats,
and Train-Fats, and of the Stages, Cook-Rooms, Beeches, and other
Places for taking Bait, Fishing, and Husbanding of Fish there, nor
cast Anchor, or do any other Thing so as to Annoy the Haling of Sayns
in the usual Baiting Places, or shoot their Sayns upon the Sayns of
others, nor steal the Sayns of others, nor any Bait out of anothers
Fishing-Boat or Net: And the Admirals of every Port or Harbour in
Newfoundland, are required to see the Rules and Orders in the said Act
for Regulating the Fishery duly put in Execution, and Yearly to keep a
Journal of all Ships, Boats, Stages, Train-Fats, and Seamen in their
respective Harbours, and Deliver a Copy thereof to the Privy-Council
at their Return to England. And it is thereby further Enacted, That
all Differences arising in Newfoundland, or any the Islands there,
about the Right and Property of Fishing-Rooms, Stages, Flakes or other
Conveniency for Fishing or Curing of Fish, shall be determined by the
Fishing Admirals in the several Harbours; and an Appeal is given from
such Judgment to the Commanders of the Men of War appointed Convoys
for Newfoundland: And that the Inhabitants of Newfoundland, and the
Islands adjacent, should strictly observe the Lords Day: And that no
Publick-House should on that Day sell any Wine, Beer, Ale, Cyder, or
other Strong-Waters, or Tobacco, or other Liquors. And whereas We
have been informed of several Abuses by the Masters of Ships, and the
Inhabitants, and others contrary to the said Act, (viz.) That the
Inhabitants do Rind the Trees, and Ingross and Incroach upon Fishing
Ship-Rooms, and destroy several of the Stages, Flakes and Cook-Rooms,
and that the Fishing Admirals are negligent in their Duty of putting
the said Act in Execution, and of keeping Journals of the Fishery,
and that the said Fishing Admirals, being Traders themselves, are
partial in their Determination of Differences, and that the Masters of
Fishing-Ships, and of By-Boats, do neglect to produce Certificates of
their Compliments of Green Men or Fresh Men, contrary to the said Act;
Which Matters being lately taken Notice of in the Humble Address of the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the last Parliament, We have thought
fit, by and with the Advice of Our Privy-Council, to Issue forth this
Our Royal Proclamation; And We do hereby strictly Charge and Command
all Our Loving Subjects, who may be any ways concerned in Putting the
said Laws in Execution, that they take effectual Care to bring to
Condign Punishment all manner of Persons who shall be found offending
against such Act of Parliament.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Twenty sixth Day of June, in
the Seventh Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.

London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceas'd; Printers to the Queens most Excellent Majesty. 1708. (Price
Two Pence.)

_1 p. folio. Copies in B. M., P. C., and P. R. O. Entered on Patent
Rolls; entered in Privy Council Register, Anne, vol. 4, p. 120.
Printed in "London Gazette," July 12, 1708._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] _Statutes of the Realm_, 10 William III, ch. 14, vol. 7, p. 515.
The House of Commons on March 31, 1708, petitioned the Queen that the
laws regulating trade with Newfoundland should be enforced (_Commons
Journals_, xv, 644, 648). A long address on the subject from the Privy
Council to the Queen, May 20, 1708, is printed in the _Acts of the
Privy Council_, ii, 553.




1711, June 23.

[Establishing Post Office in America.]


BY THE QUEEN.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR ENFORCING THE DUE EXECUTION OF THE ACT, INTITULED, AN ACT FOR
ESTABLISHING A GENERAL POST-OFFICE FOR ALL HER MAJESTIES DOMINIONS,
AND FOR SETTLING A WEEKLY SUM OUT OF THE REVENUES THEREOF, FOR THE
SERVICE OF THE WAR, AND OTHER HER MAJESTIES OCCASIONS.

ANNE R.

Whereas by an Act of Parliament made in the Last Session of Parliament,
Intituled, An Act for Establishing a General Post-Office for all
Her Majesties Dominions, and for Settling a Weekly Sum out of the
Revenues thereof, for the Service of the War, and other Her Majesties
Occasions,[1] It is Enacted, That from and after the First Day of
this Instant June, there be One General Letter-Office and Post-Office
Established in the City of London, from whence all Letters and Packets
may be with speed and expedition sent into any Part of the Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland, or to North-America, the West-Indies, or to
any other of Our Dominions or Territories, or to any other Kingdom or
Country beyond the Seas; at which said Office all Returns and Answers
may be Received. And that One Master of the said General Letter-Office
and Post-Office shall be appointed by Us, under Our Great Seal of
Great Britain, by the Name and Stile of our Postmaster General: And
that no Person or Persons whatsoever, in any Part of Our Kingdoms of
Great Britain and Ireland, or other Our Plantations or Colonies in the
West-Indies and America, other than Our Postmaster General for the
time being, and his Deputies, Servants, and Assigns, shall presume to
Receive, Take up, Order, Dispatch, Convey, Carry, Recarry, or Deliver
any Letter or Letters, Packet or Packets of Letters, other than to and
from any Town or Place to or from the next Post-Road or Stage appointed
for that Purpose, above Six Miles from a General Office; and other
than and except such Letters as shall respectively concern Goods sent
by Common known Carriers of Goods, by Carts, Waggons, or Pack-Horses,
and which shall be respectively Delivered with the Goods such Letters
do concern, without Hire or Reward, or other Profit or Advantage for
Receiving or Delivering such Letters; and except Letters of Merchants
and Masters, Owners of any Ships, Barques, or Vessels of Merchandize,
or any the Cargo or Lading therein, sent on Board such Ships, Barques,
or Vessels of Merchandize, whereof such Merchants or Masters are
Owners, and Delivered by any Masters of any such Ships, Barques, or
Vessels of Merchandize, or by any other Person Employed by them for the
Carriage of such Letters, according to their respective Directions, so
as such Letters be Delivered to the respective Persons to whom they
shall be Directed, without Paying or Receiving any Hire or Reward,
Advantage or Profit for the same in anywise; and except Commissions
or the Returns thereof, Affidavits, Writs, Process or Proceeding, or
Returns thereof, Issuing out of any Court; and also any Letter or
Letters to be sent by any Private Friend or Friends in their way of
Journey or Travel, or by any Messenger or Messengers sent on purpose,
for or concerning the private Affair of any Person or Persons; or
make any Collection of Letters, or Set up or Employ any Foot-Post,
Horse-Post, or Packet-Boat, or other Vessel or Boat, or other Person
or Persons, Conveyance or Conveyances whatsoever, for the Receiving,
Taking up, Ordering, Dispatching, Conveying, Carrying, Recarrying,
or Delivering any Letter or Letters, Packet or Packets of Letters,
by Sea or by Land, or on any River within Our Dominions, or by means
whereof any Letter or Letters, Packet or Packets of Letters, shall be
Collected, Received, Taken up, Ordered, Dispatched, Conveyed, Carried,
Recarried, or Delivered, by Sea or Land, or on any River within Our
Dominions (other than as before Excepted;) or shall presume to Keep,
Provide or Maintain Horses or Furniture, for the Horsing of any Person
or Persons Riding Post, (that is to say) Riding several Stages upon a
Post-Road, and Changing Horses, or shall Lett to Hire, or Furnish any
Person or Persons whatsoever with Horses or Furniture for Riding Post,
as aforesaid, on any of the Post-Roads or Stages now or hereafter to
be Appointed, with or without a Guide or Horn, for Hire or Reward, or
on any Agreement or Promise of Reward, or whereby he or they may have
any Profit or Advantage, on pain of Forfeiting the Sum of Five Pounds
of British Money for every several Offence against the Tenor of the
said Act, and also of the Sum of One hundred Pounds of like British
Money for every Week that every Offender against the same Act shall
Collect, Receive, Take up, Order, Dispatch, Convey, Carry, Recarry, or
Deliver any Letter or Letters, Packet or Packets of Letters, by Sea
or Land, or on any River within Our Dominions (other than as before
excepted;) or that shall presume to Set up, Continue, or Employ any
Foot-Post, Horse-Post, or Packet-Boat, or other Vessel or Boat, or any
other Person or Persons, Conveyance or Conveyances whatsoever, for
the Receiving, Taking up, Ordering, Dispatching, Conveying, Carrying,
Recarrying, or Delivering of any Letter or Letters, Packet or Packets
of Letters, by Sea or Land, or on any River within Our Dominions, as
aforesaid; which said Penalties and Forfeitures are to be Sued for,
and Recovered in such Courts, and to be Received and Divided in such
manner, and for such Uses, as in the said Act is for that purpose
mentioned, together with full Costs of Suit. But it is by the said
Act Provided, That if the Postmaster doth not or cannot Furnish any
Person Riding in Post, with sufficient Horses, within one Half Hour
after Demand, then such Person is at Liberty to Provide himself as he
can to the next Stage, and so at every Stage where he shall not be
Furnished, as aforesaid; and the Person who shall Furnish such Horses
shall therefore by [be] liable to any Penalty by reason thereof. And
by a Proviso contained in the said Act, it is Declared, That nothing
in the Exception above mentioned contained, shall be construed to
extend to give any Licence or Authority to any Common known Carriers
of Goods, by Carts, Waggons, or Pack-Horses, their Servants or Agents,
to Receive, Collect or Deliver, with or without Hire, any Letter or
Letters, Packet or Packets of Letters whatsoever, that do not concern
Goods in their Carts, Waggons, or on their Pack-Horses; nor to any
Owners or Drivers of Stage-Coaches; nor to any Masters, Owners or
Commanders of Boats called Passage-Boats, sailing between any Part of
Great Britain or Ireland, and any Parts or Places beyond the Seas, or
their Servants or Agents; nor to any Passenger or Passengers on Board
such Boats or Vessels; nor to the Owners or Watermen on Board of any
Boat, Barge, or Vessel, Passing or Repassing on any River or Rivers,
to and from any Parts of Great Britain and Ireland, North-America, or
the West-Indies, or other Our Dominions or Territories, although such
Drivers of Stage-Coaches, Owners, Masters or Commanders of Boats called
Passage-Boats, or Passengers therein, Owners or Watermen on Board of
any such Boat, Barge, or Vessel, Passing or Repassing on any such River
or Rivers, as aforesaid, do not receive any Hire or Reward, or other
Advantage for the same; but that all such Carriers, Owners, and Drivers
of Stage-Coaches, Owners, Masters or Commanders of Passage-Boats, and
the Passengers therein, and all Owners and Watermen on Board of any
Boat, Barge, or Vessel, Passing or Repassing on any River or Rivers, to
or from any the Parts and Places aforesaid, Collecting and Delivering
Letters, as aforesaid, though without Hire or Reward, shall be Deemed
and Taken, and are thereby Declared to be Persons Offending against
the said Act, and to Forfeit and Pay such Sum and Sums of Money, as
Persons Collecting, Receiving, Taking up, Conveying, and Delivering of
Letters for Hire, or Setting up, Employing and Maintaining any Posts
contrary to the said Act, or that are or shall be concerned therein,
are therein, as is herein before mentioned, Enacted to Forfeit and
Pay. And by another Proviso in the said Act it is Declared, That
nothing in the said Act contained should extend to give Licence to any
Person or Persons whatsoever, to make Collection of Letters in or near
the City of London, or Suburbs thereof, under Pretence of Conveying
the same to any Part or Place in the said City or Suburbs, or to the
General Post-Office of the said City, without the Licence and Leave
of the Postmaster General for the time being; and that any Person or
Persons Acting contrary thereunto, should Forfeit and Pay as Persons
Collecting, Receiving, Carrying, Recarrying, and Delivering Letters
contrary to the said Act, are thereby Enacted to Forfeit and Pay, and
to be Recovered, as aforesaid, with full Costs of Suit. And by the
said Act it is further Enacted, That all Letters and Packets, that
by any Master of any Ship or Vessel, or any of his Company, or any
Passengers therein, shall or may be brought to any Post-Town, or which
shall arrive or touch at any Post belonging to any Post-Town within
any of Our Dominions, or any the Members thereof, or which shall be
on Board any Ship or Vessel that shall or doth touch or stay at any
such Post-Town, (other than such Letters as are before excepted) shall
by such Master, Passengers, or other Person or Persons, be forthwith
delivered to the Deputy or Deputies only of such Postmaster General
for the time being, by him appointed for such Place or Post-Town,
and to be by such Deputy or Deputies sent Post unto the said General
Post-Office, to be delivered according to the several and respective
Directions of the same, upon pain of Forfeiting the Sum of Five Pounds
of British Money for every several Offence against the Tenor of the
said Act, to be Recovered in manner aforesaid, with full Costs of Suit.
And for the Encouragement of all such Masters of Ships or Vessels,
or such other Persons, on their Arrival at such Ports, as aforesaid,
from any Parts beyond the Seas, to deliver unto the Deputy or Deputies
of such Postmaster General for such Place or Post-Town at which they
shall so touch or arrive, all such Letters and Packets as they shall
respectively have on Board such Vessel or Vessels, every such Master or
other Person, for every Letter or Packet of Letters he or they shall
so deliver unto such Deputy or Deputies, shall receive the Sum of One
Peny of such Deputy or Deputies, he or they Signing such Certificate
as in the said Act is mentioned. And We being Willing and Desirous
that Our Good Subjects should have Early and Sufficient Notice of the
Penalties and Forfeitures before mentioned, to the end they may avoid
Incurring the same, and that the Revenue granted by the said Act may be
duly answered to Us, and all Frauds in Prejudice of the same prevented,
have thought fit, and do by this Our Royal Proclamation (by and with
the Advice of Our Privy Council) Notifie and Declare to all Our Loving
Subjects the Purport and Tenor of the said several Parts of the said
Act, hereby Requiring and Commanding all Persons concerned to conform
themselves to the said Act.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Twenty third Day of June, 1711.
In the Tenth Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.

London, Printed by the Assigns of Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills,
deceas'd; Printers to the Queens most Excellent Majesty. 1711.

(Price Two Pence.)

_1 p. folio. There are two issues varying in the cut of the royal arms.
Copies in B. M. and P. R. O. Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in Privy
Council Register, Anne, vol. 5, p. 260. Printed in "London Gazette,"
June 28, 1711._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] _Statutes of the Realm_, ix, 393 (9 Anne, ch. 11; ch. 10 in some
editions of the Statutes).




1714, October 4.

[Concerning Passes for Ships.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

REQUIRING ALL SHIPS AND VESSELS, TRADING FROM THE PLANTATIONS IN THE
WAY OF THE ALGERINES, TO FURNISH THEMSELVES WITH PASSES.

GEORGE R.

Whereas pursuant to Treaties Concluded between Our Predecessors,
and the Government of Algier,[1] several Passes have been Granted
under the Hand and Seal of the High Admirals of Great Britain, or the
Commissioners for Executing that Office of Our respective Dominions:
And whereas Our Commissioners for Executing the Office of High
Admiral, have humbly Represented unto Us, That they have reason to
apprehend, that several of the said Passes of the Old Form have been
Clandestinely altered, as well in their Dates as otherwise, which
may be very Prejudicial to the Trading Ships of Our Subjects: For
Preventing whereof We have thought fit, by the Advice of Our Privy
Council, to Publish this Our Royal Proclamation, hereby Declaring,
That all such Passes of the Old Form, which have been so Issued, shall
not Continue in Force longer than the Thirtieth Day of July next. And
We do hereby strictly Charge and Command all Our Loving Subjects, who
are or shall be possessed of any such Passes, That they do, as soon as
may be, return the same into the Office of Admiralty of Great Britain,
in order to their being Cancelled. And whereas, pursuant to the late
Treaty with Algier, it is absolutely necessary, That all Ships and
Vessels belonging to Our Loving Subjects of Great Britain and Ireland,
as well as Our Foreign Governments and Plantations, which shall have
occasion to Trade to Portugal, the Canaries, Guinea, the Indies, into
the Mediterranean, or elsewhere, in the way of the Cruizers of the
aforesaid Government of Algier, should be furnished with Passes of
the New Form, by or before the said Thirtieth Day of July next, lest
by their being met with by the Ships of Algier, unfurnished with such
Passes, they be Brought up, and the Ships and Goods Confiscated; We do
hereby strictly Charge and Require the Owners and Masters of all Ships
and Vessels of Our Loving Subjects Trading, as aforesaid, to take
particular Care that they do timely furnish themselves with such Passes
of the New Form accordingly.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Fourth Day of October, 1714.
In the First Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by John Baskett, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, And by the Assigns of Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills,
deceas'd. 1714.

_1 p. folio. Copies in B. M., and Signet. Entered on Patent Rolls;
entered in Privy Council Register, I Geo., vol. 1, p. 91. Printed in
"London Gazette," October 4, 1714._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Since the proclamation of April 1, 1676 (see p. 129, with note)
the question of ship passes had been given frequent attention, but
seldom directly concerned the American trade. On February 9, 1677,
the Privy Council drew up a long set of regulations regarding the
form and issuing of passes, with direct reference to the Plantations
trade (printed in _Acts of the Privy Council_, i, 692-700) but the
proclamation then ordered to be issued to explain these regulations,
if published, has not been found. The treaty with Algiers of April
10, 1682, required that all English merchants should have a pass
under the seal of the Lord High Admiral or his commissioners and
a proclamation was issued April 13, 1683, to that effect. Further
proclamations, containing reference to the treaties of 1682 and April
5, 1686, were issued on March 17, 1692 and June 9, 1700, to reinforce
these provisions. On February 17, 1698, the Privy Council took action
allowing the granting of passes in the Plantations (_Acts of the Privy
Council_, ii, 318). Since certain passes for the trade with Algiers had
been clandestinely altered, a proclamation was published on January
17, 1714, canceling all passes held twelve months from that date and
requiring new ones to be issued (these proclamations are calendared in
Lord Crawford's _Tudor and Stuart Proclamations_). In connection with
the issuing of the above printed proclamation concerning passes for the
Plantations trade, the Privy Council proposed to send a certain number
of passes over to the governors of the colonies, there to be issued
by them, but to this the government of Algiers objected (_Acts of the
Privy Council_, ii, 682).




1714, November 22.

[Continuing Officers in the Colonies.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

DECLARING HIS MAJESTIES PLEASURE FOR CONTINUING THE OFFICERS IN HIS
MAJESTIES PLANTATIONS, TILL HIS MAJESTIES PLEASURE SHALL BE FURTHER
DECLARED.

GEORGE R.

Whereas by an Act of Parliament made in the Sixth Year of the Reign of
the late Queen Anne, Our most Dear Sister, Intituled, An Act for the
Security of Her Majesties Person and Government, and of the Succession
to the Crown of Great Britain in the Protestant Line,[1] It was
Enacted, amongst other Things, That no Office, Place, or Employment,
Civil or Military, within any of Her said late Majesties Plantations,
should become Void, by reason of the Demise or Death of Her said late
Majesty, but that the Person and Persons in any of the said Offices,
Places, or Employments, should Continue in the respective Offices,
Places, and Employments for the Space of Six Months next after such
Death or Demise, unless sooner Removed and Discharged by Us; And in
regard it may happen, that Our Pleasure may not, within the said time,
be Declared touching the said Offices, which will, at the end of the
said Six Months, become Void: We, for the Preventing the Inconveniences
that may happen thereby, in Our Princely Wisdom and Care of the State
(reserving to Our Judgment hereafter the Reformation and Redress of any
Abuses in Misgovernment, upon due Knowledge and Examination thereof)
are Pleased, and do hereby Order, Signifie, and Declare, That all
Persons that, at the time of the Decease of Her said late Majesty,
were Duly and Lawfully Possessed of or Invested in any Office, Place
or Employment, Civil or Military, in any of Our Plantations, and
which have not been since Removed from such their Offices, Places, or
Employments, shall be and shall hold themselves Continued in the said
Offices, Places, or Employments, as formerly they Held and Enjoyed the
same, until Our Pleasure be further known, or that other Provision be
made, pursuant to Her late Majesties Commissions and Instructions to
Her Governors and Officers of the Plantations aforesaid.[2] And that
in the mean time for the Preservation of the Peace, and necessary
Proceedings in Matters of Justice, and for the Safety and Service of
the State, all the said Persons, of whatsoever Degree or Condition,
do not fail every one severally, according to his Place, Office, or
Charge, to proceed in the Performance and Execution of all Duties
thereunto belonging, as formerly appertained unto them while the late
Queen was Living. And further We do hereby Will and Command all and
singular Our Subjects in the said Plantations, of what Estate or Degree
they or any of them be, to be Aiding, Helping and Assisting, at the
Commandment of the said Officers, in the Performance and Execution of
the said Offices and Places, as they tender Our Displeasure, and will
answer for the contrary at their utmost Perils.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Two and twentieth Day of
November, 1714. In the First Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by John Baskett, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, And by the Assigns of Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills,
deceas'd. 1714.

_1 p. folio. Copies in B. M., Dalk., and P. C. Entered on Patent Rolls;
entered in Privy Council Register, I Geo., vol. 1, p. 119. Printed in
"London Gazette," November 27, 1714._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Statutes of the Realm_, viii, 738; 6 Anne, ch. 41 (ch. 7 in other
editions of the Statutes).

[2] The Privy Council, August 5, 1714, passed an order that all
officers in Great Britain and the Plantations should be continued in
office, and on August 10 drafted a form of proclamation for proclaiming
the King in the Plantations (_Acts of Privy Council_, ii, 682). The
proclamation proceedings are printed in the records of several of the
colonies.




1717, September 5.

[For Suppressing Pirates in West Indies.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR SUPPRESSING OF PIRATES.

GEORGE R.

Whereas We have received Information, That several Persons, Subjects
of Great Britain, have, since the Twenty fourth Day of June, in the
Year of our Lord One thousand seven hundred and fifteen, committed
divers Piracies and Robberies upon the High Seas in the West-Indies, or
adjoyning to Our Plantations, which hath, and may Occasion great Damage
to the Merchants of Great Britain, and others, Trading into those
Parts; And though We have appointed such a Force as We Judge sufficient
for Suppressing the said Piracies: Yet the more effectually to put an
End to the same, We have thought fit, by and with the Advice of our
Privy-Council, to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation; And We do hereby
Promise and Declare, That in case any of the said Pirates shall, on or
before the Fifth Day of September, in the Year of our Lord One thousand
seven hundred and eighteen,[1] Surrender him or themselves to One of
Our Principal Secretaries of State in Great Britain or Ireland, or to
any Governor or Deputy-Governor of any of Our Plantations or Dominions
beyond the Seas, every such Pirate and Pirates, so Surrendring him
or themselves, as aforesaid, shall have Our Gracious Pardon of and
for such his or their Piracy or Piracies, by him or them Committed
before the Fifth Day of January next ensuing. And We do hereby strictly
Charge and Command all Our Admirals, Captains, and other Officers at
Sea, and all Our Governors and Commanders of any Forts, Castles, or
other Places in Our Plantations, and all other Our Officers Civil and
Military, to Seize and Take such of the Pirates who shall refuse or
neglect to Surrender themselves accordingly. And We do hereby further
Declare, That in case any Person or Persons, on or after the Sixth Day
of September, One thousand seven hundred and eighteen, shall Discover
or Seize, or cause or procure to be Discovered or Seized, any One
or more of the said Pirates, so neglecting or refusing to Surrender
themselves, as aforesaid, so as they may be brought to Justice, and
Convicted of the said Offence, such Person or Persons, so making such
Discovery or Seizure, or causing or procuring such Discovery or Seizure
to be made, shall have and receive as a Reward for the same, viz. For
every Commander of any Pirate-Ship or Vessel the Sum of One hundred
Pounds; For every Lieutenant, Master, Boatswain, Carpenter, and Gunner,
the Sum of Forty Pounds; For every Inferior Officer the Sum of Thirty
Pounds; And for every Private Man the Sum of Twenty Pounds. And if any
Person or Persons, belonging to, and being Part of the Crew of any
such Pirate-Ship or Vessel, shall, on or after the said Sixth Day of
September, One thousand seven hundred and eighteen, Seize and Deliver,
or cause to be Seized or Delivered, any Commander or Commanders of such
Pirate-Ship or Vessel, so as that he or they be brought to Justice, and
convicted of the said Offence, such Person or Persons, as a Reward for
the same, shall receive for every such Commander the Sum of Two hundred
Pounds; which said Sums the Lord Treasurer, or the Commissioners of Our
Treasury for the time being, are hereby required and directed to Pay
accordingly.

Given at Our Court at Hampton-Court, the Fifth Day of September,
1717. In the Fourth Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by John Baskett, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, And by the Assigns of Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills,
deceas'd. 1717.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Dalk., P. C., and P. R. O. Entered on Patent
Rolls; entered in Privy Council Register, I Geo., vol. 2, p. 38.
Printed in "London Gazette," September 17, 1717._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] This date was extended to July 1, 1710, according to a proclamation
of December 21, 1718, printed on p. 178. On February 9, 1718, the
Attorney-General was requested to interpret the meaning of several
clauses in the above proclamation, and the Queries and Answers are
printed in full in the _Acts of the Privy Council_, ii, 723.




1718, December 21.

[For Suppressing Pirates in West Indies.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

GEORGE R.

Whereas We did think fit, by and with the Advice of Our Privy-Council,
to Issue Our Royal Proclamation, bearing Date the Fifth Day of
September, One thousand seven hundred and seventeen, in the Fourth Year
of Our Reign, therein taking Notice, That We had received Information,
that several Persons, Subjects of Great Britain, had, since the Four
and twentieth Day of June, in the Year of our Lord One thousand seven
hundred and fifteen, committed divers Piracies and Robberies upon
the High Seas in the West-Indies, or adjoyning to Our Plantations,
which had and might Occasion great Damage to the Merchants of Great
Britain, and others, Trading into those Parts: And We did thereby
Promise and Declare, That in case any the said Pirates should, on or
before the Fifth Day of September, One thousand seven hundred and
eighteen, Surrender him or themselves in manner as therein is directed,
every such Pirate and Pirates, so Surrendring him or themselves, as
aforesaid, should have Our Gracious Pardon of and for such his or their
Piracy or Piracies, by him or them committed before the Fifth Day of
January then next ensuing: And whereas several of the said Pirates,
not having had timely Notice of Our said Proclamation, may not have
Surrendred themselves within the time therein appointed, and by reason
thereof are uncapable of Receiving the Benefit of Our Royal Mercy and
Clemency intended thereby: And though We have appointed such a Force,
as We judge sufficient for Suppressing the said Piracies, yet the more
effectually to put an end to the same, We have thought fit, by and with
the Advice of Our Privy-Council, to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation;
And We do hereby Promise and Declare, That in case any the said Pirates
shall, on or before the First Day of July, in the Year of Our Lord One
thousand seven hundred and nineteen, Surrender him or themselves to
One of Our Principal Secretaries of State in Great Britain or Ireland,
or to any Governor or Deputy-Governor of any of Our Plantations
or Dominions beyond the Seas, every such Pirate and Pirates, so
Surrendring him or themselves, as aforesaid, shall have Our Gracious
Pardon of and for such his or their Piracy or Piracies, by him or them
Committed before such time as they shall have received Notice of this
Our Royal Proclamation; which Pardon or Pardons We have Authorized
and Commanded Our respective Governors to Grant accordingly. And We
do hereby strictly Charge and Command all Our Admirals, Captains, and
other Officers at Sea, and all Our Governors and Commanders of any
Forts, Castles, or other Places in Our Plantations, and all others Our
Officers Civil and Military, to Seize and Take such of the Pirates, who
shall refuse or neglect to Surrender themselves accordingly. And We do
hereby further Declare, That in case any Person or Persons, on or after
the First Day of July, One thousand seven hundred and nineteen, shall
Discover or Seize, or Cause or Procure to be Discovered or Seized, any
One or more of the said Pirates, so Neglecting or Refusing to Surrender
themselves, as aforesaid, so as they may be brought to Justice, and
Convicted of the said Offence, such Person or Persons, so making such
Discovery or Seizure, or Causing or Procuring such Discovery or Seizure
to be made, shall Have and Receive as a Reward for the same, (viz.) For
every Commander of any Pirate-Ship or Vessel the Sum of One hundred
Pounds; For every Lieutenant, Master, Boatswain, Carpenter, and Gunner,
the Sum of Forty Pounds; For every Inferior Officer the Sum of Thirty
Pounds; And for every Private Man, the Sum of Twenty Pounds; And if
any Person or Persons, belonging to, and being part of the Crew of any
such Pirate-Ship or Vessel, shall, on or after the said First Day of
July, One thousand seven hundred and nineteen, Seize and Deliver, or
cause to be Seized and Delivered, any Commander or Commanders of such
Pirate-Ship or Vessel, so as that he or they be brought to Justice, and
Convicted of the said Offence, such Person or Persons, as a Reward for
the same, shall Receive for every such Commander the Sum of Two hundred
Pounds; which said Sums the Lord Treasurer, or the Commissioners of Our
Treasury for the time being, are hereby Required and Directed to Pay
accordingly.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Twenty first Day of December
1718. In the Fifth Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by John Baskett, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, And by the Assigns of Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills,
deceas'd. 1718.

_1 p. folio. Copies in P. C., and P. R. O. Entered on Patent Rolls;
entered in Privy Council Register, I Geo., vol. 2, p. 206. Printed in
"London Gazette," December 27, 1718._




1722, July 19.

[Concerning Passes for Ships.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

REQUIRING PASSES FORMERLY GRANTED TO SHIPS AND VESSELS TRADING IN THE
WAY OF THE ALGERINE CRUIZERS, TO BE RETURNED INTO THE OFFICE OF THE
ADMIRALTY OF GREAT BRITAIN; AND OTHER PASSES TO BE ISSUED OF A NEW
FORM.

GEORGE R.

Whereas by Our Royal Proclamation bearing Date the Fourth Day of
October,[1] in the First Year of Our Reign, We did Charge and Require,
that the Owners and Masters of all Ships and Vessels belonging to Our
loving Subjects of Great Britain and Ireland, as well as Our Foreign
Governments and Plantations, which should have Occasion to trade to
Portugal, the Canaries, Guinea, the Indies, into the Mediterranean,
or elsewhere, in the Way of the Cruizers of the Government of Algier,
should be furnished with Passes of the Form thereby directed, by or
before the Thirtieth Day of July, in the Year of Our Lord One thousand
seven hundred and fifteen. And whereas Our Commissioners for Executing
the Office of High Admiral of Great Britain and Ireland, have humbly
represented unto Us, That it may have happened, that when such Ships
or Vessels have either been taken in Time of War, or disposed of
by Sale in Remote Parts, the Passes issued to them, as aforesaid,
may have fallen into the Hands of Foreigners, or have been sold to
them with the Ships or Vessels, the latter being directly contrary
to the Bonds entred into by the Masters of such Ships and Vessels
to return the aforesaid Passes, that so they may be Cancelled at
the Admiralty-Office: And Our said Commissioners for Executing the
Office of High Admiral of Great Britain and Ireland, having further
represented unto Us, That they have been informed, that several Ships
and Vessels, belonging to Foreign Princes or States, have by some
Indirect Means procured and carried on their Trade with such Passes, as
aforesaid; which Indirect Proceedings are not only Prejudical to Our
Trading Subjects, and Our Revenue, but may occasion Misunderstandings
between Us and the aforesaid Government of Algier: For Preventing
whereof We have thought fit, by the Advice of Our Privy-Council, to
Publish this Our Royal Proclamation, hereby Declaring, that all such
Passes of the Old Form, which have been issued before the Date of
this Our Royal Proclamation, shall not continue in Force longer than
for the Space of Twelve Months from the Date hereof (Excepting such
as have been granted to such Ships or Vessels as are gone or going
to the East-Indies, or to the South-Seas, or any other long Trading
Voyages.) And We do hereby strictly Charge and Command all Our Loving
Subjects, who are, or shall be possessed of any such Passes, that they
do, within the Space of Twelve Months from the Date of this Our Royal
Proclamation, as aforesaid, return the same (Excepting such as before
excepted) into the Office of the Admiralty of Great Britain, in Order
to their being Cancelled; and that they do furnish themselves with
Passes of a New Form, under the Hands and Seals of Our Commissioners
for Executing the Office of High Admiral of Great Britain and Ireland,
in lieu thereof, for their several Ships and Vessels, according to the
Treaties concluded between Us and the said Government of Algier, and
Our Instructions given to Our said Commissioners for Executing the
Office of High Admiral of Great Britain and Ireland touching the same.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Nineteenth Day of July, in the
Eighth Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by John Baskett, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, And by the Assigns of Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills,
deceas'd. 1722.

_1 p. folio. Copies in P. C., and P. R. O. Entered on Patent Rolls;
entered in Privy Council Register, I Geo., vol. 4, p. 62. Printed in
"London Gazette," July 24, 1722._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] See proclamation of October 4, 1714, printed on p. 172, with note.




1727, July 5.

[Continuing Officers in the Colonies.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

DECLARING HIS MAJESTY'S PLEASURE FOR CONTINUING THE OFFICERS IN HIS
MAJESTY'S PLANTATIONS, TILL HIS MAJESTY'S PLEASURE SHALL BE FURTHER
SIGNIFIED.[1]

GEORGE R.

Whereas by an Act of Parliament, made in the Sixth Year of the late
Queen Anne, of Blessed Memory, intituled, An Act for the Security of
Her Majesty's Person and Government, and of the Succession to the
Crown of Great Britain in the Protestant Line, it was enacted (amongst
other things) That no Office, Place, or Employment, Civil or Military,
within any of Her said late Majesty's Plantations, should become void
by reason of the Demise, or Death of Her said late Majesty, Her Heirs,
or Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm; but that the Person and
Persons in any of the Offices, Places, or Employments aforesaid, should
continue in their respective Offices, Places, and Employments, for the
Space of Six Months next after such Death or Demise, unless sooner
removed and discharged by the next in Succession, to whom the Crown of
this Realm should come, remain, and be, according to the several Acts
of Parliament for limiting and settling the Succession of the Crown,
as by the said recited Act may appear; and in regard it may happen,
that Our pleasure may not within the said time be declared, touching
the said Offices, Places, and Employments in Our Foreign Plantations,
which will at the End of the said Six Months become void; We, for
preventing the Inconveniences that may happen thereby, in Our Princely
Wisdom, and Care of the State (reserving to Our Judgment hereafter the
Reformation and Redress of any Abuses in the Execution of any such
Offices, Places, and Employments, upon due Knowledge and Examination
thereof) have thought fit, with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to
issue this Our Royal Proclamation, and do hereby order, signify, and
declare, That all Persons, that at the Time of the Decease of Our late
Royal Father King George the First, of Glorious Memory, were duly and
lawfully possessed of, or invested in any Office, Place, or Employment,
Civil or Military, in any of Our Plantations, and which have not been
since removed from such their Offices, Places, or Employments, shall
be, and shall hold themselves continued in the said Offices, Places,
and Employments, as formerly they held and enjoyed the same, until Our
Pleasure be further known, or other Provision be made, pursuant to the
Commissions and Instructions of Our said late Royal Father, to His
Governors and Officers of the Plantations aforesaid; and that in the
mean time, for the Preservation of the Peace, and necessary Proceedings
in Matters of Justice, and for the Safety and Service of the State, all
the said Persons, of whatsoever Degree or Condition, do not fail every
one severally, according to his Place, Office, or Charge, to proceed
in the Performance and Execution of all Duties thereunto belonging, as
formerly appertained unto them, during the life of Our said late Royal
Father; and further, We do hereby will and command all and singular Our
Subjects in the said Plantations, of what Estate or Degree they, or any
of them be, to be aiding, helping, and assisting, at the Commandment
of the said Officers, in the Performance and Execution of the said
Offices and Places, as they tender Our Displeasure, and will answer the
contrary at their utmost Perils.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Fifth Day of July, 1727, and
in the First Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by John Baskett, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty; and Thomas Norris, Assignee to George Hills, 1727.

Price Two Pence.

_1 p. folio. Copy in P. C. Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in Privy
Council Register, II Geo., vol. 1, p. 32. Printed in "American Weekly
Mercury," September 28, 1727._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] This proclamation, with a form of proclamation for proclaiming the
new King, was sent over to each colony. In the state archives of some
of the colonies, this correspondence is still preserved, and in some
cases has been printed, i.e., in _Pennsylvania Archives_, ser. 1, vol.
1, p. 200.




1729, December 31.

[Concerning Passes for Ships.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

REQUIRING PASSES FORMERLY GRANTED TO SHIPS AND VESSELS, TRADING IN
THE WAY OF THE CRUIZERS BELONGING TO THE GOVERNMENTS ON THE COAST OF
BARBARY, TO BE RETURNED INTO THE OFFICE OF THE ADMIRALTY OF GREAT
BRITAIN, AND OTHER PASSES OF DIFFERENT FORMS TO BE ISSUED.

GEORGE R.

Whereas our Royal Father of Glorious Memory, by His Proclamation,
bearing Date the Nineteenth Day of July, in the Eighth Year of His
Reign[1], did charge and command all His loving Subjects, who then
were, or should be possessed of any Passes, which before the said
Nineteenth Day of July had been issued for Ships and Vessels belonging
to His said late Majesty's Subjects trading to Portugal, the Canaries,
Guinea, the Indies, into the Mediterranean, or elsewhere, in the Way
of the Cruizers of the Government of Algiers (excepting such as had
been granted to such Ships or Vessels as were gone or going to the
East Indies, or the South Seas, or any other long Trading Voyages) to
return the same, and furnish themselves with Passes of a new Form,
under the Hands and Seals of the Commissioners for executing the Office
of High Admiral of Great Britain and Ireland, in lieu thereof, for
their several Ships and Vessels, in such Manner as by the said recited
Proclamation was directed: And whereas it hath been humbly represented
unto Us, That it may have happened that several Passes granted pursuant
to the said recited Proclamation may, either by Accident, or undue
Means, have fallen into the Hands of Foreigners, who by Colour of such
Passes may carry on their Trade; We, taking the Premises into Our Royal
Consideration, and judging it necessary to put a speedy Stop to all
such indirect Practices, which do not only tend to the Prejudice of
Our trading Subjects, but may occasion a Misunderstanding between Us
and the Governments on the Coast of Barbary, for preventing thereof
have thought fit, by the Advice of our Privy Council, to publish this
Our Royal Proclamation, and do hereby declare, That all such Passes of
the present Form now in being shall not continue in Force longer than
Twelve Months, to be computed from the First Day of March next ensuing
the Date hereof (except such Passes as have been granted to Ships gone
or going to the East Indies, or other remote Voyages, where they cannot
be timely furnished with new Passes) and We do hereby strictly charge
and command all Our loving Subjects, who are or shall be possessed of
any such Passes, That they do within the Space of Twelve Months, to
be computed from the said First Day of March next, return the same
(except such as are before excepted) into the Office of the Admiralty
of Great Britain, or to the respective Collectors of Our Customs at
the Out-Ports of Great Britain and Ireland, or to the Governors of
some of Our Foreign Plantations or Dominions, in order to their being
cancelled; and that they do furnish themselves with Passes of a new
Form, under the Hands and Seals of our Commissioners for executing
the Office of High Admiral of Great Britain and Ireland, in lieu
thereof, for their several Ships and Vessels, according to the Treaties
subsisting between Us and the said Governments on the Coast of Barbary,
and the Regulations made by Our said Royal Father, by Order in His
Privy Council, on the Fourteenth Day of June, in the Year One thousand
seven hundred and twenty two, and Our Instructions given to Our said
Commissioners for executing the Office of High Admiral of Great Britain
and Ireland, touching the same: And whereas many Ships and Vessels
belonging to Our loving Subjects continue several Years trading from
Port to Port in the Mediterranean without returning Home, whereby they
cannot so conveniently procure their Passes to be exchanged, We do
hereby, for the Ease of Our Trading Subjects, publish and declare Our
Pleasure, That upon the Application of any Owner of any Ship or Vessel,
or other substantial Merchant, to the Office of the Admiralty of Great
Britain, and Oath made by him of the Property of such Ship or Vessel,
and that Three Fourths of the Company are Our Subjects, according to
an Act made in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of Our Royal Predecessor
King Charles the Second [intituled, An Act for the Encouraging and
Increasing of Shipping and Navigation] and upon entring into the usual
Bond for the Return of such Pass at the End of the Voyage, it shall
and may be lawful for Our Commissioners for executing the Office of
High Admiral of Great Britain and Ireland, or Our High Admiral of Great
Britain and Ireland for the time being, and they are respectively
impowered to make out a new Pass for such Ship or Vessel, and send the
same to such of His Majesty's Consuls in the Mediterranean, as the said
Owner or Merchant shall desire, with Direction to such Consul, that
upon Application to him from the Master of the Ship for which the Pass
is made out, and surrendering up his old Pass, and entring into a like
Bond for the Return of such new Pass, he shall deliver out the said new
Pass to such Master, and transmit the old one, with the Bond, to the
Office of the Admiralty of Great Britain. And in order more effectually
to hinder for the future any Abuses that may be attempted by Foreigners
relating to the new Passes to be issued as aforesaid, We do hereby
further declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That all such new Passes
to be hereafter issued for any Ships or Vessels whatsoever belonging
to any of Our Subjects of the Island of Minorca or Gibraltar, shall
be made out in a peculiar Form, different from the Form of the new
Passes to be issued for Ships and Vessels belonging to any other Part
of our Dominions, and that such new Passes shall be lodged with the
respective Governors, Lieutenant Governors, or Commanders in Chief for
the time being, of the said Island of Minorca and Gibraltar, and issued
out only by them, according to the Regulations made by Our said Royal
Father in Council, as aforesaid; and the said respective Governors,
Lieutenant Governors, and Commanders in Chief are hereby charged and
required not to issue or deliver out any such Passes to any Persons
whatsoever, other than such as are really Our Subjects inhabiting in
the said Island of Minorca or Gibraltar respectively, and strictly to
conform themselves in all respects to the Regulations and Instructions
made and given, as aforesaid. And We do hereby further publish and
declare, That by Our Orders made in Our Privy Council on the Eighteenth
Day of this instant December, We have ordered and directed, that the
proper Officers of Our Customs in the several Ports of Our Kingdoms
of Great Britain and Ireland do demand of the Masters of all Merchant
Ships, so soon as they shall return into Port from a Foreign Voyage,
all Passes granted as aforesaid, which shall be in their Possession, to
be produced to the said respective Officers of Our Customs; and that
if the same shall appear to be of an older Date than Twelve Months for
Ships and Vessels trading on this side the Streights Mouth, or for
Ships and Vessels trading to a greater Distance, in case the Voyages
of such last mentioned Ships and Vessels shall be determined, then
such Passes shall be delivered up to the said respective Officers of
Our Customs, and be by them returned to the Office of the Admiralty
of Great Britain; and in case the Master of any such Ship or Vessel
shall refuse to produce or deliver up such Passes, according to the
true Intent of Our said Order, then the said Officers shall certify
the Name of every such Master, and of the Ship or Vessel, to Our
Commissioners for executing the Office of High Admiral of Great Britain
and Ireland, or to Our High Admiral of Great Britain and Ireland for
the time being, to the end that Directions may be given for putting the
Bond, entered into on the granting any such Pass, in Suit. And all Our
Governors, Lieutenant Governors, and Commanders in Chief of any of Our
Islands, Colonies, or Plantations, Consuls residing in Foreign Parts,
and all other Our Officers and Ministers whatsoever, and all other Our
loving Subjects whom it may concern, are hereby expressly required and
commanded to yield due Obedience unto, and strictly to observe all the
Orders, Instructions, Regulations, and Directions before mentioned, on
Pain of Our high Displeasure.

Given at Our Court at St. James's the Thirty first Day of December,
1729. in the Third Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by the Assigns of His Majesty's Printer, and of Henry
Hills, deceas'd. 1729.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Dalk., and P. C. Entered in Privy Council
Register, II Geo., vol. 2, p. 126. Printed in "London Gazette," January
3, 1730._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] See proclamation of July 19, 1722, printed on p. 180.




1740, April 9.

[Encouraging Trade with America.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

GEORGE R.

Whereas by an Act passed this present Sessions of Parliament,
intituled, An Act for the more effectual securing and encouraging
the Trade of his Majesty's British Subjects to America, and for the
Encouragement of Seamen to enter into his Majesty's Service;[1] it
is, among other Things, enacted, for the encouraging his Majesty's
Subjects to engage in joint and united, as well as separate Expences,
Expeditions, and Adventures, That We, our Heirs, and Successors, be
impowered, from time to time, during the Continuance of the present
or any future War[2], to grant Charters or Commissions for the more
effectual enabling any Societies, or particular Persons to join in
Expeditions by Sea or Land, and to sail to, and in any of the Seas in
America, for the attacking, taking, or destroying any Ships, Goods,
Moveables or Immoveables, Settlements, Factories, Creeks, Harbours,
Places of Strength, Lands, Forts, Castles, and Fortifications, now
belonging, or hereafter to belong to, or to be possest by any Enemy, in
any Part or Parts of America; and for the better making and carrying on
any Preparations for such Purposes, and for the making and assuring to
the Societies or Persons concerned, their Heirs, Successors, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, full and undoubted Properties, Rights,
and Titles, in and to the same, which such Societies or Persons shall
take or cause to be taken from the Enemy, under such Regulations, and
in such Manner and Form, as We, our Heirs and Successors, shall think
fit, and at any Times hereafter, by any further Grants or Charters
to confirm, and further assure the Premisses to them, so as to enable
them to have and enjoy the full Benefit thereof, but so, as that
nothing therein contained shall extend to exclude or restrain any of
our Subjects from having a full and free Trade to and in any Part of
America: And whereas We are desirous, that none of our loving Subjects
should be ignorant of the said Encouragement, We have thought fit, with
the Advice of our Privy Council, to publish the same, by this Our Royal
Proclamation, to the End that all Officers, Seamen, Marines, Soldiers,
and others, Our Subjects, may be fully informed of the Benefit thereby
intended for such of them, as shall be willing to assist by their
Endeavours in the vigorous Prosecution of the War, and the Annoyance of
the Enemy.

Given at our Court at St. James's the Ninth Day of April, 1740, in
the Thirteenth Year of our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by John Baskett, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty. 1740.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Dalk., and P. C.; also in N. Y. Public Library.
Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in Privy Council Register, II Geo.,
vol. 7, p. 9. Printed in "London Gazette," April 12, 1740._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] "_Statutes at Large_" (_Basket_, 1764), vi, 379.

[2] War with Spain was declared October 19, 1739.




1740, June 19.

[Providing for Distribution of Prize Money.]


BY THE LORDS JUSTICES.

A PROCLAMATION

APPOINTING THE DISTRIBUTION OF PRIZES TAKEN, AND THE BOUNTY FOR
TAKING SHIPS OF WAR OF THE ENEMY.

  Jo. Cant.        Hervey C. P. S.   Pembroke,
  Hardwicke C.     Dorset,           Ilay,
  Wilmington P.    Devonshire,       Holles Newcastle.[1]


Whereas by an Act of Parliament made in the last Session of Parliament,
intituled, An Act for the more effectual securing and encouraging
the Trade of His Majesty's British Subjects to America, and for the
Encouragement of Seamen to enter into His Majesty's Service, it is,
amongst other Things, enacted, That the Flag Officers, Commanders, and
other Officers, Seamen, Marines, and Soldiers on Board every Ship and
Vessel of War, in His Majesty's Pay, shall have the sole Interest and
Property of and in all and every Ship, Vessel, Goods, and Merchandize
which they shall take after the Fourth Day of January, in the Year of
Our Lord One thousand seven hundred and thirty nine,[2] in Europe,
and after the Twenty Fourth Day of June, in the Year of Our Lord One
thousand seven hundred and forty, in any other Part of the World
(being first adjudged lawful Prize, in any of His Majesty's Courts
of Admiralty in Great Britain, or in His Plantations in America, or
elsewhere) to be divided in such Proportions, and after such Manner,
as His Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors shall think fit to order
and direct by Proclamation, to be issued for that Purpose. And as a
farther Encouragement to the Officers, Seamen, Marines, Soldiers, and
others on Board His Majesty's Ships of War, as also of Privateers, to
attack, take, and destroy any Ships of Force belonging to the Enemy, it
is thereby also enacted, That there shall be paid by the Treasurer of
His Majesty's Navy, upon Bills to be made forth by the Commissioners
of the Navy, to be paid according to the Course thereof, without Fee
or Reward, unto the Officers, Seamen, Marines, Soldiers, and others
that shall have been actually on Board such of His Majesty's Ship or
Ships of War, or Privateer or Privateers, in any Action where any
Ship or Ships of War, or Privateers shall have been taken from the
Enemy, sunk, burnt, or otherwise destroyed, Five Pounds for every Man,
which was living on Board any Ship or Ships so taken, sunk, burnt, or
otherwise destroyed, at the Beginning of the Engagement between them,
the Numbers of such Men to be proved by the Oaths of Three or more of
the chief Officers or Men, which were belonging to the said Ship or
Ships of War, or Privateers of the Enemy, at the Time of her or their
being taken as Prize, sunk, burnt, or otherwise destroyed, before the
Mayor, or other chief Magistrate of the Port, whereunto any Prize,
or Officers, or Men of such Ships as were sunk, burnt, or otherwise
destroyed, shall be brought; which Oaths the said Mayor, or other
chief Magistrate of any such Port is hereby impowered and required
to administer, and shall forthwith grant a Certificate thereof,
without Fee or Reward, directed to the Commissioners of the Navy: Upon
producing which Certificate to the Commissioners of the Navy, together
with an authentick Copy of the Condemnation of such Ship so taken; or
if such Ship be sunk, burnt, or otherwise destroyed, on producing only
a Certificate from the Mayor, or other chief Magistrate, as aforesaid,
the said Commissioners of His Majesty's Navy, or such Person or Persons
as they shall appoint for that Purpose, shall, according to the Course
of the Navy, within Fifteen Days, make out Bills for the Amount of such
Bounty, directed to the Treasurer of the Navy, payable to, and to be
divided amongst the Officers, Seamen, Marines, and Soldiers on Board
His Majesty's Ships of War, in Manner, Form, and Proportion, as, by
His Majesty's Proclamation, to be issued for that Purpose, shall be
directed and appointed; and amongst the Owners, Officers, and Seamen
of any private Vessel, or Ship of War, in such Manner and Proportion,
as, by any Agreement in Writing, they shall have entered into for that
Purpose, shall be directed; We taking the Premisses into Consideration,
do, pursuant to the said Act of Parliament (with the Advice of His
Majesty's Privy Council) by this Proclamation order, direct, and
appoint, that the neat Produce of all Prizes taken by His Majesty's
Ships of War, and Bounty Money for Prisoners taken in such Prizes, be
divided into Eight equal Parts, whereof the Captain or Captains of any
of His Majesty's Ships of War, who shall be actually on Board at the
taking of any Prize, shall be allowed Three Eighth Parts; But in case
any Prize shall be taken by any Ship or Ships of War, under the Command
of a Flag or Flags, the Flag Officer or Officers being actually on
Board, or directing and assisting in the Capture, to have One Eighth
Part of the said Three Eighths; to the Captains of the Marines, and
Land Forces, Sea Lieutenants, and Master on Board any such Ships,
shall be allowed One Eighth Part, to be equally divided amongst them;
to the Lieutenants and Quarter-masters of Marines, and Lieutenants,
Ensigns, and Quarter-masters of Land Forces, Boatswain, Gunner,
Purser, Carpenter, Masters, Mate, Chirurgeons, and Chaplain on Board
any such Ship, One Eighth Part to be equally divided amongst them;
to the Midshipmen, Carpenter's Mates, Boatswain's Mates, Gunner's
Mates, Master at Arms, Corporals, Yeoman of the Sheets, Coxswain,
Quarter-master, Quarter-master's Mates, Chirurgeon's Mates, Yeoman of
the Powder Room, and Serjeants of Marines or Land Forces on Board any
such Ships, One Eighth Part to be equally divided amongst them; to the
Trumpeters, Quarter-gunners, Carpenter's Crew, Steward, Cook, Armourer,
Steward's Mate, Cook's Mate, Gunsmith, Cooper, Swabber, ordinary
Trumpeter, Barber, able Seamen, ordinary Seamen, and Marine or other
Soldiers, Two Eighth Parts, to be equally divided amongst them: And
in case any Sea Captain, inferior Commission or Warrant Sea Officers,
belonging to any Ship of War, for whom any Shares of Prizes are hereby
allowed, be absent, and not on Board at the Time of the Capture of
any Prize, the Share of such Sea Captain, inferior Commission, or
Warrant Sea Officer, shall be cast into the Shares hereby allowed
to the Trumpeter, Quarter-gunners, Carpenter's Crew, Steward, Cook,
Armourer, Steward's Mate, Cook's Mate, Gunsmith, Cooper, Swabber,
ordinary Trumpeter, Barber, able Seamen, ordinary Seamen, and Marine
or other Soldiers, to be equally divided amongst them; provided that
if any Officer or Officers on Board any of His Majesty's Ships of War,
at the Time of taking any such Prizes, shall have more Commissions,
or Offices, than one, he or they shall be intitled only to the Share
or Shares of such Prizes, which, according to the above mentioned
Distribution, shall belong to his or their respective superior
Commissions or Offices. And We do hereby strictly enjoin all and
every Commander and Commanders of any Ships of War, taking any Prize,
as soon as may be, to transmit, or cause to be transmitted, to the
Commissioners of His Majesty's Navy, a true List of the Names of all
the Officers, Seamen, Marines, Soldiers, and others, who were actually
on Board His Majesty's Ships of War, under his or their Command, at the
taking such Prize; which List shall contain the Quality of the Service
of each Person on Board and be subscribed by the Captain or commanding
Officer and Three or more of the chief Officers on Board. And We do
hereby require and direct the Commissioners of His Majesty's Navy,
or any Three or more of them, after Condemnation of such Prize, to
examine, or cause to be examined such List, by the Muster-book of such
Ships of War, and Lists annex'd thereto, to see that such List doth
agree with the said Muster-book and annex'd Lists, as to the Names,
Qualities, or Ratings of the Officers, Seamen, Marines, Soldiers, and
others, belonging to such Ship of War; and upon Request forthwith to
grant a Certificate of the Truth of any List transmitted to them, to
the Agents nominated and appointed by the Captors pursuant to the said
Act, to take care or dispose of such Prize, and also upon Application
to them, to give or cause to be given unto the Agents, who shall at any
Time or Times be appointed, as aforesaid, by the Captors of any Prizes
taken by any of the Ships of War of His Majesty, all such Lists, from
the Muster-book of any such Ships of War, and annexed Lists, as the
said Agents shall find requisite for their Direction, in paying the
Produce of such Prizes, or the Bounty, in case any Bounty shall be due
for taking the same, and to be otherwise aiding and assisting to the
said Agents, as shall be necessary.

Given at Whitehall the Nineteenth Day of June, 1740, and in the
Fourteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by John Baskett, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty. 1740.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., Dalk., and P. C. Entered in Privy
Council Register, II Geo., vol. 7, p. 118. Printed in "London Gazette,"
June 24, 1740._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] This proclamation was issued by the Lords Justices in the absence
of the King, who from May to October, 1740, was at Hanover endeavoring
to secure the allegiance to England of Frederick the Great.

[2] 1739-40. War had been declared with Spain, October 19, 1739.




1741, June 18.

[Regulating Distribution of Prizes.]


BY THE LORDS JUSTICES.

A DECLARATION

APPOINTING THE DISTRIBUTION OR PRIZES TAKEN BY WAY OF REPRIZAL BEFORE
HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION OF WAR.

  Wilmington, P.    Devonshire,    Montagu,  Cha. Wager.[1]
  Dorset,     Holles Newcastle,    Pembroke,

His Majesty having, on the Tenth Day of July, One thousand seven
hundred and thirty nine, taken into His serious Consideration the
many and repeated Depredations which had been committed, and the many
unjust Seizures which had been made in the West Indies, and elsewhere,
by Spanish Guarda Costas, and Ships acting under the Commissions of the
King of Spain, or his Governors, contrary to the Law of Nations, and in
Violation of the Treaties subsisting between the Crown of Great Britain
and Spain, whereby His Majesty's trading Subjects had sustained great
Losses; and His Majesty having determined to take such Measures as were
necessary for vindicating the Honour of His Crown, and for procuring
Reparation and Satisfaction to His injured Subjects, was pleased, by
and with the Advice of His Privy Council, upon the said Tenth Day of
July, to order that General Reprizals should be granted against the
Ships, Goods, and Subjects of the King of Spain; so that, as well His
Majesty's Fleet and Ships, as also all other Ships and Vessels that
should be commissionated by Letters of Marque or General Reprizals, or
otherwise, by His Majesty's Commissioners for executing the Office of
Lord High Admiral of Great Britain, should and might lawfully seize
all Ships, Vessels, and Goods belonging to the King of Spain, or his
Subjects, or others inhabiting within any the Territories of the King
of Spain, and bring the same to Judgement in any of the Courts of
Admiralty within His Majesty's Dominions:

[The remainder of this proclamation, which has no further direct
reference to the American plantations, provides for the distribution of
the prize money arising from the sale of Spanish vessels seized between
July 10 and the time of the declaration of war, October 19, 1739:
namely, that one half should go to those who had suffered from unjust
Spanish depredation according to such regulations as should later be
determined, and one half should go to officers and sailors concerned
in the capture according to the regulations of the Proclamation of
June 19, 1740. Commanders who had taken prizes were to transmit to the
Commissioners of the Navy true lists of all officers and seamen on
board at the time of capture.]

Given at Whitehall the Eighteenth Day of June, 1741, in the Fifteenth
Year of His Majesty's Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by John Baskett, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty. 1741.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., and P. C. Entered in Privy Council
Register, II Geo., vol. 7, p. 490. Printed in the "London Gazette,"
June 20, 1741._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Issued by the Lords Justices, during the absence of the King at
Hanover.




1741, June 18.

[Regulating Distribution of Prizes.]


BY THE LORDS JUSTICES.

A DECLARATION

APPOINTING THE DISTRIBUTION OF PRIZES TAKEN SINCE THE DECLARATION
OF WAR, AND BEFORE THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE ACT OF PARLIAMENT FOR
GRANTING THE PRIZES TO THE CAPTORS.

  Wilmington, P.  Devonshire,        Montagu,   Cha. Wager.
  Dorset,         Holles Newcastle,  Pembroke,

Whereas by an Act of Parliament made in the Thirteenth Year of His
Majesty's Reign, intituled, An Act for the more effectual securing and
encouraging the Trade of His Majesty's British Subjects to America, and
for the Encouragement of Seamen to enter into His Majesty's Service, it
is among other Things enacted, That the Flag Officers, Commanders, and
other Officers, Seamen, Marines, and Soldiers on Board every Ship and
Vessel of War in His Majesty's Pay, shall have the sole Interest and
Property of and in all and every Ship, Vessel, Goods, and Merchandize
which they shall take after the Fourth Day of January, in the Year
of our Lord One thousand seven hundred and thirty-nine in Europe;
and after the Twenty fourth Day of June, in the Year of our Lord One
thousand seven hundred and forty, in any other Part of the World (being
first adjudged lawful Prize in any of His Majesty's Courts of Admiralty
in Great Britain, or in His Plantations in America, or elsewhere) to
be divided in such Proportions, and after such Manner, as His Majesty,
His Heirs, and Successors shall think fit to order and direct, by
Proclamation to be issued for that Purpose, in Pursuance whereof a
Proclamation was issued on the Nineteenth of June, One thousand seven
hundred and forty, directing in what Manner and Proportion the said
Prizes should be distributed among the Captors: And whereas between the
Time of His Majesty's Declaration of War against Spain, which was on
the Nineteenth of October, One thousand seven hundred and thirty-nine,
and the aforementioned Fourth of January, One thousand seven hundred
and thirty nine, His Majesty's Ships of War have seized and taken in
Europe several Ships, Vessels, and Goods belonging to the Enemy; and
between the said Nineteenth of October One thousand seven hundred and
thirty-nine, and the said Twenty Fourth of June, One thousand seven
hundred and forty, His Majesty's Ships of War have taken divers other
Ships, Vessels, and Goods of the Enemy, in other Parts of the World,
the Property whereof became vested in His Majesty;

[The remainder of the proclamation provides for the distribution of
prize money arising from the sale of the enemy's vessels seized within
the specified intervals, among the officers and seamen of the ships
concerned in the capture, according to the proclamation of June 19,
1740.]

Given at Whitehall the Eighteenth Day of June, One thousand seven
hundred and forty one, in the Fifteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by John Baskett, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty. 1741.

_1 p. folio. Copy in P. C. Entered in Privy Council Register, II Geo.,
vol. 7, p. 493. Printed in "London Gazette," June 20, 1741._




1744, March 29.

[Declaration of War against France.]


HIS MAJESTY'S.

DECLARATION

OF WAR AGAINST THE FRENCH KING.

GEORGE R.

The Troubles, which broke out in Germany, on Account of the Succession
of the late Emperor Charles the Sixth, having been begun, and carried
on, by the Instigation, Assistance, and Support of the French King,
with a View to overturn the Balance of Power in Europe, and to extend
the dangerous Influence of that Crown, in direct Violation of the
solemn Guaranty of the Pragmatic Sanction given by him in the Year
One thousand seven hundred and thirty eight, in Consideration of
the Cession of Lorraine; and We having, on Our Part, executed Our
Engagements for maintaining the Pragmatic Sanction, with that good
Faith, which is inseparable from Us; and having opposed the Attempts
made against the Dominions of the Queen of Hungary; We are not
surprised, that Our Conduct, in this Respect, should have drawn upon Us
the Resentment of the French King, who has found his ambitious Views,
in a great Measure, disappointed by the Assistance We have furnished to
Our Ally, unjustly attacked by him; or that he should alledge it as a
principal Reason for declaring War against Us.

From the Time, that We found Ourselves obliged, for the Maintenance
of the just Rights of Our Subjects, to enter into a War with Spain,
instead of observing a strict Neutrality, which We might have
promised Ourselves on the Part of the French King, from whom We were
even founded by Treaty to have demanded Assistance; he has given
Encouragement and Support to Our Enemies, by conniving at his Subjects
acting as Privateers under Spanish Commissions, both in Europe and
America; and by sending in the Year One thousand seven hundred and
forty, a strong Squadron into the American Seas, in order to prevent
Us, from prosecuting the just War, which We were carrying on against
Spain, in those Parts; And We have the most authentick Proof, that
an Order was given to the Commander of the French Squadron, not only
to act in a hostile Manner against Our Ships, either jointly with
the Spaniards, or separately; but even to concert Measures with Our
Enemies, for attacking one of Our principal Dominions in America; a
Duplicate of that Order dated the Seventh of October, One thousand
seven hundred and forty, having fallen into the Hands of the Commander
in Chief of Our Squadron in the West Indies. This injurious Proceeding
was greatly aggravated by the French Minister at Our Court, having
declared on Occasion of sending the said Squadron, that the French King
was very far from having any Design, or Intention, of breaking with Us.

The same offensive Conduct was continued, on the Part of the French
King, towards Us, by his Squadron in the Mediterranean, in the Year One
thousand seven hundred and forty one, joining with, and protecting the
Ships of Our Enemies, in Sight of Our Fleet, which was preparing to
attack them.

These unwarrantable Proceedings; The notorious Breach of Treaties,
by repairing the Fortifications, and erecting New Works at Dunkirk;
the open Hostilities lately committed against Our Fleet in the
Mediterranean; the Affront and Indignity offered to Us, by the
Reception of the Son of the Pretender to Our Crown, in the French
Dominions; the Embarkation actually made at Dunkirk, of a considerable
Body of Troops, notoriously designed for an Invasion of this Kingdom,
in Favour of the Pretender to Our Crown; and the sending a Squadron of
French Ships of War into the Channel, to support the said Embarkation
and Invasion; will be lasting Monuments of the little Regard had by the
French Court, for the most solemn Engagements, when the Observance of
them is inconsistent with Interest, Ambition, or Resentment.

We cannot omit taking Notice of the unjust Insinuations contained in
the French King's Declaration of War against Us, with respect to the
Convention made at Hanover, in October, One thousand seven hundred
and forty one. That Convention, regarding Our Electorate only, had
no Relation to Our Conduct as King of Great Britain: the Allegations
concerning it, are groundless and injurious: Our Proceedings in that
Respect, having been perfectly consistent with that good Faith which We
have always made the Rule of Our Actions.

It is unnecessary to mention the Objections made to the Behaviour
of Our Ministers in Foreign Courts; since it is notorious, that
the principal View, and Object, of the Negotiations of the French
Ministers in the several Courts of Europe, have been, either to stir up
intestine Commotions in the Countries, where they resided; or to create
Differences, and Misunderstandings, between them, and their respective
Allies.

The Charge of Piracy, Cruelty, and Barbarity against Our Ships of War,
is equally unjust and unbecoming; and We have all such Proceedings so
much in Abhorrence, that, if any Practices of that Nature had been made
appear to us, We should have taken effectual Care to put a Stop to
them, and to have punished the Offenders in the severest Manner.

We being therefore indispensibly obliged to take up Arms, and entirely
relying on the Help of Almighty God, who knows the Uprightness of Our
Intentions, have thought fit to declare, and do hereby declare War
against the French King; and We will, in pursuance of such Declaration,
vigorously prosecute the same by Sea and Land; being assured of the
ready Concurrence and Assistance, of all Our loving Subjects, in so
just a Cause: And We do hereby will, and require, Our Generals and
Commanders of Our Forces, Our Commissioners for Executing the Office of
High Admiral of Great Britain, Our Lieutenants of Our several Counties,
Governors of Our Forts and Garrisons, and all other Officers under
them, by Sea and Land, to do, and execute, all Acts of Hostility, in
the Prosecution of this War against the said French King, his Vassals,
and Subjects, and to oppose their Attempts; willing, and requiring, all
Our Subjects to take Notice of the same, whom We henceforth strictly
forbid to hold any Correspondence, or Communication, with the Subjects
of the French King: And We do hereby command Our own Subjects, and
advertise all other Persons of what Nation soever, not to transport
or carry any Soldiers, Arms, Powder, Ammunition, or other Contraband
Goods, to any of the Territories, Lands, Plantations, or Countries of
the said French King; declaring, that whatsoever Ship or Vessel shall
be met withal, transporting or carrying any Soldiers, Arms, Powder,
Ammunition, or other Contraband Goods, to any of the Territories,
Lands, Plantations, or Countries of the said French King, the same
being taken, shall be condemned as good and lawful Prize. And whereas
there are remaining in Our Kingdoms divers of the Subjects of the
French King, We do hereby declare Our Royal Intention to be, that all
the French Subjects, who shall demean themselves dutifully towards Us,
shall be safe in their Persons and Estates.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Twenty ninth Day of March,
1744, in the Seventeenth Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by Thomas Baskett and Robert Baskett, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. 1744.

_1 p. folio. Copies in B. M., and P. C.; also in John Carter Brown
Library. Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in Privy Council Register, II
Geo., vol. 9, p. 269. Printed in "London Gazette," March 31, 1744. The
declaration was reprinted in Boston by T. Fleet, 1744, as a broadside.
Copies are in the American Antiquarian Society and the Boston Public
Library._




1744, June 14.

[Regarding Distribution of Prizes.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

GEORGE R.

Whereas Application has been made to Us, in order to prevent Disputes
arising among the Flag Officers, who have been or may hereafter
be employed in Our Service, upon the Construction of that Part of
the Proclamation of Our Lords Justices, during Our Absence, on
the Nineteenth Day of June, One thousand seven hundred and forty,
appointing a Distribution of the Spanish Prizes and Bounty Money, which
relates to the Shares granted to the Flag or Flag Officers, who shall
be actually on Board at the taking any Prize, or shall be directing or
assisting therein: And whereas We having taken the Opinion of Our Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty, do judge it expedient to make such a
Regulation, as may explain and settle the Right of Flag Officers, and
Commanders, in all Cases of Prizes taken from any of Our Enemies at
Sea; We therefore, with the Advice of Our Privy Council, do by this
Our Proclamation[1] publish, order, and declare, That the following
Regulations be observed: First, That a Flag Officer commanding in
Chief upon Service, shall have One Eighth Part of all Prizes taken by
Ships under his Command: Secondly, That a Flag Officer sent to command
at Jamaica, or elsewhere, shall have no Right to any Share of Prizes
taken by Ships employed there before he arrives, within the Limits of
his Command: Thirdly, That when an inferior Flag Officer, or Private
Ships, are sent out to reinforce a superior Flag Officer at Jamaica,
or elsewhere, the said superior Flag Officer shall have no Right to
any Share in Prizes taken by them, before their Arrival within the
Limits of his Command: Fourthly, That a Chief Flag Officer, returning
home from Jamaica, or elsewhere, shall have no Share in Prizes taken
by the Ships left at Jamaica, or elsewhere, after he has got out of
the Limits of his Command: Fifthly, That if a Flag Officer is sent
to command in the Out-ports of this Kingdom, he shall have no Share
in Prizes taken by Ships that sail from that Port, by Order from
the Admiralty: Sixthly, That when more Flag Officers than one serve
together, the Eighth Part of all Prizes taken by any Ships of the Fleet
or Squadron, shall be divided in the following Proportion, viz. If
there be but Two Flag Officers, the Chief shall have Two Third Parts,
and the other shall have the remaining Third Part; but if the Number of
Flag Officers be more than Two, the Chief shall have only one half, and
the other half shall be divided equally among the other Flag Officers:
Seventhly, That Commodores, with Captains under them, shall be esteemed
as Flag Officers, with respect to their Right to an Eighth Part of
Prizes, whether commanding in Chief, or serving under Command.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, this Fourteenth Day of June, 1744,
in the Eighteenth Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London, Printed by Thomas Baskett and Robert Baskett, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. 1744.

_1 p. folio. Copy in P. C. Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in Privy
Council Register, II Geo., vol. 9, p. 355. Printed in "London Gazette,"
June 16, 1744._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] A long proclamation was issued November 7, 1744, providing for
the distribution of the bounty for destroying French ships, which is
omitted from this volume since it contains no direct reference to
America. It was printed in the _London Gazette_ of November 10, 1744,
and a copy of the original broadside is in the Privy Council Office.




1752, June 25.

[Continuing Officers in Georgia.]


BY THE LORDS JUSTICES.

A PROCLAMATION.

    Hardwicke, C.    Hartington,
    Granville, P.    Holdernesse.[1]

Whereas by Letters Patent of his present Majesty, under his great
Seal, which erected the Territories and Country of Georgia in America
into One Free Province, under the Trustees for establishing the Colony
of Georgia in America, the immediate Government thereof was, after
the Determination of a Term of Twenty-one Years therein mentioned, to
come to his said Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; which Term is not
yet expired: And whereas the said Trustees having voluntarily made
a Proposal to his Majesty, to make an absolute Surrender of all the
Powers, Rights, and Trusts, vested in them by the said Charter; which
his Majesty having been pleased graciously to accept, the said Trustees
did, by their Indenture of Grant and Surrender, bearing Date the
Twentieth Instant, grant and surrender to his Majesty, his Heirs, and
Successors, the said Charter, and all Powers, Jurisdictions, Countries,
and Territories, thereby granted to them; by which, the immediate Care
of the said Province, and of his Majesty's Subjects there, is now
devolved upon his Majesty;[2] We being desirious of making Provision
for the present Government of the said Province, and securing the
Peace and good Order thereof, until his Majesty shall establish such
other Form and Order of Government therein, as to his Majesty, in his
Royal Wisdom, shall seem most for the Honour of his State, and the
Happiness of his Subjects there; have thought fit, with the Advice of
his Majesty's Privy-Council, to issue this Proclamation; and do hereby
order, signify, and declare his Majesty's Pleasure, That all Persons
who now are, or, at the Time of the Publication of this Proclamation,
shall be duly and lawfully possessed of, or invested in, any Offices or
Places of Authority, Government, or Employment, Ecclesiastical, Civil,
or Military, in his Majesty's said Colony of Georgia, and particularly
all Governors, Lieutenants, or Deputy Governors, President, and
Assistants, Council, Judges, Justices, Magistrates, Provost Marshals,
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and all others in any Place or Rank of
Government, or concerned in the Administration of Government, either
Inferior or Superior, and all other Officers and Ministers holding any
Office, Place, or Employment there, shall hold under his Majesty, and
be continued in their said several and respective Places, Offices,
or Employments, and enjoy the same with the like Salaries, Fees, and
Emoluments thereto belonging, which have hitherto been actually paid,
until his Majesty's Pleasure be further known, or other Provision be
made for the due Government and Ordering of his Majesty's said Colony:
And that in the mean Time, for the Preservation of the publick Peace
and Tranquillity of the said Province, We do strictly command all the
said Persons, of whatsoever Rank, Degree, or Condition, to proceed
in the Execution of their respective Offices, and to perform all
the Duties thereunto belonging: And further, We do hereby will and
command all and singular his Majesty's Subjects in the said Colony,
of what Estate or Degree they, or any of them, be, to be obedient to,
and aiding, helping, and assisting the said Officers and Ministers
in the Performance and Execution of their said Offices, Places, and
Employments, as they tender his Majesty's Displeasure, and will answer
the contrary at their utmost Perils: All which Matters and Things,
herein before commanded and directed, We do, by this Proclamation,
order and direct to be done, performed, submitted to, and obeyed,
until his Majesty shall further make known his Royal Will and Pleasure
thereupon.

Given at Whitehall the Twenty-fifth Day of June, 1752, in the Twenty
sixth Year of his Majesty's Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING

_Manuscript copy in P. C. No printed copy found. Entered on Patent
Rolls, and in Crown Office Docquet Book, vol. 11; entered in Privy
Council Register, II Geo., vol. 14, p. 105. Printed in "London
Gazette," July 4, 1752, from which the above transcript was made._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Issued by the Lords Justices, during the absence of the King at
Hanover.

[2] The charter establishing the colony of Georgia, dated June 9, 1732,
was formally surrendered by the Trustees, June 23, 1752, and the colony
became a royal province (see C. C. Jones' _History of Georgia_, i,
450-459).




1756, May 17.

[Declaration of War against France.]


HIS MAJESTY'S

DECLARATION

OF WAR AGAINST THE FRENCH KING.

GEORGE R.

The unwarrantable Proceedings of the French in the West Indies,
and North America, since the Conclusion of the Treaty of Aix la
Chapelle, and the Usurpations and Encroachments made by them upon
Our Territories, and the Settlements of Our Subjects in those Parts,
particularly in Our Province of Nova Scotia, have been so notorious,
and so frequent, that they cannot but be looked upon as a sufficient
Evidence of a formed Design and Resolution in that Court, to pursue
invariably such Measures, as should most effectually promote their
ambitious Views, without any Regard to the most solemn Treaties and
Engagements. We have not been wanting on Our Part, to make, from time
to time, the most serious Representations to the French King, upon
these repeated Acts of Violence, and to endeavour to obtain Redress and
Satisfaction for the Injuries done to Our Subjects, and to prevent the
like Causes of Complaint for the future: But though frequent Assurances
have been given, that every thing should be settled agreeable to the
Treaties subsisting between the Two Crowns, and particularly that the
Evacuation of the Four Neutral Islands in the West Indies should be
effected (which was expressly promised to Our Ambassadour in France)
the Execution of these Assurances, and of the Treaties on which they
were founded, has been evaded under the most frivolous Pretences;
and the unjustifiable Practices of the French Governors, and of the
Officers acting under their Authority, were still carried on, till,
at length, in the Month of April, One thousand seven hundred and
fifty four, they broke out in open Acts of Hostility, when, in Time
of profound Peace, without any Declaration of War, and without any
previous Notice given, or Application made, a Body of French Troops
under the Command of an Officer bearing the French King's Commission,
attacked in a hostile Manner, and possessed themselves of the English
Fort on the Ohio in North America.

But notwithstanding this Act of Hostility, which could not but be
looked upon as a Commencement of War, yet, from Our earnest Desire of
Peace, and in Hopes the Court of France would disavow this Violence and
Injustice, We contented Ourselves with sending such a Force to America,
as was indispensably necessary for the immediate Defence and Protection
of Our Subjects against fresh Attacks and Insults.

In the mean Time great Naval Armaments were preparing in the Ports of
France, and a considerable Body of French Troops embarked for[1] North
America; and though the French Ambassadour was sent back to England
with specious Professions of a Desire to accommodate these Differences,
yet it appeared, that their real Design was only to gain Time for the
Passage of those Troops to America, which they hoped would secure the
Superiority of the French Forces in those Parts, and enable them to
carry their ambitions and oppressive Projects into Execution.

In these Circumstances We could not but think it incumbent upon Us,
to endeavour to prevent the Success of so dangerous a Design, and to
oppose the Landing of the French Troops in America; and in Consequence
of the just and necessary Measures We had taken for that Purpose,
the French Ambassadour was immediately recalled from Our Court, the
Fortifications at Dunkirk, which had been repairing for some Time, were
enlarged; great Bodies of Troops marched down to the Coast; and Our
Kingdoms were threatened with an Invasion.

In order to prevent the Execution of these Designs, and to provide for
the Security of Our Kingdoms, which were thus threatened, We could
no longer forbear giving Orders for the seizing at Sea the Ships of
the French King, and his Subjects. Notwithstanding which, as We were
still unwilling to give up all Hopes that an Accommodation might be
effected, We have contented Ourselves hitherto with detaining the said
Ships, and preserving them, and (as far as was possible) their Cargoes
intire, without proceeding to the Confiscation of them; but it being
now evident, by the hostile Invasion actually made by the French King
of Our Island of Minorca, that it is the determined Resolution of that
Court to hearken to no Terms of Peace, but to carry on the War, which
has been long begun on their Part, with the utmost Violence, We can no
longer remain, consistently with what We owe to Our own Honour, and to
the Welfare of Our Subjects, within those Bounds, which, from a Desire
of Peace, We had hitherto observed.

We have therefore thought proper to declare War; and We do hereby
Declare War against the French King, who hath so unjustly begun
it, relying on the Help of Almighty God, in Our just Undertaking,
and being assured of the hearty Concurrence and Assistance of Our
Subjects, in Support of so good a Cause; hereby willing and requiring
Our Captain General of Our Forces, Our Commissioners for executing
the Office of Our High Admiral of Great Britain, Our Lieutenants
of Our several Counties, Governors of Our Forts and Garrisons, and
all other Officers and Soldiers under them, by Sea and Land, to do
and execute all Acts of Hostility, in the Prosecution of this War
against the French King, his Vassals and Subjects, and to oppose their
Attempts: Willing and requiring all Our Subjects to take Notice of the
same; whom We henceforth strictly forbid to hold any Correspondence
or Communication with the said French King, or his Subjects. And We
do hereby command Our own Subjects, and advertise all other Persons,
of what Nation soever, not to transport or carry any Soldiers,
Arms, Powder, Ammunition, or other Contraband Goods, to any of the
Territories, Lands, Plantations, or Countries of the said French
King; Declaring, that whatsoever Ship or Vessel shall be met withal,
transporting or carrying any Soldiers, Arms, Powder, Ammunition, or any
other Contraband Goods, to any of the Territories, Lands, Plantations,
or Countries of the said French King, the same, being taken, shall be
condemned as good and lawful Prize.

And whereas there are remaining in Our Kingdom, divers of the Subjects
of the French King, We do hereby Declare Our Royal Intention to be,
That all the French Subjects who shall demean themselves dutifully
towards Us, shall be safe in their Persons and Effects.

Given at our Court at Kensington, the Seventeenth Day of May, 1756,
in the Twenty ninth Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Thomas Baskett, Printer to the King's most
Excellent Majesty; and by the Assigns of Robert Baskett. 1756.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., B. M., and in Mass. Historical Society.
Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in Privy Council Register, II Geo.,
vol. 16, p. 177. Printed in "London Gazette," May 18, 1756. Reprinted
as a broadside by J. Parker, New York, 1756, of which a copy was in the
N. Y. State Library._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] In the copy in the British Museum, this word is printed _from_, but
the word _for_ is substituted in manuscript, and in a contemporaneous
hand is appended the following note: "The above Error was not found out
by either of the Clerks of the Secretaries of State, Offices, &c, but
published and Publickly Stuck up at the 'Change, where a Country-fellow
made his Remark on the Error, which occasion'd fresh Expresses to be
dispatched to the [illegible] and Plantations abroad, at the additional
Expense of L8000."




1759, October 23.

[Thanksgiving in England for Defeat of French.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR A PUBLICK THANKSGIVING.

GEORGE R.

We do most devoutly and thankfully acknowledge the great Goodness
and Mercy of Almighty God, who hath afforded Us his Protection and
Assistance in the just War, in which, for the common Safety of Our
Realms, and for disappointing the boundless Ambition of France, We
are now engaged; and hath given such signal Successes to Our Arms,
both by Sea and Land, particularly by the Defeat of the French Army in
Canada, and the Taking of Quebec; and who hath most seasonably granted
Us at this Time an uncommonly plentiful Harvest: And therefore, duly
considering that such great and publick Blessings do call for publick
and solemn Acknowledgments, We have thought fit, by and with the Advice
of Our Privy Council, to issue this Our Royal Proclamation, hereby
appointing and commanding, That a General Thanksgiving to Almighty God,
for these His Mercies, be observed throughout Our Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, upon Thursday
the Twenty ninth Day of November next. And, for the better and more
religious and orderly Solemnizing the same, We have given Directions to
the most Reverend the Archbishops, and the Right Reverend the Bishops
of England, to compose a Form of Prayer suitable to this Occasion,
to be used in all Churches and Chapels, and other Places of Publick
Worship, and to take Care for the timely dispersing thereof throughout
their respective Dioceses. And We do strictly charge and command, That
the said publick Day of Thanksgiving be religiously observed by all Our
loving Subjects, as they tender the Favour of Almighty God, and upon
Pain of suffering such Punishment as We may justly inflict upon all
such as shall contemn or neglect the Performance of so religious and
necessary a Duty.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Twenty third Day of October,
One thousand seven hundred and fifty nine, in the Thirty third Year
of our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Thomas Baskett, Printer to the King's most
Excellent Majesty; and by the Assigns of Robert Baskett. 1759.

_1 p. folio. Only copy found in Mass. Historical Society. Entered on
Patent Rolls; entered in Privy Council Register, II Geo., vol. 18, p.
170. Printed in "London Gazette," October 27, 1759. It was ordered
by the Privy Council that the Thanksgiving should also be celebrated
in Ireland, and a proclamation with practically the same wording was
issued by the Lord Lieutenant and Council of Ireland, October 30, 1759.
A printed copy of this latter proclamation is in the Dublin Public
Record Office._




1759, October 23.

[Thanksgiving in Scotland for Defeat of French.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR A PUBLICK THANKSGIVING.

GEORGE R.

We do most devoutly and thankfully acknowledge the great Goodness
and Mercy of Almighty God who hath afforded Us his Protection and
Assistance in the just War in which for the common safety of Our Realms
and for disappointing the boundless Ambition of France We are now
engaged; and hath given such signal Successes to Our Arms both by Sea
and Land particularly by the defeat of the French Army in Canada and
the taking of Quebeck and who hath most seasonably granted Us at this
time an uncommonly plentiful Harvest And therefore duly considering
that such great and publick Blessings do call for publick and solemn
Acknowledgments, We have thought fit by and with the Advice of Our
Privy Council to issue this Our Royal Proclamation hereby appointing
and commanding That a general Thanksgiving to Almighty God for these
His Mercies be observed throughout that part of Our Kingdom of Great
Britain called Scotland upon Thursday the Twenty Ninth day of November
next. And we do strictly charge and command That the said Publick
Thanksgiving be reverently and decently observed by all Our loving
Subjects in Scotland on the said Twenty Ninth day of November next
as they tender the favour of Almighty God and would avoid his Wrath
and Indignation and upon pain of such Punishment as We may justly
inflict upon all such as shall contemn or neglect the Performance of
so religious a Duty. Our Will and Pleasure is therefore and We charge
That incontinent this Our Proclamation seen Ye pass to the Market Cross
of Edinburgh and all other Places needful and there in Our Name and
Authority make Publication thereof that none pretend Ignorance And
Our Will and Pleasure is That Our Sollicitor do cause printed Copies
hereof to be sent to the Sherifs of the several Shires Stewarts of
Stewarties and Baillies of Regalities and their Clerks whom We ordain
to see the same published; And We appoint them to send Doubles thereof
to the several Paroch Kirks within their Bounds that upon the Lords day
immediately preceding the Day above mentioned the same may be published
and read from the Pulpits immediately after Divine Service.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the twenty third day of October One
Thousand Seven hundred and Fifty nine in the thirty third Year of Our
Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

_1 p. folio. Only printed copy noted by the editor was advertised
for sale by the Museum Book Store of London in 1909, priced at L27.
10s. Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in Privy Council Register, II
Geo., vol. 18, p. 171, from which this transcript was made. Printed in
"London Gazette," October 27, 1759._




1760, October 27.

[Continuing Officers in the Colonies.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

DECLARING HIS MAJESTY'S PLEASURE FOR CONTINUING THE OFFICERS IN HIS
MAJESTY'S PLANTATIONS TILL HIS MAJESTY'S PLEASURE SHALL BE FURTHER
SIGNIFIED.

GEORGE R.

Whereas by an Act of Parliament made in the Sixth Year of the late
Queen Anne, of blessed Memory, intituled, "An Act for the Security
of her Majesty's Person and Government, and of the Succession to the
Crown of Great Britain in the Protestant Line," it was enacted (amongst
other Things) That no Office, Place, or Employment, Civil or Military,
within any of her said late Majesty's Plantations, should become void
by Reason of the Demise or Death of her said late Majesty, her Heirs,
or Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm; but that the Person and
Persons in any of the Offices, Places, or Employments aforesaid, should
continue in their respective Offices, Places, and Employments, for the
Space of Six Months next after such Death or Demise, unless sooner
removed and discharged by the next in Succession to whom the Crown of
this Realm should come, remain, and be, according to the several Acts
of Parliament for limiting and settling the Succession of the Crown,
as by the said recited Act may appear; And in regard it may happen,
that Our Pleasure may not, within the said Time, be declared, touching
the said Offices, Places, and Employments, in Our Foreign Plantations,
which will, at the End of the said Six Months, become void; We, for
preventing the Inconveniences that may happen thereby, in Our princely
Wisdom and Care of the State (reserving to Our Judgement hereafter the
Reformation and Redress of any Abuses in the Execution of any such
Offices, Places, and Employments, upon due Knowledge and Examination
thereof) have thought fit, with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to
issue this Our Royal Proclamation, and do hereby order, signify, and
declare, That all Persons that, at the Time of the Decease of Our late
Royal Grandfather King George the Second, of glorious Memory, were
duly and lawfully possessed of, or invested in, any Office, Place,
or Employment, Civil or Military, in any of Our Plantations, and
which have not been since removed from such their Offices, Places, or
Employments, shall be, and shall hold themselves continued in the said
Offices, Places, and Employments, as formerly they held and enjoyed
the same, until Our Pleasure be further known, or other Provision be
made, pursuant to the Commissions and Instructions of Our said late
Royal Grandfather, to His Governors and Officers of the Plantations
aforesaid; and that in the mean time, for the Preservation of the
Peace, and necessary Proceedings in Matters of Justice, and for the
Safety and Service of the State, all the said Persons, of whatsoever
Degree or Condition, do not fail every one severally, according to his
Place, Office, or Charge, to proceed in the Performance and Execution
of all Duties thereunto belonging, as formerly appertained unto them,
during the Life of Our said late Royal Grandfather: And further, We
do hereby will and command all and singular Our Subjects in the said
Plantations, of what Estate or Degree they, or any of them, be, to
be aiding, helping, and assisting, at the Commandment of the said
Officers, in the Performance and Execution of the said Offices and
Places, as they tender Our Displeasure, and will answer the contrary at
their utmost Perils.

Given at Our Court at Saville House, the Twenty Seventh Day of
October, 1760, in the First Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

_No printed copy found. Entered on Patent Rolls; in Crown Office
Docquet Book, vol. II, where it is dated October 25; and in Privy
Council Register, III Geo., vol. 1, p. 11. Printed in "London Gazette,"
October 13, 1761, from which this transcript was made._




1763, October 7.

[Establishing New Governments in America.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

GEORGE R.

Whereas We have taken into Our Royal Consideration the extensive
and valuable Acquisitions in America, secured to Our Crown by the
late Definitive Treaty of Peace, concluded at Paris the Tenth Day of
February last;[1] and being desirous, that all Our loving Subjects,
as well of Our Kingdoms as of Our Colonies in America, may avail
themselves, with all convenient Speed, of the great Benefits and
Advantages which must accrue therefrom to their Commerce, Manufactures,
and Navigation; We have thought fit, with the Advice of Our Privy
Council, to issue this Our Royal Proclamation,[2] hereby to publish
and declare to all Our loving Subjects, that We have, with the Advice
of Our said Privy Council, granted Our Letters Patent under Our Great
Seal of Great Britain, to erect within the Countries and Islands ceded
and confirmed to Us by the said Treaty, Four distinct and separate
Governments, stiled and called by the Names of Quebec, East Florida,
West Florida, and Grenada, and limited and bounded as follows; viz.

First. The Government of Quebec, bounded on the Labrador Coast by the
River St. John, and from thence by a Line drawn from the Head of that
River through the Lake St. John to the South End of the Lake nigh
Pissin;[3] from whence the said Line crossing the River St. Lawrence
and the Lake Champlain in Forty five Degrees of North Latitude, passes
along the High Lands which divide the Rivers that empty themselves into
the said River St. Lawrence, from those which fall into the Sea; and
also along the North Coast of the Baye des Chaleurs, and the Coast of
the Gulph of St. Lawrence to Cape Rosieres, and from thence crossing
the Mouth of the River St. Lawrence by the West End of the Island of
Anticosti, terminates at the aforesaid River of St. John.

Secondly. The Government of East Florida, bounded to the Westward by
the Gulph of Mexico, and the Apalachicola River; to the Northward, by a
Line drawn from that Part of the said River where the Chatahouchee and
Flint Rivers meet, to the Source of St. Mary's River, and by the Course
of the said River to the Atlantick Ocean; and to the Eastward and
Southward, by the Atlantick Ocean, and the Gulph of Florida, including
all Islands within Six Leagues of the Sea Coast.

Thirdly. The Government of West Florida, bounded to the Southward
by the Gulph of Mexico, including all Islands within Six Leagues
of the Coast from the River Apalachicola to Lake Pentchartrain; to
the Westward, by the said Lake, the Lake Mauripas, and the River
Mississippi; to the Northward, by a Line drawn due East from that
Part of the River Mississippi which lies in Thirty one Degrees North
Latitude, to the River Apalachicola or Chatahouchee; and to the
Eastward by the said River.

Fourthly. The Government of Grenada, comprehending the Island of that
Name, together with the Grenadines, and the Islands of Dominico, St.
Vincents, and Tobago.

And, to the End that the open and free Fishery of Our Subjects may be
extended to and carried on upon the Coast of Labrador and the adjacent
Islands, We have thought fit, with the Advice of Our said Privy
Council, to put all that Coast, from the River St. John's to Hudson's
Streights, together with the Islands of Anticosti and Madelaine, and
all other smaller Islands lying upon the said Coast, under the Care and
Inspection of Our Governor of Newfoundland.

We have also, with the Advice of Our Privy Council, thought fit to
annex the Islands of St. John's, and Cape Breton or Isle Royale, with
the lesser Islands adjacent thereto, to Our Government of Nova Scotia.

We have also, with the Advice of Our Privy Council aforesaid, annexed
to Our Province of Georgia all the Lands lying between the Rivers
Altamaha and St. Mary's.

And whereas it will greatly contribute to the speedy settling Our said
new Governments, that Our loving Subjects should be informed of Our
Paternal Care for the Security of the Liberties and Properties of
those who are and shall become Inhabitants thereof; We have thought fit
to publish and declare, by this Our Proclamation, that We have, in the
Letters Patent under Our Great Seal of Great Britain, by which the said
Governments are constituted, given express Power and Direction to Our
Governors of Our said Colonies respectively, that so soon as the State
and Circumstances of the said Colonies will admit thereof, they shall,
with the Advice and Consent of the Members of Our Council, summon and
call General Assemblies within the said Governments respectively, in
such Manner and Form as is used and directed in those Colonies and
Provinces in America, which are under Our immediate Government; and
We have also given Power to the said Governors, with the Consent of
Our said Councils, and the Representatives of the People, so to be
summoned as aforesaid, to make, constitute, and ordain Laws, Statutes,
and Ordinances for the Publick Peace, Welfare, and Good Government of
Our said Colonies, and of the People and Inhabitants thereof, as near
as may be agreeable to the Laws of England, and under such Regulations
and Restrictions as are used in other Colonies: And in the mean Time,
and until such Assemblies can be called as aforesaid, all Persons
inhabiting in, or resorting to Our said Colonies, may confide in Our
Royal Protection for the Enjoyment of the Benefit of the Laws of Our
Realm of England; for which Purpose, We have given Power under Our
Great Seal to the Governors of Our said Colonies respectively, to erect
and constitute, with the Advice of Our said Councils respectively,
Courts of Judicature and Publick Justice, within Our said Colonies,
for the hearing and determining all Causes, as well Criminal as Civil,
according to Law and Equity, and as near as may be agreeable to the
Laws of England, with Liberty to all Persons who may think themselves
aggrieved by the Sentences of such Courts, in all Civil Cases, to
appeal, under the usual Limitations and Restrictions, to Us in Our
Privy Council.

We have also thought fit, with the Advice of Our Privy Council as
aforesaid, to give unto the Governors and Councils of Our said Three
New Colonies upon the Continent, full Power and Authority to settle
and agree with the Inhabitants of Our said New Colonies, or with any
other Persons who shall resort thereto, for such Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, as are now, or hereafter shall be in Our Power
to dispose of, and them to grant to any such Person or Persons,
upon such Terms, and under such moderate Quit-Rents, Services, and
Acknowledgments as have been appointed and settled in Our other
Colonies, and under such other Conditions as shall appear to Us to be
necessary and expedient for the Advantage of the Grantees, and the
Improvement and Settlement of our said Colonies.

And whereas We are desirous, upon all Occasions, to testify Our Royal
Sense and Approbation of the Conduct and Bravery of the Officers and
Soldiers of Our Armies, and to reward the same, We do hereby command
and impower Our Governors of Our said Three New Colonies, and all
other Our Governors of Our several Provinces on the Continent of North
America, to grant, without Fee or Reward, to such Reduced Officers as
have served in North America during the late War, and to such Private
Soldiers as have been or shall be disbanded in America, and are
actually residing there, and shall personally apply for the same, the
following Quantities of Lands, subject at the Expiration of Ten Years
to the same Quit-Rents as other Lands are subject to in the Province
within which they are granted, as also subject to the same Conditions
of Cultivation and Improvement; viz.

To every Person having the Rank of a Field Officer, Five thousand
Acres.--To every Captain, Three thousand Acres.--To every Subaltern or
Staff Officer, Two thousand Acres.--To every Non-Commission Officer,
Two hundred Acres.--To every Private Man, Fifty Acres.

We do likewise authorize and require the Governors and Commanders in
Chief of all Our said Colonies upon the Continent of North America, to
grant the like Quantities of Land, and upon the same Conditions, to
such Reduced Officers of Our Navy, of like Rank, as served on Board
Our Ships of War in North America at the Times of the Reduction of
Louisbourg and Quebec in the late War, and who shall personally apply
to Our respective Governors for such Grants.

And whereas it is just and reasonable, and essential to Our Interest
and the Security of Our Colonies, that the several Nations or Tribes of
Indians, with whom We are connected, and who live under Our Protection,
should not be molested or disturbed in the Possession of such Parts
of Our Dominions and Territories as, not having been ceded to, or
purchased by Us, are reserved to them, or any of them, as their Hunting
Grounds; We do therefore, with the Advice of Our Privy Council,
declare it to be Our Royal Will and Pleasure, that no Governor or
Commander in Chief in any of Our Colonies of Quebec, East Florida, or
West Florida, do presume, upon any Pretence whatever, to grant Warrants
of Survey, or pass any Patents for Lands beyond the Bounds of their
respective Governments, as described in their Commissions; as also,
that no Governor or Commander in Chief in any of Our other Colonies
or Plantations in America, do presume, for the present, and until Our
further Pleasure be known, to grant Warrants of Survey, or pass Patents
for any Lands beyond the Heads or Sources of any of the Rivers which
fall into the Atlantick Ocean from the West and North-West, or upon any
Lands whatever, which, not having been ceded to, or purchased by Us as
aforesaid, are reserved to the said Indians, or any of them.

And We do further declare it to be Our Royal Will and Pleasure, for the
present as aforesaid, to reserve under Our Sovereignty, Protection,
and Dominion, for the Use of the said Indians, all the Lands and
Territories not included within the Limits of Our said Three New
Governments, or within the Limits of the Territory granted to the
Hudson's Bay Company, as also all the Lands and Territories lying to
the Westward of the Sources of the Rivers which fall into the Sea
from the West and North West, as aforesaid; and We do hereby strictly
forbid, on Pain of Our Displeasure, all Our loving Subjects from making
any Purchases or Settlements whatever, or taking Possession of any of
the Lands above reserved, without Our especial Leave and Licence for
that Purpose first obtained.

And We do further strictly enjoin and require all Persons whatever, who
have either wilfully or inadvertently seated themselves upon any Lands
within the Countries above described, or upon any other Lands, which,
not having been ceded to, or purchased by Us, are still reserved to the
said Indians as aforesaid, forthwith to remove themselves from such
Settlements.

And whereas great Frauds and Abuses have been committed in the
purchasing Lands of the Indians, to the great Prejudice of Our
Interests, and to the great Dissatisfaction of the said Indians; in
order therefore to prevent such Irregularities for the future, and
to the End that the Indians may be convinced of Our Justice, and
determined Resolution to remove all reasonable Cause of Discontent, We
do, with the Advice of Our Privy Council, strictly enjoin and require,
that no private Person do presume to make any Purchase from the said
Indians of any Lands reserved to the said Indians, within those Parts
of Our Colonies where We have thought proper to allow Settlement; but
that if, at any Time, any of the said Indians should be inclined to
dispose of the said Lands, the same shall be purchased only for Us, in
Our Name, at some publick Meeting or Assembly of the said Indians to
be held for that Purpose by the Governor or Commander in Chief of Our
Colonies respectively, within which they shall lie: and in case they
shall lie within the Limits of any Proprietary Government, they shall
be purchased only for the Use and in the Name of such Proprietaries,
conformable to such Directions and Instructions as We or they shall
think proper to give for that Purpose: And We do, by the Advice of
Our Privy Council, declare and enjoin, that the Trade with the said
Indians shall be free and open to all our Subjects whatever; provided
that every Person, who may incline to trade with the said Indians, do
take out a Licence for carrying on such Trade from the Governor or
Commander in Chief of any of Our Colonies respectively, where such
Person shall reside; and also give Security to observe such Regulations
as We shall at any Time think fit, by Ourselves or by Our Commissaries
to be appointed for this Purpose, to direct and appoint for the Benefit
of the said Trade; And We do hereby authorize, enjoin, and require the
Governors and Commanders in Chief of all Our Colonies respectively, as
well Those under Our immediate Government as those under the Government
and Direction of Proprietaries, to grant such Licences without Fee or
Reward, taking especial Care to insert therein a Condition, that such
Licence shall be void, and the Security forfeited, in Case the Person,
to whom the same is granted, shall refuse or neglect to observe such
Regulations as We shall think proper to prescribe as aforesaid.

And We do further expressly enjoin and require all Officers whatever,
as well Military as those employed in the Management and Direction of
Indian Affairs within the Territories reserved as aforesaid for the Use
of the said Indians, to seize and apprehend all Persons whatever, who,
standing charged with Treasons, Misprisions of Treason, Murders, or
other Felonies or Misdemeanors, shall fly from Justice, and take Refuge
in the said Territory, and to send them under a proper Guard to the
Colony where the Crime was committed of which they stand accused, in
order to take their Tryal for the same.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Seventh Day of October, One
thousand seven hundred and sixty three, in the Third Year of Our
Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Mark Baskett, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty; and by the Assigns of Robert Baskett. 1763.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., and P. C.; also in Mass. State Archives,
and John Carter Brown Library. Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in
Privy Council Register, III Geo., vol. 3, p. 102. Printed in "London
Gazette," October 8, 1763, and in several of the colonial newspapers,
as the "Providence Gazette," December 17, 1763; also in the "Annual
Register," vi, 208, Knox, "New Collection of Voyages," 1767, ii, 265,
and elsewhere._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Text of treaty can be consulted in Chalmers' _Collection of
Treaties_, i, 467.

[2] The events leading up to the issuing of this proclamation have been
so thoroughly treated in C. W. Alvord's "Genesis of the Proclamation
of 1763" in _Michigan Pioneer and Historical Collections_, vol. xxxvi,
p. 20, and in C. E. Carter's _Great Britain and the Illinois Country_
(Prize Essay of the Amer. Hist. Assoc., 1910) that any explanatory
notes in this place seem unnecessary.

[3] _Nipissim_ in proclamation as printed in the _London Gazette_.




1764, March 26.

[Colonizing Granada and other Islands.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION.

GEORGE R.

Whereas We have taken into Our Consideration, the great Benefit which
will arise to the Commerce of Our Kingdoms and the Interests of Our
Subjects, from the speedy Settlement of Our Islands of Grenada, the
Grenadines, Dominica, St. Vincent, and Tobago. We do therefore think
fit, with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to issue this Our Royal
Proclamation to publish and declare to Our loving Subjects, that We
have, with the Advice of Our said Privy Council, given the necessary
Powers and Directions for an immediate Survey and Division into
proper Parishes and Districts, of such of the said Islands as have
not hitherto been so surveyed and divided, and for laying out such
Lands in the said Islands, as are in Our Power to dispose of, into
Allotments for Plantations of different Size and Extent, according as
the Nature of the Land shall be more or less adapted to the Growth of
Sugar, Coffee, Cocoa, Cotton, or other Articles of beneficial Culture,
reserving to Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, such Parts of the said
Islands as shall be necessary for erecting Fortifications thereon, and
for all other military Purposes, for Glebes for Ministers, Allotments
for Schoolmasters, for Woodlands, High Roads, and all other publick
Purposes; and also reserving such Lands in Our Islands of Dominica and
St. Vincent, as, at the Time of the Surrender of those Islands, were
and still are in the Possession of the French Inhabitants of those
Islands, which Lands, it is Our Will and Pleasure should be granted to
such of the said Inhabitants as shall be inclined to accept the same,
upon Leases for Terms absolute, or for renewable Terms, upon certain
Conditions and under proper Restrictions. And We do hereby further
publish and declare, that the Allotments for Plantations in Our Islands
of Grenada, the Grenadines, Tobago, and St. Vincent, shall contain to
Three Hundred Acres, with some few Allotments in each Island of Five
Hundred Acres; and that the Allotments in Our Island of Dominica, which
is represented to be not so well adapted to the Cultivation of Sugar,
and which from its Situation requires in Policy to be well peopled with
White Inhabitants, shall be in general from Fifty to One Hundred Acres.

And whereas We have thought fit to declare to Our Parliament at the
Opening of the present Session, Our Gracious Intention of reserving for
the publick Use, whatever Sums shall be produced by the Sale of any of
the Lands belonging to Us in the Islands of the West Indies, which were
ceded to Us by the late Treaty; We do further publish and declare, that
when these Allotments, or a sufficient Part of them, shall have been
laid out, the same shall be set up to Sale by Auction, at a Price per
Acre, to be fixed thereon by Commissioners appointed for that Purpose,
under Our Great Seal of Great Britain, who shall give publick Notice of
the Time and Place of such Sale.

And We do hereby further publish and declare, that the Lands so set up
to Sale by Auction, shall not be sold, but upon the following Terms,
and under the following Conditions and Reservations, that is to say,

That each Purchaser shall immediately pay into the Hands of such Person
as We shall appoint to receive the same, Twenty per Cent. of the whole
Purchase-Money.

That the Remainder of the Purchase-Money shall be paid by different
Installments, viz. Ten per Cent. within the First Year after the
Purchase, Ten per Cent. more within the Second Year after such
Purchase, and Twenty per Cent. within every successive Year, until the
Whole is paid.

That each Purchaser of Lands which have been cleared and improved,
shall, within the Space of Three Months from the Date of the Grant,
settle and constantly keep upon the Lot purchased, One White Man or Two
White Women for every Hundred Acres contained in the said Lot; and, in
Default thereof, shall be subject to the Payment of Twenty Pounds per
Annum for every White Woman, and Forty Pounds for every White Man, that
shall be wanting to compleat the Number.

That the Purchaser of uncleared Lands shall clear and cultivate One
Acre in every Twenty in each Year, until Half the Land so purchased
shall be cleared; and, in Default thereof, shall pay Five Pounds per
Annum for every Acre not cleared, pursuant to such Condition; and such
Purchaser shall also be obliged to settle and constantly keep upon the
Lot so purchased, One White Man or Two White Women for every Hundred
Acres, as the same shall be cleared.

That each Purchaser shall, besides the Purchase-Money, be subject to
the Payment of an Annual Quit-Rent to Us, Our Heirs, and Successors,
of Six-pence per Acre, under the Penalty of Five Pounds per Acre upon
Non-payment thereof; such Quit-Rents, in the Case of the Purchase of
cleared Lands, to commence from the Date of the Grant; and the first
Payment to be made at the Expiration of the First Year; and in Case of
the Purchase of the uncleared Lands, such Quit-Rents to commence at the
Expiration of Twelve Months from the Time each Acre is cleared.

That in Case of Failure in the Payment of the Purchase-Money in the
Manner above directed, the Purchaser shall forfeit all Right to the
Lands purchased.

That no Person shall purchase at any publick Sale more than Five
Hundred Acres of cleared or uncleared Lands, in the Islands of Grenada,
and the Grenadines, Tobago, and St. Vincent's, and in the Island of
Dominica the Quantity shall be restrained to Three Hundred Acres; and
in Order to enforce this necessary and essential Regulation, that a
Condition shall be inserted in every Grant, to be made in Consequence
of such Purchase, that in Case any Purchase shall be made contrary
thereto, so that the Property of the Purchaser in the Islands where
the Lands lie, shall thereby amount to more than the above Quantity
respectively, the same shall be void, the Money paid thereon
forfeited, and the consequential Grant of no Effect.

That all and every Purchaser of Lands, upon the foregoing Terms and
Conditions, shall immediately, upon the Payment of the first Twenty
per Cent. of the Purchase-Money, receive a Bill of Sale, signed by the
said Commissioners, which shall entitle such Purchasers to a Grant
of the said Lands, under the Seal of the Islands, containing the
aforementioned Conditions and Reservations: Which said Purchase, and
Grant in Consequence thereof, duly registered in the proper Offices,
shall be good and valid in Law against Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
unless the same shall be revoked: And We do hereby declare the same
revocable by Our Commissioners of Our Treasury, or Our High Treasurer
for the Time being, within Twelve Months from the Date thereof; in
which Case such Purchase and Grant shall become void and of no Effect;
and upon Notice of such Revocation, the said Commissioners shall return
to such Purchaser the Money paid upon the Purchase, with legal Interest
thereon, and reasonable Allowance for any Improvements made on the said
Lands.

And whereas the Establishing Towns in proper Situations, within
the said Islands, will conduce greatly to the Convenience of the
Inhabitants, and the Benefit of Trade and Commerce; We have therefore
thought fit, with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to direct a proper
District in every Parish in each Island, to be laid out for that
Purpose, into Lots for Tenements of different Size and Extent; and
each Town-Lot to have a proportionate Allotment of Land contiguous to
such Town, for a small Field or Pasture, allowing one Acre for every
ten Foot in Front of the Town-Lot to which it is to be annexed; but no
Field-Lot to exceed the Quantity of Six Acres.

And We do hereby further publish and declare, that such of these Town
and Pasture-Lots, in each Island, as consist of Lands, which have
been already cleared and improved, shall be set up to Sale by publick
Auction, at a Price per Foot in Front of each Town-Lot, and a Price
per Acre of the Field-Lot, to be fixed upon such Lot, by the said
Commissioners, in like Manner as upon the Allotments for Plantations.

And We do further publish and declare, that the Lots, so set up to
Sale by Auction, shall not be sold but upon the following Terms and
Conditions; that is to say,

That the Purchase-Money, shall be paid in the same Proportion, by the
like Installments and upon the same Conditions as are required in the
Case of the Purchase of Allotments for Plantations.

That each Tenement shall be charged with the Payment of an Annual
Ground-Rent to Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, of One Penny per Foot
in Front, and Sixpence per Acre, for each Acre of the Field annexed
to such Tenement; the said Rents to commence at the Expiration of one
Year from the Date of the Purchase, and the Purchaser to be liable
to the same Penalties, in Case of Failure of the Payment of the
Purchase-Money, and the Ground-Rent and Quit-Rent, as We have already
required in respect to the Purchase of Allotments for Plantations.

And We do further publish and declare, that the Reservations, which We
have directed to be made for Town and Pasture-Lots of uncleared Lands,
shall be granted in Fee Simple by Our Governor in Chief, under the Seal
of the Islands, to any Persons, who will give such Security as Our
Commissioners shall approve, for building on such Town-Lots within a
reasonable Time, to be fixed by Our said Commissioners; and also for
Inclosing, Fencing, and properly Clearing for Pasture, the Fields that
shall be granted with such Tenement.

And We do further publish and declare, that We have directed that no
more than one Town-Lot be granted to any one Person, and that no more
than Six Acres of Pasture-Land be annexed to such Town-Lot, whatever
Number of Feet in Front it shall consist of.

That each Grantee shall be obliged, under proper Penalties, to the
Payment of an Annual Ground-Rent to Us, Our Heirs, and Successors,
of One Penny per Foot in Front of the Town-Lot for a Tenement, and
Sixpence per Acre for each Acre of the Pasture-Lot; the first Payment
to be made within two Years from the Date of the Grant.

And in order the more effectually to conduce to the Peopling Our said
Islands with industrious White Inhabitants, upon which their Strength
and Security do essentially depend; We have thought fit, with the
Advice of Our said Council, to direct a Quantity of Land, not exceeding
Eight Hundred Acres, to be reserved in such Parts of every Parish in
each Island respectively, as are not adapted for Sugar Plantations,
for the Accommodation of poor Settlers, to be divided into Lots,
of not less than Ten, not more than Thirty Acres each; And we do
hereby further publish and declare, that the said Allotments are to
be granted in Fee Simple, under the Seal of Our said Islands, to such
poor Protestants as shall apply for the same, in Proportion to their
respective Abilities to cultivate the said Lands; and subject to the
following Conditions; that is to say,

That each Grantee shall, at the Expiration of four Years from the
Date of the Grant, pay a Quit-Rent to Us, Our Heirs, and Successors,
of Six-pence per Acre, for every Acre then cleared, and a Penalty of
Two Shillings per Acre, for every Acre of Land uncleared; which said
Penalty of Two Shillings per Acre shall be reduced to Six-pence per
Acre, as the Land shall be cleared; and in Case of Failure of such Rent
and Penalty, the Grantee shall be subject to the further Penalty of the
Payment of Five Pounds for every Acre, for which such Quit-Rent shall
not be paid.

That each Grantee shall enter upon and occupy the Land within Three
Months from the Date of the Grant; and shall continue to occupy and
improve the same, for Twelve successive Months, from the Time of such
first Settlement.

That the Lands shall, for the Space of Seven Years, be unalienable by
Sale, nor shall the same be let, set or assigned over during the same
Term, otherwise than to the Use and Benefit of any Child or Children of
such original Settler, without especial licence in Writing first had
and obtained, from the Chief Governor or Commander in Chief of Our said
Islands for the Time being; and in Case of Failure or Default in either
of the two last mentioned Conditions, the Grant to be void.

And We do hereby further publish and declare, that all Grants made of
the said Allotments for poor Settlers, as also all Grants made of Town
and Pasture Lots of cleared and uncleared Lands, shall be absolute and
final.

That in all Grants to be made of Allotments for Plantations and Town
and Pasture Lots, and of Lands for poor Settlers, there shall be a
Reservation to Us, Our Heirs, and Successors of all Mines of Gold and
Silver.

And We do further publish and declare, that the first Sale of Lands
shall be in the Month of June next, if the Surveys can be made so soon;
due Notice of which, as also of the Place of Sale, will be given by
Our Commissioners appointed as aforesaid, for the Disposal of the said
Lands.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Twenty-sixth Day of March,
One thousand seven hundred and sixty-four, in the Fourth Year of Our
Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

_A printed copy is noted in Crawford's "Handlist of Proclamations" as
being in the Society of Antiquaries, but it could not be found by the
present editor, who used the "London Gazette" as the source of his
transcript. Entered on Patent Rolls, and in Crown Office Docquet Book,
vol. 12; entered in Privy Council Register, III Geo., vol. 3, p. 342.
Printed in "London Gazette" March 27, 1764._




1772, August 26.

[For Apprehending Destroyers of the Gaspee.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION:

FOR THE DISCOVERING AND APPREHENDING THE PERSONS WHO PLUNDERED AND
BURNT THE GASPEE SCHOONER; AND BARBAROUSLY WOUNDED AND ILL TREATED
LIEUTENANT WILLIAM DUDINGSTON, COMMANDER OF THE SAID SCHOONER.

Whereas We have received Information, That upon the 10^{th} Day of
June last, between the Hours of Twelve and One in the Morning, in
the Providence or Narrowganset River, in Our Colony of Rhode-Island
and Providence Plantations, a great Number of Persons, armed with
Guns and other offensive Weapons and led by Two Persons, who were
called the Captain and Head-Sheriff, in several armed Boats, attacked
and Boarded Our Vessel called the Gaspee[1] Schooner, then lying at
single Anchor in the said River, commanded by Our Lieutenant William
Dudingston, under the Orders of Our Rear-Admiral John Montagu, and
having dangerously wounded and barbarously treated the said William
Dudingston, took, plundered and burnt the said Schooner: We, to the
Intent that such outrageous and heinous Offenders may be discovered,
and brought to condign Punishment, have thought fit, with the Advice
of Our Privy Council, to issue this Our Royal Proclamation: And We are
hereby graciously pleased to promise, that if any Person or Persons
shall discover any other Person or Persons concerned in the said
daring and heinous Offences, above mentioned, so that he or they may
be apprehended and brought to Justice, such Discoverer shall have and
receive, as a Reward for such Discovery, upon Conviction of each of
the said Offenders, the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds. And if any Person
or Persons shall discover either of the said Persons who acted as,
or called themselves, or were called by their said Accomplices, the
Head-Sheriff or the Captain, so that they, or either of them, may be
apprehended and brought to Punishment, such Discoverer shall have and
receive, as a Reward for such Discovery, upon Conviction of either
of the said Persons, the further Sum of Five Hundred pounds, over
and above the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds herein before promised, for
the discovery and apprehending any of the other common Offenders,
abovementioned; and if any Person or Persons concerned therein,
except the Two Persons who were called the Head-Sheriff, and Captain,
and the Person or Persons who wounded Our said Lieutenant William
Dudingston, shall discover any one or more of the said Accomplices,
so that he or they may be apprehended and brought to Punishment,
such Discoverer shall have and receive the said Reward or Rewards of
Five Hundred Pounds, or One Thousand Pounds, as the Case may be, and
also Our gracious Pardon for his said Offence. And the Commissioners
for executing the Office of Treasurer of Our Exchequer, are hereby
required to make Payment accordingly of the said Rewards. And We do
hereby strictly charge and command all Our Governors, Deputy-Governors,
Magistrates, Officers, and all other Our Loving Subjects, that they
do use their utmost Diligence in their several Places and Capacities,
to find out, discover and apprehend the said Offenders, in Order to
their being brought to Justice. And We do hereby command that this Our
Proclamation be printed and published in the usual Form,[2] and affixed
in the principal Places of Our Town of Newport, and other Towns in Our
said Colony, that none may pretend Ignorance.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Twenty-Sixth Day of August,
1772, in the Twelfth Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

Printed by Solomon Southwick, Printer to the Honorable the Governor
and Company of the Colony of Rhode-Island and Providence-Plantations,
in New-England.

_1 p. folio. Copy in R. I. Historical Society. Entered in Privy Council
Register, III Geo., vol. 9, p. 428. Printed in "R. I. Colonial
Records," vii, 107._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The numerous documents relating to the burning of the Gaspee
are printed in _R. I. Colonial Records_, vol. 7, pp. 55-192; also
in R. I. Historical Society _Proceedings_, 1890-91, pp. 80-92, and
_Publications_, vol. 7, pp. 238-244.

[2] This is the only proclamation of which the editor finds record
that was printed outside of Great Britain. A marginal note appended
to the entry of the proclamation in the Privy Council Register (III
Geo., vol. 9, p. 428) reads: "N. B. The original proclamation under
the Great Seal was sent over to Rhode Island with the Commission &c
by the Secretary of State." In the _London Gazette_ of September
8, 1772, an article dated at Whitehall, August 29, and evidently
officially inspired, recites the circumstances of the attack upon the
Gaspee, the appointment of a commission of inquiry, and the issuance
of a Proclamation which was "to be printed and published within the
said Colony of Rhode Island." Under date of December 22, 1772, Governor
Wanton of Rhode Island wrote to the Sheriffs of the several counties:
"In obedience to the King's command, signified to me, by the Right
Honorable the Earl of Dartmouth, one of his principal secretaries of
state, I have caused to be printed His Majesty's proclamation for
discovering and apprehending the persons who plundered and burnt the
Gaspee schooner; copies of which, I send you by express, which you
are forthwith to affix in the most public places of the several towns
within your colony" (_R. I. Colonial Records_, vii, 117). John Howland
relates that the proclamation was posted near the Market house in
Providence, but was struck down by a patriotic citizen and "mingled
with the filth of the street" (Stone's _Life of Howland_, p. 37).

The editor could find no printed copy of this proclamation in England,
but a few days after returning to America had the good fortune to
discover one of the original broadsides, which was purchased for the R.
I. Historical Society.




1774, December 16.

[Providing Copper Currency for Virginia.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

GEORGE R.

Whereas it hath been humbly represented to Us on the part and behalf of
Our Colony of Virginia that a Currency of Copper Money within the same
Colony would be highly beneficial to Our good Subjects the Inhabitants
thereof for the more easy and convenient making of small Payments; And
Whereas the Treasurer of Our said Colony being thereunto authorized
by an Act of Our Governor Council and Assembly of Our said Colony
passed in the tenth Year of Our Reign[1] hath delivered to the Master
and Worker of Our Mint in Our Tower of London a sufficient quantity
of Fine Copper in Barrs nealed for the Coinage of five Tons of the
Pieces hereinafter mentioned after making the just and usual Allowances
to the Officers of Our Mint; And Whereas Our said Master and Worker
of Our Mint hath in pursuance of Our Warrant for that purpose issued
Coined thereout five Tons of Pieces of Copper Coin of such Weight that
Sixty Pieces thereof are equal to one Pound Weight averdupois without
erring either in excess or defect above one thirtieth part and are of
the value of two shillings and sixpence according to the Currency of
Money in Our said Colony of Virginia And each Piece is Stamped on one
side with Our effigies with the Inscription Georgius III Rex and on the
reverse with the Virginia Arms with the St. Georges Cross leaving out
the escutcheon of Crowns except one Crown at the Top as on the Guinea
without Crest Supporters or Motto except the word Virginia round the
Arms with the date of the Year which are now ready to be exported to
Our said Colony of Virginia.[2] We have thereupon with the Advice of
Our Privy Council thought fit to issue this Our Royal Proclamation
And We do accordingly hereby Ordain declare and Command that the said
Pieces of Copper Money so Coined Stamped and impressed as aforesaid
shall be current and lawful Money of and in Our said Colony of Virginia
and of and within the Districts and precincts of the same and shall
pass and be received therein after the rate following that is to say
Twenty four of the said Pieces shall pass and be received for the Sum
of one shilling according to the Currency of Our said Province of
Virginia and at and after such rate shall be computed accepted and
taken accordingly in all Bargains Rates Payments and other Transactions
of Money; Provided always and We do hereby further declare that no
person shall be obliged to take more than one shilling of such Copper
Money in any one Payment of any Sum of Money under twenty Shillings nor
more than two shillings and sixpence thereof in any one payment of a
larger Sum of Money than twenty shillings;

Given at Our Court at St. James's the Sixteenth day of December 1774
in the Fifteenth Year of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

_No printed copy found. Entered in Privy Council Register, III Geo.,
vol. 11, p. 267, from which this transcript was taken._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The Virginia Assembly, in November, 1769, authorized the treasurer
to purchase copper in Great Britain for the purpose of importing copper
money to the colony (Hening's _Statutes_, viii, 343).

[2] There are many of these Virginia copper half-pennies, dated 1773,
preserved in coin collections. They answer perfectly in appearance to
the above description (see Dickeson, _American Numismatical Manual_, p.
84, and cut on plate viii). Although dated in 1773, it was apparently
not until the following year that they were ready to be exported and
the proclamation enforcing their acceptance issued.




1775, August 23.

[For Suppression of Rebellion in America.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR SUPPRESSING REBELLION AND SEDITION.

GEORGE R.

Whereas many of Our Subjects in divers Parts of Our Colonies and
Plantations in North America, misled by dangerous and ill-designing
Men, and forgetting the Allegiance which they owe to the Power that has
protected and sustained them, after various disorderly Acts committed
in Disturbance of the Publick Peace, to the Obstruction of lawful
Commerce, and to the Oppression of Our loyal Subjects carrying on the
same, have at length proceeded to an open and avowed Rebellion, by
arraying themselves in hostile Manner to withstand the Execution of
the Law, and traitorously preparing, ordering, and levying War against
Us; And whereas there is Reason to apprehend that such Rebellion hath
been much promoted and encouraged by the traitorous Correspondence,
Counsels, and Comfort of divers wicked and desperate Persons within
this Realm: To the End therefore that none of Our Subjects may neglect
or violate their Duty through Ignorance thereof, or through any
Doubt of the Protection which the Law will afford to their Loyalty
and Zeal; We have thought fit, by and with the Advice of Our Privy
Council, to issue this Our Royal Proclamation, hereby declaring that
not only all Our Officers Civil and Military are obliged to exert
their utmost Endeavours to suppress such Rebellion, and to bring
the Traitors to Justice; but that all Our Subjects of this Realm and
the Dominions thereunto belonging are bound by Law to be aiding and
assisting in the Suppression of such Rebellion, and to disclose and
make known all traitorous Conspiracies and Attempts against Us, Our
Crown and Dignity; And We do accordingly strictly charge and command
all Our Officers as well Civil as Military, and all other Our obedient
and loyal Subjects, to use their utmost Endeavours to withstand and
suppress such Rebellion, and to disclose and make known all Treasons
and traitorous Conspiracies which they shall know to be against Us,
Our Crown and Dignity; and for that Purpose, that they transmit to One
of Our Principal Secretaries of State, or other proper Officer, due
and full Information of all Persons who shall be found carrying on
Correspondence with, or in any Manner or Degree aiding or abetting the
Persons now in open Arms and Rebellion against Our Government within
any of Our Colonies and Plantations in North America, in order to bring
to condign Punishment the Authors, Perpetrators, and Abettors of such
traitorous Designs.

Given at Our Court at St. James's the Twenty-third Day of August, One
thousand seven hundred and seventy-five, in the Fifteenth Year of Our
Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Charles Eyre and William Strahan, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. 1775.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Mass. State Archives, Boston Public Library,
and N. Y. Public Library. Entered on Patent Rolls, and in Crown Office
Docquet Book, vol. 12; entered in Privy Council Register, III Geo.,
vol. 12, p. 83. Printed in "London Gazette," August 26, 1775, and in
most of the colonial newspapers. It was reprinted in broadside form in
Boston (copies in N. Y. Public Library, Mass. Historical Society, and
Mass. State Archives), and in New York (copy in Library of Congress);
for the full titles, see Evans' "American Bibliography," nos. 14077 and
14078. The original English issue has been printed in facsimile form
in the Boston Public Library "Bulletin" for October, 1892, and as an
artotype by Bierstadt of New York, about 1890._




1775, December 22.

[Appointing the Distribution of Prizes.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

APPOINTING THE DISTRIBUTION OF PRIZES TAKEN DURING THE CONTINUANCE
OF THE REBELLION NOW SUBSISTING IN DIVERS PARTS OF THE CONTINENT OF
NORTH AMERICA.

GEORGE R.

Whereas by an Act, made in this present Session of Parliament,
intituled, An Act to prohibit all Trade and Intercourse with
the Colonies of New Hampshire, Massachuset's Bay, Rhode Island,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pensylvania, the Three Lower
Counties on Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South
Carolina, and Georgia, during the Continuance of the present Rebellion
within the said Colonies respectively; for repealing an Act, made in
the Fourteenth Year of the Reign of His present Majesty, to discontinue
the Landing and Discharging, Lading or Shipping, of Goods, Wares, and
Merchandize, at the Town and within the Harbour of Boston, in the
Province of Massachuset's Bay; and also Two Acts, made in the last
Session of Parliament, for restraining the Trade and Commerce of the
Colonies in the said Acts respectively mentioned; and to enable any
Person or Persons, appointed and authorized by His Majesty to grant
Pardons, to issue Proclamations, in the Cases, and for the Purposes
therein mentioned; It is, amongst other Things, enacted, That all Ships
and Vessels of or belonging to the Inhabitants of the said Colonies,
together with their Cargoes, Apparel, and Furniture, except as in the
said Act are excepted, and all other Ships and Vessels whatsoever,
together with their Cargoes, Apparel, and Furniture, which shall be
found trading in any Port or Place of the said Colonies, or going to
trade, or coming from trading, in any such Port or Place, except as
are therein also excepted, shall become forfeited to His Majesty, as
if the same were the Ships and Effects of Open Enemies, and shall
be so adjudged, deemed, and taken, in all Courts of Admiralty, and
in all other Courts whatsoever: And, for the Encouragement of the
Officers and Seamen of His Majesty's Ships of War, it is thereby
also further enacted, That the Flag Officers, Captains, Commanders,
and other commissioned Officers in His Majesty's Pay, and also the
Seamen, Marines, and Soldiers on Board, shall have the sole Interest
and Property of and in all and every such Ship, Vessel, Goods, and
Merchandize, which they shall seize and take, (being first adjudged
lawful Prize in any of His Majesty's Courts of Admiralty) to be
divided in such Proportions, and after such Manner, as His Majesty
shall think fit to order and direct by Proclamation or Proclamations
hereafter to be issued for those Purposes: We, taking the Premises into
Consideration, do, pursuant to the said Act of Parliament, (with the
Advice of Our Privy Council), by this Our Proclamation, order, direct,
and appoint, That the neat Produce of all Prizes taken, in Pursuance
of the said Act, by Our Ships of War, be divided into Eight equal
Parts, and be distributed in Manner following; that is to say, To the
Captain or Captains of any of Our Ships of War, who shall be actually
on Board at the Taking of any Prize, Three Eighth Parts; but in case
any such Prize shall be taken by any of Our Ship or Ships of War,
under the Command of a Flag or Flags, the Flag Officer or Officers,
being actually on Board, or directing and assisting in the Capture,
shall have One of the said Three Eighth Parts, the said One Eighth
Part to be paid to such Flag or Flag Officers, in such Proportions,
and subject to such Regulations, as are herein-after for that Purpose
mentioned: To the Captains of Marines and Land Forces, Sea Lieutenants
and Master, on Board any such Ships, One Eighth Part, to be equally
divided amongst them: To the Lieutenants and Quarter Masters of
Marines, and Lieutenants, Ensigns, and Quarter Masters of Land Forces,
Boatswain, Gunner, Purser, Carpenter, Master's Mate, Chirurgeon, Pilot,
and Chaplain, on Board any such Ship, One Eighth Part, to be equally
divided amongst them: To the Midshipmen, Secretary to Flag Officers,
Captain's Clerk, Master Sail Maker, Carpenter's Mates, Boatswain's
Mates, Gunner's Mates, Master at Arms, Corporals, Yeomen of the Sheets,
Coxswain, Quarter Masters, Quarter Master's Mates, Chirurgeon's Mates,
Yeomen of the Powder Room, and Serjeants of Marines or Land Forces,
on Board any such Ships, One Eighth Part, to be equally divided
amongst them; To the Trumpeters, Quarter Gunners, Carpenter's Crew,
Steward, Cook, Armourer, Steward's Mate, Cook's Mate, Gunsmith,
Cooper, Swabber, Ordinary Trumpeter, Barber, Able Seamen, Ordinary
Seamen, and Marine or other Soldiers, and all other Persons doing
Duty, or assisting on Board any such Ships, Two Eighth Parts, to be
equally divided amongst them. And in case any Sea Captain, inferior
Commission or Warrant Sea Officers, belonging to any Ship of War, for
whom any Shares of Prizes are hereby allowed, be absent at the Time
of the Capture of any Prize, the Share of such Sea Captain, inferior
Commission or Warrant Sea Officer, shall be cast into the Shares hereby
allowed to the Trumpeters, Quarter Gunners, Carpenter's Crew, Steward,
Cook, Armourer, Steward's Mate, Cook's Mate, Gunsmith, Cooper, Swabber,
Ordinary Trumpeter, Barber, Able Seamen, Ordinary Seamen, and Marine
or other Soldiers, and other Persons doing Duty, or assisting on Board
any such Ships, to be equally divided amongst them. Provided, That if
any Officer or Officers on Board any of Our Ships of War, at the Time
of taking any such Prizes, shall have more Commissions or Offices than
one, he or they shall be intitled only to the Share or Shares of the
said Prizes which, according to the above-mentioned Distribution, shall
belong to his or their respective superior Commissions or Offices. And
We do hereby strictly enjoin all and every Commander and Commanders of
any Ships of War, taking any Prize, as soon as may be, to transmit,
or cause to be transmitted, to the Commissioners of Our Navy, a true
List of the Names of all the Officers, Seamen, Marines, Soldiers, or
others, who were actually on Board Our Ships of War, under his or their
Command, at the taking such Prize; which List shall contain the Quality
of the Service of each Person on Board, and be subscribed by the
Captain or Commanding Officer, and Three or more of the Chief Officers
on Board. And We do hereby require and direct the Commissioners of
Our Navy, or any Three or more of them, to examine, or cause to be
examined, such Lists by the Muster Books of such Ships of War, and
Lists annexed thereto, to see that such Lists do agree with the said
Muster Book, and annexed Lists, as to the Names, Qualities, or Ratings
of the Officers, Seamen, Marines, Soldiers, and others belonging to
such Ship of War; and, upon Request, forthwith to grant a Certificate
of the Truth of any List transmitted to them, to the Agents nominated
and appointed by the Captors, pursuant to the said Act, to take care
or dispose of such Prize; and also, upon Application to them, to give,
or cause to be given, unto the Agents who shall, at any Time or
Times, be appointed as aforesaid by the Captors, all such Lists from
the Muster Books of any such Ships of War, and annexed Lists, as the
said Agents shall find requisite for their Direction in paying the
Produce of such Prizes, and to be otherwise aiding and assisting to
the said Agents, as shall be necessary. And as touching the said One
Eighth Part, herein before mentioned to be granted to the Flag or Flag
Officers, who shall be actually on Board at the taking of any Prize,
or shall be directing and assisting therein, We have thought fit, and
do, by these Presents, publish, order, and declare, That the following
Regulations be observed; First, That a Flag Officer commanding in
Chief, where there is but One Flag Officer upon Service, shall have to
his own Use the said One Eighth Part of the Prizes taken by Ships under
his Command: Secondly, That a Flag Officer sent to command at Jamaica,
or elsewhere, shall have no Right to any Share of the Prizes taken, by
Ships employed there, before he arrives at the Place to which he is
sent, and actually takes upon him the Command: Thirdly, That when an
inferior Flag Officer is sent out to reinforce a superior Flag Officer
at Jamaica, or elsewhere, the said superior Flag Officer shall have
no Right to any Share in the Prizes taken by them before they arrive
within the Limits of his Command, and actually receive some Orders from
him: Fourthly, That a Chief Flag Officer returning home from Jamaica,
or elsewhere, shall have no Share of the Prizes taken by the Ships
left behind to act under another Command: Fifthly, That if a Flag
Officer is sent to command in the Out-ports of this Kingdom, he shall
have no Share of the Prizes taken by Ships that sailed from that Port,
by Order from the Admiralty: Sixthly, That when more Flag Officers
than One serve together, the Eighth Part of the Prizes taken by any
Ships of the Fleet, or Squadron, shall be divided in the following
Proportions; videlicet, If there be but Two Flag Officers, the Chief
shall have Two Third Parts of the said One Eighth Part, and the other
shall have the remaining Third Part; but if the Number of Flag Officers
be more than Two, the Chief shall have only One Half, and the other
Half shall be divided equally among the other Flag Officers: Seventhly,
That Commodores, with Captains under them, shall be esteemed as Flag
Officers, with respect to their Right to an Eighth Part of Prizes
taken, whether commanding in Chief, or serving under Command.

Given at our Court at St. James's, the Twenty-second Day of December,
One thousand seven hundred and seventy-five, in the Sixteenth Year of
Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Charles Eyre and William Strahan, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. 1775.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., and P. C. Entered on Patent Rolls,
and in Crown Office Docquet Book, vol. 12; entered in Privy Council
Register, III Geo., vol. 12, p. 267. Printed in "London Gazette,"
December 23, 1775._




1776, October 30.

[Fast Day in England.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR A GENERAL FAST.

GEORGE R.

We, taking into Our most serious Consideration the just and necessary
Measures of Force which We are obliged to use against Our rebellious
Subjects in Our Colonies and Provinces in North America; and putting
Our Trust in Almighty God, that he will vouchsafe a Special Blessing on
Our Arms, both by Sea and Land, have resolved, and do, by and with the
Advice of Our Privy Council, hereby command, That a Publick Fast and
Humiliation be observed throughout that Part of Our Kingdom of Great
Britain called England, Our Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick
upon Tweed, upon Friday the Thirteenth Day of December next; that so
both We and Our People may humble Ourselves before Almighty God, in
order to obtain Pardon of Our Sins; and may, in the most devout and
solemn Manner, send up Our Prayers and Supplications to the Divine
Majesty, for averting those heavy Judgements, which Our manifold
Sins and Provocations have most justly deserved, and for imploring
his Intervention and Blessing speedily to deliver Our loyal Subjects
within Our Colonies and Provinces in North America from the Violence,
Injustice, and Tyranny of those daring Rebels who have assumed to
themselves the Exercise of Arbitrary Power, to open the Eyes of those
who have been deluded by specious Falshoods, into Acts of Treason and
Rebellion, to turn the Hearts of the Authors of these Calamities,
and finally to restore Our People in those distracted Provinces and
Colonies to the happy Condition of being free Subjects of a free State;
under which heretofore they flourished so long and prospered so much:
And We do strictly charge and command, that the said Publick Fast be
reverently and devoutly observed by all Our loving Subjects in England,
Our Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, as they tender
the Favour of Almighty God, and would avoid his Wrath and Indignation;
and upon Pain of such Punishment, as We may justly inflict upon all
such as contemn and neglect the Performance of so religious a Duty. And
for the better and more orderly solemnizing the same, We have given
Directions to the most Reverend the Archbishops, and the Right Reverend
the Bishops of England to compose a Form of Prayer suitable to this
Occasion, to be used in all Churches, Chapels, and Places of Publick
Worship; and to take Care the same be timely dispersed throughout their
respective Dioceses.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Thirtieth Day of October, One
thousand seven hundred and seventy-six, in the Seventeenth Year of
Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Charles Eyre and William Strahan, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. MDCCLXXVI.

_1 p. folio. Copy in B. M. Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in Privy
Council Register, III Geo., vol. 13, p. 172. Printed in "London
Gazette," November 2, 1776. A proclamation with practically the same
wording was issued by the Lord Lieutenant and Council of Ireland,
November 7, 1776 (copy in Dublin P. R. O.), in consequence of an order
of the Privy Council (Privy Council Register, III Geo., vol. 13, p.
174)._




1776, October 30.

[Fast Day in Scotland.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR A GENERAL FAST.

GEORGE R.

We taking into Our most serious Consideration the just and necessary
Measures of Force, which We are obliged to use against Our rebellious
Subjects in Our Colonies and Provinces in North America, and putting
Our Trust in Almighty God that he will vouchsafe a special Blessing on
Our Arms both by Sea and Land, have resolved, and do, by and with the
Advice of Our Privy Council, hereby command, That a Publick Fast and
Humiliation be observed throughout that Part of Our Kingdom of Great
Britain called Scotland, upon Thursday the Twelfth Day of December
next, that so both We and Our People may humble Ourselves before
Almighty God, in order to obtain Pardon of Our Sins, and may, in the
most devout and solemn Manner, send up Our Prayers and Supplications
to the Divine Majesty, for averting those heavy Judgments which Our
manifold Sins and Provocations have most justly deserved, and for
imploring His Intervention and Blessing speedily to deliver Our Loyal
Subjects within Our Colonies and Provinces in North America, from the
Violence, Injustice, and Tyranny of those daring Rebels, who have
assumed to themselves the Exercise of Arbitrary Power; to open the
Eyes of those who have been deluded by specious Falsehoods into Acts
of Treason and Rebellion; to turn the Hearts of the Authors of these
Calamities; and finally to restore Our People, in those distracted
Provinces and Colonies, to the happy Condition of being Free Subjects
of a Free State, under which heretofore they flourished so long, and
prospered so much. And We do strictly charge and command, that the
said Publick Fast be reverently and devoutly observed by all Our
loving Subjects in Scotland, as they tender the Favour of Almighty
God, and would avoid His Wrath and Indignation, and upon Pain of such
Punishment as we may justly inflict on all such as contemn and neglect
the Performance of so Religious a Duty. Our Will is therefore, and We
charge, That incontinent this Our Proclamation seen, ye pass to the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and all other Places needful, and there,
in Our Name and Authority, make Publication hereof, that none pretend
Ignorance. And Our Will and Pleasure is, That Our Solicitor do cause
printed Copies hereof to be sent to the Sheriffs of the several Shires,
Stewarts of Stewarties, and Bailiffs of Regalities, and their Clerks,
whom We ordain to see the same published: And We appoint them to send
Doubles hereof to the several Paroch Kirks within their Bounds, that
upon the Lord's Day immediately preceding the Day abovementioned, the
same may be published and read from the Pulpits, immediately after
Divine Service.

Given at Our Court at St. James's the Thirtieth Day of October, One
thousand seven hundred and seventy-six, in the Seventeenth Year of
Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

_No printed copy found. Entered on Patent Rolls; entered in Privy
Council Register, III Geo., vol. 13, p. 173. Printed in "London
Gazette," November 2, 1776._




1778, January 23.

[Fast Day in England.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR A GENERAL FAST.

GEORGE R.

We, taking into Our most serious Consideration the just and necessary
Measures of Force which We are obliged to use against Our Rebellious
Subjects in Our Colonies and Provinces in North America; and putting
Our Trust in Almighty God, that He will vouchsafe a special Blessing on
Our Arms, both by Sea and Land, have resolved, and do, by and with the
Advice of Our Privy Council, hereby command, That a Publick Fast and
Humiliation be observed throughout that Part of Our Kingdom of Great
Britain called England, Our Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick
upon Tweed, upon Friday the Twenty-seventh Day of February next; that
so both We and Our People may humble Ourselves before Almighty God, in
order to obtain Pardon of Our Sins; and may, in the most devout and
solemn Manner, send up Our Prayers and Supplications to the Divine
Majesty for averting those heavy Judgements, which Our manifold Sins
and Provocations have most justly deserved, and for imploring his
Intervention and Blessing speedily to deliver Our loyal Subjects
within Our Colonies and Provinces in North America from the Violence,
Injustice, and Tyranny of those daring Rebels who have assumed to
themselves the Exercise of Arbitrary Power, to open the Eyes of those
who have been deluded by specious Falsehoods into Acts of Treason and
Rebellion, to turn the Hearts of the Authors of these Calamities,
and finally to restore Our People in those distracted Provinces and
Colonies to the happy Condition of being free Subjects of a free State,
under which heretofore they flourished so long and prospered so much:
And We do strictly charge and command, That the said Publick Fast be
reverently and devoutly observed by all Our loving Subjects in England,
Our Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, as they tender
the Favour of Almighty God, and would avoid his Wrath and Indignation;
and upon Pain of such Punishment as We may justly inflict on all such
as contemn and neglect the Performance of so religious a Duty. And
for the better and more orderly solemnizing the same, We have given
Directions to the Most Reverend the Archbishops, and the Right Reverend
the Bishops of England, to compose a Form of Prayer suitable to this
Occasion, to be used in all Churches, Chapels, and Places of Publick
Worship; and to take Care the same be timely dispersed throughout their
respective Dioceses.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Twenty-third Day of January,
One thousand seven hundred and seventy-eight, in the Eighteenth Year
of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Charles Eyre and William Strahan, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. MDCCLXXVIII.

_1 p. folio. Copy in P. C. Entered on Patent Rolls, and in Crown Office
Docquet Book, vol. 12, entered in Privy Council Register, III Geo.,
vol. 14, p. 458. Printed in "London Gazette," January 24, 1778. A
proclamation with practically the same wording was issued by the Lord
Lieutenant and Council of Ireland, January 31, 1775 (copy in Dublin P.
R. O.), in consequence of an order of the Privy Council (Privy Council
Register, III Geo., vol. 14, p. 461)._




1778, January 23.

[Fast Day in Scotland.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR A GENERAL FAST.

GEORGE R.

We, taking into Our most serious Consideration the just and necessary
Measures of Force which We are obliged to use against Our Rebellious
Subjects in Our Colonies and Provinces in North America; and putting
Our Trust in Almighty God, that He will vouchsafe a special Blessing on
Our Arms, both by Sea and Land, have resolved, and do, by and with the
Advice of Our Privy Council, hereby command, That a Publick Fast and
Humiliation be observed throughout that Part of Our Kingdom of Great
Britain called Scotland, upon Thursday the Twenty sixth Day of February
next; that so both We and Our People may humble Ourselves before
Almighty God, in order to obtain Pardon of Our Sins; and may, in the
most devout and solemn Manner, send up Our Prayers and Supplications
to the Divine Majesty, for averting those heavy Judgments, which Our
manifold Sins and Provocations have most justly deserved, and for
imploring His Intervention and Blessing, speedily to deliver Our loyal
Subjects, within Our Colonies and Provinces in North America, from
the Violence, Injustice and Tyranny of those daring Rebels, who have
assumed to themselves the Exercise of Arbitrary Power; to open the
Eyes of those who have been deluded by specious Falsehoods into Acts
of Treason and Rebellion; to turn the Hearts of the Authors of these
Calamities; and finally to restore Our People in those distracted
Provinces and Colonies to the happy Condition of being Free Subjects
of a Free State, under which heretofore they flourished so long and
prospered so much. And We do strictly charge and command, That the
said Publick Fast be reverently and devoutly observed by all Our
loving Subjects in Scotland, as they tender the Favour of Almighty
God, and would avoid His Wrath and Indignation; and upon Pain of such
Punishment as We may justly inflict on all such as contemn and neglect
the Performance of so religious a Duty. Our Will is therefore, and We
charge, That incontinent this Our Proclamation seen, ye pass to the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and all other Places needful, and there,
in Our Name and Authority, make Publication hereof, that none pretend
Ignorance. And Our Will and Pleasure is, That Our Solicitor do cause
printed Copies hereof to be sent to the Sheriffs of the several Shires,
Stewarts of Stewarties, and Bailif's of Regalities, and their Clerks,
whom We ordain to see the same published; and We appoint them to send
Doubles hereof to the several Paroch Kirks within their Bounds, that
upon the Lord's Day immediately preceding the Day above mentioned,
the same may be published and read from the Pulpits immediately after
Divine Service.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Twenty-third Day of January,
One thousand seven hundred and seventy-eight, in the Eighteenth Year
of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

_No printed copy found. Entered on Patent Rolls, and in Crown Office
Docquet Book, vol. 12; entered in Privy Council Register, III Geo.,
vol. 14, p. 460. Printed in "London Gazette," January 24, 1778._




1778, September 16.

[Regarding the Distribution of Prizes.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR GRANTING THE DISTRIBUTION OF PRIZES DURING THE PRESENT
HOSTILITIES.

GEORGE R.

Whereas, by Our Order in Council dated the Twenty-ninth Day of July
last, We have ordered that general Reprisals be granted against the
Ships, Goods, and Subjects of the French King, and that as well Our
Fleets and Ships, as also all other Ships and Vessels that shall
be commissionated by Letters of Marque, or general Reprisals, or
otherwise, by Our Commissioners for executing Our Office of Lord High
Admiral of Great Britain, shall and may lawfully seize all Ships,
Vessels and Goods, belonging to the French King, and bring the same to
Judgement in any of Our Courts of Admiralty within Our Dominions: We,
being desirous to give due Encouragement to all Our faithful Subjects
who shall lawfully seize the same, and having declared in Council, by
Our Order of the Seventh of last Month, Our Intentions concerning the
Distribution of all Manner of Captures, Seizures, Prizes and Reprisals,
of all Ships and Goods, during the present Hostilities, do now make
known to all Our loving Subjects, and all others whom it may concern,
by this Our Proclamation, by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council,
that Our Will and Pleasure is, That the Neat Produce of all Prizes
taken, the Right whereof is inherent in Us, and Our Crown, be given
to the Takers in the Proportion and Manner of Proceeding herein-after
set forth: that is to say, That all Prizes taken by Ships and Vessels
having Commissions of Letters of Marque and Reprisals, may be sold and
disposed of by the Merchants, Owners, Fitters, and others to whom such
Letters of Marque and Reprisals are granted, for their own Use and
Benefit, after final Adjudication, and not before. And We do hereby
further Order and direct, that the Neat Produce of all Prizes which are
or shall be taken by any of Our Ships or Vessels of War, shall be for
the entire Benefit and Encouragement of Our Flag Officers, Captains,
Commanders, and other Commissioned Officers in Our Pay, and of the
Seamen, Marines, and Soldiers, on Board Our said Ships and Vessels at
the Time of the Capture; and that such Prizes may be lawfully sold and
disposed of by them and their Agents, after the same shall have been to
Us finally adjudged lawful Prize, and not otherwise. The Distribution
shall be made as follows; the Whole of the Neat Produce being first
divided into Eight equal Parts;

The Captain or Captains of any of Our said Ships and Vessels of War,
who shall be actually on Board at the Taking of any Prize, shall have
Three Eighth Parts; but in case any such Prize shall be taken by any
of Our Ships or Vessels of War, under the Command of a Flag or Flags,
the Flag Officer or Officers being actually on Board or directing and
assisting in the Capture, shall have One of the said Three Eighth
Parts; the said One Eighth Part to be paid to such Flag or Flag
Officers in such Proportions, and subject to such Regulations, as are
herein-after mentioned:

The Captains of Marines and Land Forces, Sea Lieutenants, and Master on
Board, shall have One Eighth Part, to be equally divided amongst them:

The Lieutenants and Quarter Masters of Marines, and Lieutenants,
Ensigns, and Quarter Masters of Land Forces, Secretaries of Admirals or
of Commodores, with Captains under them, Boatswains, Gunners, Purser,
Carpenter, Master's Mates, Chirurgeon, Pilot, and Chaplain on Board,
shall have One Eighth Part, to be equally divided amongst them:

The Midshipmen, Captain's Clerk, Master Sailmaker, Carpenter's Mates,
Boatswain's Mates, Gunner's Mates, Master at Arms, Corporals, Yeomen
of the Sheets, Cockswain, Quarter Masters, Quarter Masters Mates,
Chirurgeon's Mates, Yeomen of the Powder Room, Serjeants of Marines,
and Land Forces on Board, shall have One Eighth Part, to be equally
divided amongst them:

The Trumpeters, Quarter Gunners, Carpenter's Crew, Stewards, Cook,
Armourer, Steward's Mate, Cook's Mate, Gunsmith, Cooper, Swabber,
Ordinary Trumpeter, Barber, Able Seamen, Ordinary Seamen, and Marines,
and other Soldiers, and all other Persons doing Duty and assisting on
Board, shall have Two Eighth Parts, to be equally divided amongst them:

Provided, That if any Officer being on Board any of Our Ships of War,
at the Time of taking any Prize, shall have more Commissions or
Offices than One, such Officer shall be intitled only to the Share
or Shares of the Prizes which, according to the above-mentioned
Distribution, shall belong to his superior Commission or Office. And We
do hereby strictly enjoin all Commanders of Our Ships and Vessels of
War taking any Prize, as soon as may be, to transmit, or cause to be
transmitted, to the Commissioners of Our Navy, a true List of the Names
of all the Officers, Seamen, Marines, Soldiers, and others, who were
actually on Board Our Ships and Vessels of War under their Command at
the Time of the Capture; which List shall contain the Quality of the
Service of each Person on Board, and be subscribed by the Captain or
Commanding Officer, and Three or more of the Chief Officers on Board.
And we do hereby require and direct the Commissioners of Our Navy, or
any Three or more of them, to examine, or cause to be examined, such
Lists by the Muster Books of such Ships and Vessels of War, and Lists
annexed thereto, to see that such Lists do agree with the said Muster
Books and annexed Lists, as to the Names, Qualities, or Ratings of the
Officers, Seamen, Marines, Soldiers, and others belonging to such Ships
and Vessels of War, and upon Request forthwith to grant a Certificate
of the Truth of any List transmitted to them, to the Agents nominated
and appointed by the Captors, to take care and dispose of such Prize;
and also upon Application to them (the said Commissioners) they shall
give, or cause to be given, to the said Agents, all such Lists from
the Muster Books of any such Ships of War, and annexed Lists, as the
said Agents shall find requisite for their Direction in paying the
Produce of such Prizes, and otherwise shall be aiding and assisting
to the said Agents in all such Matters as shall be necessary. We do
hereby further will and direct, that the following Regulations shall
be observed concerning the One Eighth Part herein-before mentioned to
be granted to the Flag, or Flag Officers, who shall actually be on
Board at the taking of any Prize, or shall be directing or assisting
therein: First, That a Flag Officer, Commander in Chief, when there is
but One Flag Officer upon Service, shall have to his own Use the said
One Eighth Part of the Prizes taken by Ships and Vessels under his
Command: Secondly, That a Flag Officer, sent to command at Jamaica, or
elsewhere, shall have no Right to any Share of Prizes taken by Ships or
Vessels employed there, before he arrives at the Place to which he is
sent, and actually takes upon him the Command: Thirdly, That when an
inferior Flag Officer is sent out to reinforce a superior Flag Officer
at Jamaica, or elsewhere, the superior Flag Officer shall have no Right
to any Share or Prizes taken by the inferior Flag Officer, before the
inferior Flag Officer shall arrive within the Limits of the Command
of the superior Flag Officer, and actually receive some Order from
him: Fourthly, That a Chief Flag Officer returning home from Jamaica,
or elsewhere, shall have no Share of the Prizes taken by the Ships or
Vessels left behind to act under another Command: Fifthly, That if a
Flag Officer is sent to command in the Out-ports of this Kingdom, he
shall have no Share of the Prizes taken by Ships or Vessels which have
sailed from that Port by Order from the Admiralty: Sixthly, That when
more Flag Officers than One serve together, the Eighth Part of the
Prizes taken by any Ships or Vessels of the Fleet or Squadron, shall
be divided in the following Proportions; viz. If there be but Two Flag
Officers, the Chief shall have Two Third Parts of the said One Eighth
Part, and the other shall have the remaining Third Part; but if the
Number of Flag Officers be more than Two, the Chief shall have only One
Half, and the other Half shall be equally divided amongst the other
Flag Officers: Seventhly, That Commodores with Captains under them
shall be esteemed as Flag Officers with respect to the Eighth Part of
Prizes taken, whether commanding in Chief or serving under Command. And
We do hereby further order, That in the Case of Cutters, Schooners,
and other armed Vessels commanded by Lieutenants, the Share of such
Lieutenants shall be Three Eighth Parts of the Prize, unless such
Lieutenants shall be under the Command of a Flag Officer or Officers;
in which Case the Flag Officer or Officers shall have One of the said
Three Eighths, to be divided among such Flag Officer or Flag Officers
in the Manner herein-before directed in the Case of Captains serving
under Flag Officers: Secondly, We direct that the Share of the Master
or other Person acting as Second in Command, and the Pilot, (if there
happens to be One on Board) shall be One Eighth Part, to be divided
into Three equal Parts; of which Two Thirds shall go to the Master,
or other Person acting as Second in Command, and the remaining One
Third to the Pilot; but if there is no Pilot, then such Eighth Part to
go wholly to the Master or Person acting as Second in Command: That
the Share of the Chirurgeon, or Chirurgeon's Mate, (where there is no
Chirurgeon) Midshipmen, and Clerk and Steward, shall be One Eighth;
That the Share of the Boatswain's, Gunner's, and Carpenter's Mates,
Yeomen of the Sheets, Sailmaker, Quarter Master, and Quarter Master's
Mate, shall be One Eighth; and the Share of the Seamen, Marines,
and other Persons on Board, assisting in the Capture, shall be Two
Eighth Parts. But it is Our Intention nevertheless, that the above
Distribution shall only extend to such Captures as shall be made by any
Cutter, Schooner, or armed Vessel, without any of His Majesty's Ships
or Vessels of War being present or within Sight of, and adding to the
Encouragement of the Captors, and Terror of the Enemy: But in Case
any of His Majesty's Ships or Vessels of War shall be present, or in
Sight, that then the Officers, Pilots, Petty Officers, and Men on Board
such Cutters and Schooners, or armed Vessels, shall share in the same
Proportion as is allowed to Persons of the like Rank and Denomination
on Board His Majesty's Ships and Vessels of War. Lastly, it is Our
Will and Pleasure, That this Our Declaration, and Order in Council
thereupon, shall extend not only to Captures from the French King, his
Subjects, and others inhabiting his Countries, but also shall extend
in the like Manner to all Ships and Goods now taken, and not finally
adjudged and condemned, and divided, or to be taken hereafter, under
the Act of Parliament of the Sixteenth Year of Our Reign, whereby it is
enacted, That, for the Encouragement of Our Officers of Our Ships of
War, the Flag Officers, Captains, Commanders, and other Commissioned
Officers in Our Pay, and the Seamen, Marines, and Soldiers on Board,
shall have the sole Interest and Property of and in all and every such
Ships and Goods as therein are recited, which they shall seize and
take; but being first adjudged, that is to say, finally adjudged lawful
Prize, and which are by the said Act declared forfeited to Us, and to
be divided and disposed of in such Proportion and after such Manner as
We, Our Heirs and Successors, shall by Proclamation or Proclamations
order and direct.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Sixteenth Day of September,
One thousand seven hundred and seventy-eight, in the Eighteenth Year
of Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Charles Eyre and William Strahan, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. 1778.

_1 p. folio. Copies in Antiq., and P. C.; also in John Carter Brown
Library. Entered on Patent Rolls, and in Crown Office Docquet Book,
vol. 12; entered in Privy Council Register, III Geo., vol. 15, p. 515.
Printed in "London Gazette," September 19, 1778._




1779, January 1.

[Fast Day in England.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR A GENERAL FAST.

GEORGE R.

We, taking into Our most serious Consideration the just and necessary
Hostilities in which We are engaged with the French King, and the
unnatural Rebellion carrying on in some of Our Provinces and Colonies
in North America, and putting Our Trust in Almighty God, that he will
vouchsafe a special Blessing on Our Arms both by Sea and Land, have
resolved, and do, by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, hereby
Command, That a Public Fast and Humiliation be observed throughout that
Part of Great Britain called England, Our Dominion of Wales, and Town
of Berwick upon Tweed, upon Wednesday the Tenth Day of February next;
that so both We and Our People may humble Ourselves before Almighty
God, in order to obtain Pardon of Our Sins; and may, in the most devout
and solemn Manner, send up Our Prayers and Supplications to the Divine
Majesty, for averting those heavy Judgments which Our manifold Sins
and Provocations have most justly deserved; and imploring His Blessing
and Assistance on Our Arms; and for restoring and perpetuating Peace,
Safety, and Prosperity, to Us and Our Kingdoms: And We do strictly
Charge and Command, That the said Public Fast be reverently and
devoutly observed by all Our loving Subjects in England, Our Dominion
of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, as they tender the Favour of
Almighty God, and would avoid His Wrath and Indignation; and upon Pain
of such Punishment as We may justly inflict on all such as contemn and
neglect the Performance of so religious and necessary a Duty. And,
for the better and more orderly solemnizing the same, We have given
Directions to the Most Reverend the Archbishops, and the Right Reverend
the Bishops of England, to compose a Form of Prayer suitable to this
Occasion, to be used in all Churches, Chapels, and Places of Public
Worship; and to take Care the same be timely dispersed throughout their
respective Dioceses.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the First Day of January, One
thousand seven hundred and seventy-nine, in the Nineteenth Year of
Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

_No printed copy found. Entered on Patent Rolls, and in Crown Office
Docquet Book, vol. 12; entered in Privy Council Register, III Geo.,
vol. 16, p. 181. Printed in "London Gazette," January 2, 1779. A
proclamation with practically the same wording was issued by the Lord
Lieutenant and Council of Ireland, January 11, 1779 (copy in Dublin P.
R. O.), in consequence of an order of the Privy Council (Privy Council
Register, III Geo., vol. 16, p. 184)._




1779, January 1.

[Fast Day in Scotland.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR A GENERAL FAST.

GEORGE R.

We, taking into Our most serious Consideration the just and necessary
Hostilities in which We are engaged with the French King, and the
unnatural Rebellion carrying on in some of Our Provinces and Colonies
in North America, and putting Our Trust in Almighty God, that he will
vouchsafe a special Blessing on Our Arms both by Sea and Land, have
resolved, and do, by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, hereby
command, That a Publick Fast and Humiliation be observed, throughout
that Part of Our Kingdom of Great Britain called Scotland, on Tuesday
the Ninth Day of February next; that so both We and Our People may
humble Ourselves before Almighty God, in order to obtain Pardon of
Our Sins; and may, in the most devout and solemn Manner, send up Our
Prayers and Supplications to the Divine Majesty, for averting those
heavy Judgements which Our manifold Sins and Provocations have most
justly deserved, and imploring his Blessing and Assistance on Our Arms,
and for restoring and perpetuating Peace, Safety, and Prosperity,
to Us and Our Kingdoms: And We do strictly Charge and Command, That
the said Publick Fast be reverently and devoutly observed by all Our
loving Subjects in Scotland, as they tender the Favour of Almighty
God, and would avoid his Wrath and Indignation; and upon Pain of
such Punishment as We may justly inflict on all such as contemn and
neglect the Performance of so religious and necessary a Duty. Our Will
is therefore, and We charge, That incontinent this Our Proclamation
seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and all other Places
needful, and there, in Our Name and Authority, make Publication hereof,
that none pretend Ignorance. And Our Will and Pleasure is, That Our
Solicitor do cause printed Copies hereof to be sent to the Sheriffs of
the several Shires, Stewarts of Stewarties, and Bailiffs of Regalities,
and their Clerks, whom We ordain to see the same published; and We
appoint them to send Doubles hereof to the several Paroch Kirks within
their Bounds, that upon the Lord's Day immediately preceding the Day
above-mentioned, the same may be published and read from the Pulpits,
immediately after Divine Service.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the First Day of January, One
thousand seven hundred and seventy-nine, in the Nineteenth Year of
Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Charles Eyre and William Strahan, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. MDCCLXXIX.

_1 p. folio. Copy in P. C. Entered on Patent Rolls, and in Crown
Office Docquet Book, vol. 12; entered in Privy Council Register, III
Geo., vol. 16, p. 182. Printed in "London Gazette," January 2, 1779._




1779, December 13.

[Fast Day in England.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR A GENERAL FAST.

GEORGE R.

We, taking into Our most serious Consideration the just and necessary
Hostilities in which We are engaged, and the unnatural Rebellion
carrying on in some of Our Provinces and Colonies in North America, and
putting Our Trust in Almighty God, that he will vouchsafe a Special
Blessing on Our Arms both by Sea and Land, have resolved, and do,
by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, hereby command, That a
Publick Fast and Humiliation be observed throughout that Part of Our
Kingdom of Great Britain called England, Our Dominion of Wales, and
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, upon Friday the Fourth Day of February
next; that so both We and Our People may humble Ourselves before
Almighty God, in order to obtain Pardon of Our Sins; and may, in the
most devout and solemn Manner, send up Our Prayers and Supplications
to the Divine Majesty, for averting those heavy Judgements which
Our manifold Sins and Provocations have most justly deserved, and
imploring his Blessing and Assistance on Our Arms, and for restoring
and perpetuating Peace, Safety, and Prosperity, to Us and Our Kingdoms:
And We do strictly charge and command, That the said Publick Fast be
reverently and devoutly observed by all Our loving Subjects in England,
our Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, as they tender
the Favour of Almighty God, and would avoid his Wrath and Indignation;
and upon Pain of such Punishment as We may justly inflict on all such
as contemn and neglect the Performance of so religious and necessary a
Duty. And for the better and more orderly solemnizing the same, We have
given Directions to the Most Reverend the Archbishops, and the Right
Reverend the Bishops of England, to compose a Form of Prayer suitable
to this Occasion, to be used in all Churches, Chapels, and Places
of Publick Worship, and to take care the same be timely dispersed
throughout their respective Dioceses.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Thirteenth of December, One
thousand seven hundred and seventy-nine, in the Twentieth Year of Our
Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Charles Eyre and William Strahan, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. MDCCLXXIX.

_1 p. folio. Copy in P. R. O. Entered on Patent Rolls, and in Crown
Office Docquet Book, vol. 12; entered in Privy Council Register, III
Geo., vol. 17, p. 453. Printed in "London Gazette," December 14, 1779.
A proclamation with practically the same wording was issued by the Lord
Lieutenant and Council of Ireland, December 24, 1779 (copy in Dublin P.
R. O.), in consequence of an order of the Privy Council (Privy Council
Register, III Geo., vol. 17, p. 455)._




1779, December 13.

[Fast Day in Scotland.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR A GENERAL FAST.

GEORGE R.

We, taking into Our most serious Consideration the just and necessary
Hostilities in which We are engaged, and the unnatural Rebellion
carrying on in some of Our Provinces and Colonies in North America, and
putting Our Trust in Almighty God, that he will vouchsafe a special
Blessing on Our Arms both by Sea and Land, have resolved, and do,
by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, hereby command, That a
Publick Fast and Humiliation be observed throughout that Part of Our
Kingdom of Great Britain called Scotland, on Thursday the Third Day
of February next; that so both We and Our People may humble Ourselves
before Almighty God, in order to obtain Pardon of Our Sins; and
may, in the most devout and solemn Manner, send up Our Prayers and
Supplications to the Divine Majesty, for averting those heavy Judgments
which Our manifold Sins and Provocations have most justly deserved, and
imploring His Blessing and Assistance on Our Arms, and for restoring
and perpetuating Peace, Safety, and Prosperity, to Us and Our Kingdoms:
And We do strictly charge and command, That the said Publick Fast
be reverently and devoutly observed by all Our loving Subjects in
Scotland, as they tender the Favour of Almighty God, and would avoid
His Wrath and Indignation; and upon Pain of such Punishment as We may
justly inflict on all such as contemn and neglect the Performance
of so religious and necessary a Duty. Our Will is therefore, and We
charge, That incontinent this Our Proclamation seen, ye pass to the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and all other Places needful, and there,
in Our Name and Authority, make Publication hereof, that none pretend
Ignorance. And Our Will and Pleasure is, That Our Solicitor do cause
printed Copies hereof to be sent to the Sheriffs of the several Shires,
Stewarts of Stewarties, and Bailiffs of Regalities, and their Clerks,
whom We ordain to see the same published: and We appoint them to send
Doubles hereof to the several Paroch Kirks within their Bounds, that
upon the Lord's Day immediately preceding the Day above mentioned the
same may be published and read from the Pulpits, immediately after
Divine Service.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Thirteenth Day of December,
One thousand seven hundred and seventy-nine, in the Twentieth Year of
Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

_No printed copy found. Entered on Patent Rolls, and in Crown Office
Docquet Book, vol. 12; entered in Privy Council Register, III Geo.,
vol. 17, p. 454. Printed in "London Gazette," December 14, 1779._




1780, December 20.

[Relations of England to Holland.]


MANIFESTO.

GEORGE R.

Through the whole Course of Our Reign, Our Conduct towards the States
General of the United Provinces has been that of a sincere Friend
and faithful Ally. Had they adhered to those wise Principles which
used to govern the Republic, they must have shewn themselves equally
sollicitous to maintain the Friendship which has so long subsisted
between the two Nations, and which is essential to the Interests of
both: But from the Prevalence of a Faction devoted to France, and
following the Dictates of that Court, a very different Policy has
prevailed. The Return made to Our Friendship, for some Time past, has
been an open Contempt of the most solemn Engagements, and a repeated
Violation of Public Faith.

On the Commencement of the Defensive War, in which We found Ourselves
engaged by the Aggression of France, We shewed a tender Regard for the
Interests of the States General, and a Desire of securing to their
Subjects every Advantage of Trade, consistent with the great and just
Principle of Our own Defence. Our Ambassador was instructed to offer
a friendly Negotiation, to obviate every Thing that might lead to
disagreeable Discussion; and to this Offer, solemnly made by him to the
States General, the 2d of November, 1778, no Attention was paid.

After the Number of Our Enemies increased by the Aggression of Spain,
equally unprovoked with that of France, We found it necessary to call
upon the States General for the Performance of their Engagements. The
Fifth Article of the perpetual Defensive Alliance between Our Crown and
the States General, concluded at Westminster the 3d of March, 1678,
besides the general Engagement for Succours, expressly stipulates,
"That that Party of the two Allies that is not attacked, shall be
obliged to break with the Aggressor in two Months after the Party
attacked shall require it." Yet two Years have passed, without the
least Assistance given to Us, without a single Syllable in Answer to
Our repeated Demands.

So totally regardless have the States been of their Treaties with
Us, that they readily promised Our Enemies to observe a Neutrality,
in direct Contradiction to those Engagements; and whilst they have
withheld from Us the Succours they were bound to furnish, every secret
Assistance has been given the Enemy; and Inland Duties have been taken
off, for the sole Purpose of facilitating the Carriage of Naval Stores
to France.

In direct and open Violation of Treaty, they suffered an American
Pirate to remain several Weeks in one of their Ports; and even
permitted a Part of his Crew to mount Guard in a Fort in the Texel.

In the East-Indies, the Subjects of the States General, in Concert with
France, have endeavoured to raise up Enemies against Us.

In the West-Indies, particularly at St. Eustatius, every Protection and
Assistance has been given to Our Rebellious Subjects. Their Privateers
are openly received in the Dutch Harbours; allowed to refit there;
supplied with Arms and Ammunition; their Crews recruited; their Prizes
brought in and sold; and all this in direct Violation of as clear and
solemn Stipulations as can be made.

This Conduct, so inconsistent with all good Faith, so repugnant to the
Sense of the wisest Part of the Dutch Nation, is chiefly to be ascribed
to the Prevalence of the leading Magistrates of Amsterdam, whose secret
Correspondence with Our Rebellious Subjects was suspected, long before
it was made known by the fortunate Discovery of a Treaty, the first
Article of which is:

"There shall be a firm, inviolable and universal Peace, and sincere
Friendship, between their High Mightinesses the Estates of the Seven
United Provinces of Holland, and the United States of North America,
and the Subjects and People of the said Parties; and between the
Countries, Islands, Cities, and Towns, situated under the Jurisdiction
of the said United States of Holland, and the said United States of
America, and the People and Inhabitants thereof, of every Degree,
without Exception of Persons or Places."

This Treaty was signed in September, 1778, by the express Order of the
Pensionary of Amsterdam, and other principal Magistrates of that City.
They now not only avow the whole Transaction, but glory in it, and
expressly say, even to the States General, that what they did "was what
their indispensable Duty required."

In the mean Time, the States General declined to give any Answer to the
Memorial presented by Our Ambassador; and this Refusal was aggravated
by their proceeding upon other Business, nay upon the Consideration
of this very Subject to internal Purposes; and while they found it
impossible to approve the Conduct of their Subjects, they still
industriously avoided to give Us the Satisfaction so manifestly due.

We had every Right to expect, that such a Discovery would have
roused them to a just Indignation at the Insult offered to Us, and
to themselves; and that they would have been eager to give Us full
and ample Satisfaction for the Offence, and to inflict the severest
Punishment upon the Offenders. The Urgency of the Business made an
instant Answer essential to the Honour and Safety of this Country.[1]
The Demand was accordingly pressed by Our Ambassador in repeated
Conferences with the Ministers, and in a Second Memorial: It was
pressed with all the Earnestness which could proceed from Our ancient
Friendship, and the Sense of recent Injuries; and the Answer now given
to a Memorial on such a Subject, delivered about Five Weeks ago,
is, _That the States have taken it ad referendum_. Such an Answer,
upon such an Occasion, could only be dictated by the fixt Purpose of
Hostility meditated, and already resolved, by the States, induced by
the offensive Councils of Amsterdam thus to countenance the hostile
Aggression, which the Magistrates of that City have made in the Name of
the Republic.

There is an End of the Faith of all Treaties with Them, if Amsterdam
may usurp the Sovereign Power, may violate those Treaties with
Impunity, by pledging the States to Engagements directly contrary,
and leaguing the Republic with the Rebels of a Sovereign to whom she
is bound by the closest Ties. An Infraction of the Law of Nations,
by the meanest Member of any Country, gives the injured State a
Right to demand Satisfaction and Punishment: How much more so, when
the Injury complained of is a flagrant Violation of Public Faith,
committed by leading and predominant Members in the State? Since
then the Satisfaction we have demanded is not given, We must, though
most reluctantly, do Ourselves that Justice which We cannot otherwise
obtain: We must consider the States General as Parties in the Injury
which they will not repair, as Sharers in the Aggression which they
refuse to punish, and must act accordingly. We have therefore ordered
Our Ambassador to withdraw from the Hague, and shall immediately pursue
such vigorous Measures as the Occasion fully justifies, and Our Dignity
and the essential Interests of Our People require.

From a Regard to the Dutch Nation at large, We wish it were possible
to direct those Measures wholly against Amsterdam; but this cannot be,
unless the States General will immediately declare, that Amsterdam
shall, upon this Occasion, receive no Assistance from them, but be left
to abide the Consequences of it's Aggression.

Whilst Amsterdam is suffered to prevail in the general Councils, and
is backed by the Strength of the State, it is impossible to resist
the Aggression of so considerable a Part, without contending with
the Whole. But We are too sensible of the common Interests of both
Countries not to remember, in the Midst of such a Contest, that the
only Point to be aimed at by Us, is to raise a Disposition in the
Councils of the Republic to return to our ancient Union, by giving Us
that Satisfaction for the past, and Security for the future, which
We shall be as ready to receive as They can be to offer, and to the
Attainment of which We shall direct all Our Operations. We mean only to
provide for Our own Security, by defeating the dangerous Designs that
have been formed against Us. We shall ever be disposed to return to
Friendship with the States General, when they sincerely revert to that
System which the Wisdom of their Ancestors formed, and which has now
been subverted by a powerful Faction, conspiring with France against
the true Interests of the Republic, no less than against those of Great
Britain.

St. James's, December 20, 1780.

G. R.

_No printed copy found, except as published in the "London Gazette
Extraordinary," December 21, 1780, from which this transcript was
taken._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] The Privy Council, by an order of April 17, 1780, declared that
whereas the United Provinces had not lived up to the terms of their
alliance with Great Britain, they should henceforth be considered
a neutral power not privileged by treaty. On the same date as the
publication of the Manifesto, December 20, 1780, the Council ordered
that general reprisals should be granted against the ships of the
United Provinces (Privy Council Register, III Geo., vol. 18). On
December 27, 1780, the King issued a proclamation providing for the
distribution of the prizes during the hostilities with the United
Provinces, which is not here printed since it remotely concerns
America.




1781, January 12.

[Fast Day in England.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR A GENERAL FAST.

GEORGE R.

We, taking into Our most serious Consideration the just and necessary
Hostilities in which We are engaged, and the unnatural Rebellion
carrying on in some of Our Provinces and Colonies in North America, and
putting Our Trust in Almighty God, that he will vouchsafe a Special
Blessing on Our Arms both by Sea and Land, have resolved, and do,
by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, hereby command, That
a Publick Fast and Humiliation be observed throughout that Part of
Our Kingdom of Great Britain called England, Our Dominion of Wales,
and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, upon Wednesday the Twenty-first
Day of February next; that so both We and Our People may humble
Ourselves before Almighty God, in order to obtain Pardon of Our Sins;
and may, in the most devout and solemn Manner, send up Our Prayers
and Supplications to the Divine Majesty, for averting those heavy
Judgements which Our manifold Sins and Provocations have most justly
deserved, and imploring His Blessing and Assistance on Our Arms, and
for restoring and perpetuating Peace, Safety, and Prosperity to Us and
Our Kingdoms. And We do strictly charge and command, That the said
Publick Fast be reverently and devoutly observed by all Our loving
Subjects in England, our Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, as they tender the Favour of Almighty God, and would avoid His
Wrath and Indignation; and upon Pain of such Punishment as We may
justly inflict on all such as contemn and neglect the Performance of
so religious and necessary a Duty. And for the better and more orderly
solemnizing the same, We have given Directions to the Most Reverend the
Archbishops, and the Right Reverend the Bishops of England, to compose
a Form of Prayer suitable to this Occasion, to be used in all Churches,
Chapels, and Places of Publick Worship, and to take care the same be
timely dispersed throughout their respective Dioceses.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Twelfth of January, One
thousand seven hundred and eighty-one, in the Twenty-first Year of
Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Charles Eyre and William Strahan, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. MDCCLXXXI.

_1 p. folio. Copies in P. C., and P. R. O. Entered on Patent Rolls,
and in Crown Office Docquet Book, vol. 12; entered in Privy Council
Register, III Geo., vol. 19, p. 31. Printed in "London Gazette,"
January 13, 1781. A proclamation with practically the same wording was
issued by the Lord Lieutenant and Council of Ireland, January 22, 1781
(copy in Dublin P. R. O.), in consequence of an order of the Privy
Council (Privy Council Register, III Geo., vol. 19, p. 34)._




1781, January 12.

[Fast Day in Scotland.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR A GENERAL FAST.

GEORGE R.

We, taking into Our most serious Consideration the just and necessary
Hostilities in which We are engaged, and the unnatural Rebellion
carrying on in some of Our Provinces and Colonies in North America,
and putting our Trust in Almighty God, that he will vouchsafe a
special Blessing on Our Arms both by Sea and Land, have resolved,
and do, by and with the Advice of our Privy Council, hereby command,
That a Publick Fast and Humiliation be observed, throughout that Part
of Our Kingdom of Great Britain called Scotland, on Thursday the
Twenty-second Day of February next; that so both We and Our People may
humble Ourselves before Almighty God, in order to obtain Pardon of
Our Sins; and may, in the most devout and solemn Manner, send up Our
Prayers and Supplications to the Divine Majesty, for averting those
heavy Judgements which Our manifold Sins and Provocations have most
justly deserved, and imploring his Blessing and Assistance on Our Arms,
and for restoring and perpetuating Peace, Safety, and Prosperity,
to Us and Our Kingdoms: And We do stricly charge and command, That
the said Publick Fast be reverently and devoutly observed by all Our
loving Subjects in Scotland, as they tender the Favour of Almighty
God, and would avoid His Wrath and Indignation; and upon Pain of
such Punishment as We may justly inflict on all such as contemn and
neglect the Performance of so religious and necessary a Duty. Our Will
is therefore, and We charge, That incontinent this Our Proclamation
seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and all other Places
needful, and there, in Our Name and Authority, make Publication hereof,
that none pretend Ignorance. And Our Will and Pleasure is, That Our
Solicitor do cause printed Copies hereof to be sent to the Sheriffs of
the several Shires, Stewarts of Stewarties, and Bailiffs of Regalities,
and their Clerks, whom we ordain to see the same published; and We
appoint them to send Doubles hereof to the several Paroch Kirks within
their Bounds, that upon the Lord's Day immediately preceding the Day
above-mentioned, the same may be published and read from the Pulpits,
immediately after Divine Service.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Twelfth Day of January, One
thousand seven hundred and eighty-one, in the Twenty-first Year of
Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Charles Eyre and William Strahan, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. MDCCLXXXI.

_1 p. folio. Copy in P. R. O. Entered on Patent Rolls, and in Crown
Office Docquet Book, vol. 12; entered in Privy Council Register, III
Geo., vol. 19, p. 33. Printed in "London Gazette," January 13, 1781._




1782, January 9.

[Fast Day in England.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR A GENERAL FAST.

GEORGE R.

We, taking into Our most serious Consideration the just and necessary
Hostilities in which We are engaged, and the unnatural Rebellion
carrying on in some of Our Provinces and Colonies in North America, and
putting Our Trust in Almighty God, that he will vouchsafe a special
Blessing on Our Arms both by Sea and Land, have resolved, and do,
by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, hereby command, That a
Publick Fast and Humiliation be observed throughout that Part of Our
Kingdom of Great Britain called England, Our Dominion of Wales, and
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, upon Friday the Eighth Day of February
next; that so both We and Our People may humble Ourselves before
Almighty God, in order to obtain Pardon of Our Sins; and may, in the
most devout and solemn Manner, send up Our Prayers and Supplications
to the Divine Majesty, for averting those heavy Judgements which
Our manifold Sins and Provocations have most justly deserved, and
imploring His Blessing and Assistance on Our Arms, and for restoring
and perpetuating Peace, Safety, and Prosperity to Us and Our Kingdoms:
And We do strictly charge and command, That the said Publick Fast be
reverently and devoutly observed by all Our loving Subjects in England,
Our Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, as they tender
the Favour of Almighty God, and would avoid His Wrath and Indignation;
and upon Pain of such Punishment as We may justly inflict on all such
as contemn and neglect the performance of so religious and necessary a
Duty. And for the better and more orderly solemnizing the same, We have
given Directions to the Most Reverend the Archbishops, and the Right
Reverend the Bishops of England, to compose a Form of Prayer suitable
to this Occasion, to be used in all Churches, Chapels, and Places
of Publick Worship, and to take Care the same be timely dispersed
throughout their respective Dioceses.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Ninth Day of January, One
thousand seven hundred and eighty-two, in the Twenty-second Year of
Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Charles Eyre and William Strahan, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. MDCCLXXXII.

_1 p. folio. Copies in P. C., and P. R. O. Entered on Patent Rolls,
and in Crown Office Docquet Book, vol. 12; entered in Privy Council
Register, III Geo., vol. 20, p. 124. Printed in "London Gazette,"
January 12, 1782. A proclamation with practically the same wording was
issued by the Lord Lieutenant and Council of Ireland, January 17, 1782
(copy in Dublin P. R. O.), in consequence of an order of the Privy
Council (Privy Council Register, III Geo., vol. 20, p. 126)._




1782, January 9.

[Fast Day in Scotland.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

FOR A GENERAL FAST.

GEORGE R.

We, taking into Our most serious Consideration the just and necessary
Hostilities in which We are engaged, and the unnatural Rebellion
carrying on in some of Our Provinces and Colonies in North America,
and putting Our Trust in Almighty God, that he will vouchsafe a
special Blessing on Our Arms both by Sea and Land, have resolved,
and do, by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, hereby command,
That a Publick Fast and Humiliation be observed, throughout that
Part of Our Kingdom of Great Britain called Scotland, on Thursday
the Seventh Day of February next; that so both We and Our People may
humble Ourselves before Almighty God, in order to obtain Pardon of
Our Sins; and may, in the most devout and solemn Manner, send up Our
Prayers and Supplications to the Divine Majesty, for averting those
heavy Judgements which Our Manifold Sins and Provocations have most
justly deserved, and imploring His Blessing and Assistance on Our Arms,
and for restoring and perpetuating Peace, Safety, and Prosperity,
to Us and Our Kingdoms: And We do strictly charge and command, That
the said Publick Fast be reverently and devoutly observed by all Our
loving Subjects in Scotland, as they tender the Favour of Almighty
God, and would avoid His Wrath and Indignation; and upon Pain of
such Punishment as We may justly inflict on all such as contemn and
neglect the Performance of so religious and necessary a Duty. Our Will
is therefore, and We charge, That incontinent this Our Proclamation
seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and all other Places
needful, and there, in Our Name and Authority, make Publication hereof,
that none pretend Ignorance. And Our Will and Pleasure is, That Our
Solicitor do cause printed Copies hereof to be sent to the Sheriffs of
the several Shires, Stewarts of Stewarties, and Bailiffs of Regalities,
and their Clerks, whom We ordain to see the same published; and We
appoint them to send Doubles hereof to the several Paroch Kirks within
their Bounds, that upon the Lord's Day immediately preceding the Day
above-mentioned, the same may be published and read from the Pulpits,
immediately after Divine Service.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Ninth Day of January, One
thousand seven hundred and eighty-two, in the Twenty-second Year of
Our Reign.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Charles Eyre and William Strahan, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. MDCCLXXXII.

_1 p. folio. Copy in P. R. O. Entered on Patent Rolls, and in Crown
Office Docquet Book, vol. 12; entered in Privy Council Register, III
Geo., vol. 20, p. 125. Printed in "London Gazette," January 12, 1782._




1783, February 14.

[Declaring Cessation of Arms.]


BY THE KING.

A PROCLAMATION

DECLARING THE CESSATION OF ARMS, AS WELL BY SEA AS LAND, AGREED UPON
BETWEEN HIS MAJESTY, THE MOST CHRISTIAN KING, THE KING OF SPAIN, THE
STATES GENERAL OF THE UNITED PROVINCES, AND THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA, AND ENJOINING THE OBSERVANCE THEREOF.

GEORGE R.

Whereas Provisional Articles were signed at Paris, on the Thirtieth Day
of November last, between Our Commissioner for treating of Peace with
the Commissioners of the United States of America and the Commissioners
of the said States, to be inserted in and to constitute the Treaty of
Peace proposed to be concluded between Us and the said United States,
when Terms of Peace should be agreed upon between Us and his Most
Christian Majesty:[1] And whereas Preliminaries for restoring Peace
between Us and His Most Christian Majesty were signed at Versailles
on the Twentieth Day of January last, by the Ministers of Us and the
Most Christian King: And whereas Preliminaries for restoring Peace
between Us and the King of Spain were also signed at Versailles on the
Twentieth Day of January last, between the Ministers of Us and the King
of Spain: And whereas, for putting an End to the Calamity of War as
soon and as far as may be possible, it hath been agreed between Us, his
Most Christian Majesty, the King of Spain, the States General of the
United Provinces, and the United States of America, as follows; that is
to say,

That such Vessels and Effects as should be taken in the Channel and in
the North Seas, after the Space of Twelve Days, to be computed from
the Ratification of the said Preliminary Articles, should be restored
on all Sides; That the Term should be One Month from the Channel and
the North Seas as far as the Canary Islands inclusively, whether in the
Ocean or in the Mediterranean; Two Months from the said Canary Islands
as far as the Equinoctial Line or Equator; and lastly, Five Months in
all other Parts of the World, without any Exception, or any other more
particular Description of Time or Place.

And whereas the Ratifications of the said Preliminary Articles between
Us and the Most Christian King, in due Form, were exchanged by the
Ministers of Us and of the Most Christian King, on the Third Day of
this instant February; and the Ratifications of the said Preliminary
Articles between Us and the King of Spain were exchanged between the
Ministers of Us and of the King of Spain, on the Ninth Day of this
instant February; from which Days respectively the several Terms
above-mentioned, of Twelve Days, of One Month, of Two Months, and of
Five Months, are to be computed: And whereas it is Our Royal Will and
Pleasure that the Cessation of Hostilities between Us and the States
General of the United Provinces, and the United States of America,
should be agreeable to the Epochs fixed between Us and the Most
Christian King:

We have thought fit, by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to
notify the same to all Our loving Subjects; and We do declare, that
Our Royal Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby strictly charge and
command all Our Officers, both at Sea and Land, and all other Our
Subjects whatsoever, to forbear all Acts of Hostility, either by Sea
or Land, against His Most Christian Majesty, the King of Spain, the
States General of the United Provinces, and the United States of
America, their Vassals or Subjects, from and after the respective
Times above-mentioned, and under the Penalty of incurring Our highest
Displeasure.

Given at Our Court at St. James's, the Fourteenth Day of February, in
the Twenty-third Year of Our Reign, and in the Year of Our Lord One
thousand seven hundred and eighty-three.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

London: Printed by Charles Eyre and William Strahan, Printers to the
King's most Excellent Majesty. 1783.

_1 p. folio. Copies in P. C., and P. R. O. Entered on Patent Rolls,
and in Crown Office Docquet Book, vol. 12; entered in Privy Council
Register, III Geo., vol. 21, p. 181. Printed in "London Gazette,"
February 15, 1783, and in many of the American newspapers. Reprinted by
James Rivington at New York, 1783, as a broadside, a copy of which is
in the N. Y. Public Library. There is also a lithographic facsimile in
the Emmet Collection in the N. Y. Public Library._

FOOTNOTE:

[1] The text of the Provisional Articles of November 30, 1782, can be
found in _Treaties and Conventions_ (1889), p. 370.




Index.


  Abercromy, Lt. Col. Duncan, apprehending of, 151.

  Africa, trade with forbidden, 120, 137.

  Algiers, 173, 180;
    treaty with, 129, 172.

  Altamaha River, 213.

  Amazon River, 21, 22.

  America, emigration to, 80;
    allegiance required from, 94;
    officers continued, 135, 146, 159, 174, 182, 210;
    new governments established, 212;
    rebellion in, 228, 230, 234, 236, 237, 239, 241, 246, 247, 249,
        250, 252, 256, 257, 259, 260, 262.

  Angola, 121, 137.

  Anne, Queen, accession of, 159;
    death of, 174.

  Anticosti, Island of, 213.

  Apalachicola River, 213.

  Ashton, John, apprehending of, 152.

  Aylesbury, Thomas, Earl of, apprehending of, 151.

  Azores, 127.


  Bacon, Nathaniel, 130.

  Bacon's Rebellion, 130.

  Barbados, 71, 114, 117, 155.

  Barbary, 121, 137, 185.

  Barker, Christopher, printer, 106, 112, 114, 115, 116, 119, 120,
        123, 125, 128, 130, 133.

  Barker, Robert, printer, 3, 4, 6, 8, 21, 23, 26, 31, 32, 68, 71,
        74, 75, 78, 80, 82, 87, 88, 92, 93.

  Baskett, John, printer, 174, 176, 177, 180, 182, 184, 189, 193.

  Baskett, Mark, printer, 218.

  Baskett, Robert, printer, 199, 201, 206, 208, 218.

  Baskett, Thomas, printer, 199, 201, 206, 208.

  Belasyse, Sir Henry, apprehending of, 151.

  Bell Sound, 102.

  Bermudas, 117, 155;
    tobacco from, 19, 37, 42, 50, 54, 56, 63, 69, 71, 82.

  Berry, Sir John, 132.

  Bill, Charles, printer, 142, 146, 150, 152, 153, 155, 158, 161,
        163, 167.

  Bill, John, printer, 8, 9, 12, 18, 21, 23, 26, 31, 32, 35, 42, 50,
        52, 55, 61, 62, 68, 71, 74, 75, 78, 80, 82, 87, 88, 92, 93,
        106, 108, 112, 114, 115, 116, 119, 120, 123, 125, 128, 130,
        133, 134, 136, 139.

  Biscainers, 5.

  Bona Esperanza, Cape de, 121, 137.

  Boston Harbor, 230.

  Brazil, North's expedition to, 21;
    tobacco from, 68.

  Buiny, 121, 137.


  Canada, 207, 208.

  Canary Islands, 173, 180, 184, 263.

  Cape Breton, 213.

  Caribee Islands, 82, 117, 148.

  Carolina, 117.

  Chaleurs, Bay of, 212.

  Champlain, Lake, 212.

  Charles II., death of, 135.

  Chattahoochee River, 213.

  Cherie, Sir Francis, 102.

  Cherie Island, 100-103.

  Coin, rates of foreign, in America, 161;
    copper coinage in Virginia, 226.

  Connecticut, trade with, prohibited, 230.

  Criminals, to be banished to Virginia, 7.

  Currency, in America, 161;
    in Virginia, 226.


  Darien, colony at, 153.

  Delaware, trade with, prohibited, 230.

  Delaware River, 133.

  Dichfield, Edward, 41.

  Dominica, 213, 218.

  Dudingston, Lieut. William, 224.


  East Florida, government of, established, 212.

  Eden, Philip, 16.

  Elliot, Edmund, apprehending of, 151.

  Ely, Bishop of. _See_ Turner, Francis.

  Emigration to America, 80, 87.

  Every, Henry, 158.

  Eyre, Charles, printer, 229, 234, 235, 239, 246, 248, 250, 257,
        258, 260, 261, 264.

  Fast day for rebellion in America, 234, 236, 237, 239, 246, 247,
        249, 250, 256, 257, 259, 260.

  Field, John, printer, 100, 104.

  Fleet, Thomas, printer, 199.

  Flint River, 213.

  Florida, Gulf of, 213.

  France, declaration of war against, 147, 196, 203;
    progress of war with, 207, 208.


  _Gaspee_, burning of, 224.

  George I., accession of, 175;
    death of, 182.

  George II., accession of, 182;
    death of, 211.

  George III., accession of, 210.

  Georgia, 213;
    officers in, continued, 201;
    charter surrendered, 203;
    trade with, prohibited, 230.

  Goffe, William, apprehending of, 104.

  Goodson, William, 97.

  Goring, Lord, 92.

  Graham, James, apprehending of, 152.

  Graham, Richard, Viscount Preston, apprehending of, 151, 152.

  Grenada, government of, established, 212;
    colonizing of, 218.

  Grenada, Island of, 213.

  Grenadines, 213, 218.

  Greenland, importing of whale-fins from, 4, 10, 78, 100.

  Guiana, expedition to, 8, 21.

  Guinea, 121, 137, 173, 180, 184.


  Hales, Sir Edward, apprehending of, 151.

  Hamilton, Sir Robert, apprehending of, 151.

  Havana, 124.

  Hellen, Philip (alias Fitz-gerald), 124.

  Hills, George, printer, 184.

  Hills, Henry, printer, 100, 104, 134, 136, 139, 142, 146, 172, 174,
        176, 177, 180, 182, 188.

  Hispaniola, 96.

  Holland, relations with England, 252;
    treaty with United States, 253.

  Holmes, Sir Robert, 140.

  Horn Sound, 102.

  Howland, John, 226.

  Hudson's Bay, 143, 148.

  Hudson's Bay Company, 143, 216.

  Hudson's Straits, 143, 213.


  Isle Royale, 213.


  Jamaica, 117, 125, 155, 200;
    encouraging settling in, 96, 112.

  James II., accession of, 136.

  James City, 132.

  Jeffreys, Herbert, 132.


  King James's Newland, 5.


  Labrador, 213.

  Langdale, Marmaduke, apprehending of, 151.

  Leake, Jasper, 16.

  Leeward Islands, 116, 155.

  Litchfield, Edward Henry, Earl of, apprehending of, 151.

  Lloyd, Capt. David, apprehending of, 151.

  Louns, Lawrence, 93.


  Madeira, 127.

  Magdalen Islands, 213.

  Mary II., accession of, 146.

  Maryland, 155;
    trade with, prohibited, 230.

  Massachusetts, 156;
    trade with, prohibited, 230.

  Mauripas, Lake, 213.

  Mexico, 163.

  Mexico, Gulf of, 213.

  Minorca, Island of, 205.

  Mississippi River, 213.

  Montague, John, 224.

  Montgomery, William, Lord, apprehending of, 151.

  Morison, Francis, 132.

  Muscovy Company, 5, 10, 78, 100.


  Narragansett River, 224.

  Navigation Act, 114, 119, 126, 128, 186.

  New Castle, 133.

  New England, 53, 171;
    disorderly trading to, 33, 66;
    Council for, 34;
    emigration to, 81, 87;
    fisheries of, 126.

  New Hampshire, trade with, prohibited, 230.

  New Jersey, trade with, prohibited, 230.

  New York, 148, 155;
    trade with, prohibited, 230.

  Newcomb, Thomas, printer, 134, 136, 139, 142, 146, 150, 152, 153,
        155, 158, 161, 163, 167, 172, 174, 176, 177, 180, 182.

  Newfoundland, 148, 156, 213;
    vagabonds to be banished to, 2;
    fisheries of, 127, 163.

  Newport, 226.

  Nichols, Francis, 16.

  Nipissim, Lake, 212.

  Norris, Thomas, printer, 184.

  North, Roger, expedition to Brazil, 21.

  North Carolina, trade with, prohibited, 230.

  Norton, Bonham, printer, 8, 9, 12, 18, 35, 42, 50, 52, 55, 61, 62.

  Nova Scotia, 203, 213.


  Oglethorpe, Sir Theophilus, apprehending of, 151.

  Ohio River, 204.

  Oreliana River, 21.

  Oyapok River, 21.


  Palmer, Roger, Earl of Castlemaine, apprehending of, 151.

  Parker, James, printer, 206.

  Passes for Mediterranean trade, 129, 172, 180, 184.

  Penn, Sir William, 97, 133.

  Penn, William, grant of Pennsylvania, 133;
    apprehending of, 151, 152.

  Pennsylvania, charter of, 133;
    trade with, prohibited, 230.

  Piracy, 140, 155, 176, 178.

  Pontchartrain, Lake, 213.

  Post Office, establishing of, 167.

  Privateering, 188, 189, 193, 195, 200.

  Prize money, distribution of, 189, 193, 195, 200, 230, 241.

  Providence River, 224.


  Quebec, capture of, 207, 208;
    government of, established, 212.


  Raleigh, Sir Walter, censured by king, 8.

  Rhode Island, 224;
    trade with, prohibited, 230.

  Richardson, Lt. Col. William, apprehending of, 151.

  Rivington, James, printer, 264.

  Rosieres, Cape, 213.

  Royal African Company, 121, 137.

  Rutter, Edward, apprehending of, 151.


  Sackvile, Col. Edward, apprehending of, 151.

  St. Christopher, Island of, 71, 116.

  St. Eustatius, 253.

  St. John Lake, 212.

  St. John River, 212, 213.

  St. Lawrence, Gulf of, 213.

  St. Lawrence River, 212.

  St. Mary's River, 213.

  St. Thomas, 8, 9.

  St. Vincent, Island of, 213, 218.

  Sallee, Port of, 121, 137.

  Soaper, Maj. Thomas, apprehending of, 151.

  Somers Islands. _See_ Bermudas.

  South Carolina, trade with, prohibited, 230.

  Southwick, Solomon, printer, 226.

  Spain, war with, 188, 190, 194, 195, 197.

  Spitzbergen, 5, 10, 78, 102.

  Stamp, Martin, 124.

  Stamp, Timothy, 124.

  Strahan, William, printer, 229, 234, 235, 239, 246, 248, 250, 257,
        258, 260, 261, 264.


  Texel, Island of, 253.

  Thanksgiving for defeat of France, 207, 208.

  Thorold, Sir Robert, apprehending of, 151.

  Tobacco, a new trade, 13;
    abuse of, 13, 18, 27, 35, 68, 71, 83;
    inspecting of, 15, 29, 38, 59, 61, 70;
    planting in England forbidden, 18, 27, 36, 51, 56, 63, 69, 77,
        84, 91, 106;
    importing of, 27, 37, 43, 50, 55, 62, 68, 76, 85, 91;
    encouraged in the plantations, 35, 42;
    retailing of, 71, 74, 88, 92.

  Tobacco-pipes, manufacture of, 12, 24.

  Tobago, Island of, 213, 218.

  Trade. _See_ Navigation Act.

  Transporting of vagabonds, 1, 2, 7, 109.

  Treaty of 1783, 262.

  Tripoli, treaty with, 129.

  Tunis, treaty with, 129.

  Turner, Francis, Bp. of Ely, apprehending of, 152.


  United States of America, 253, 262.


  Vagabonds, to be banished to America, 1, 7, 109.

  Venezuela, 8.

  Versailles, treaty of 1783, 262.

  Virginia, 34, 117, 155;
    criminals to be banished to, 7;
    tobacco from, 19, 37, 42, 50, 54, 56, 58, 63, 69, 71, 82;
    lotteries in, 31;
    government of, 52;
    rebellion in, 130;
    copper coinage in, 226;
    trade with, prohibited, 230.

  Virginia Company, 31, 52.


  Wanton, Gov. Joseph, 226.

  Warwick, Robert, Earl of, 94.

  West Florida, government of, established, 212.

  West Indies, 112, 129, 140, 158, 168, 194, 197, 203, 204, 219, 253;
    vagabonds to be banished to, 2;
    conquest of, 96;
    pirates in, 176, 178.

  Weston, Thomas, colony at Weymouth, 34.

  Weymouth, 34.

  Whale-fins, importing of, 4, 10, 78, 100.

  Whalley, Edward, apprehension of, 104.

  Wheeler, Sir Charles, 116.

  William III, accession of, 146;
    death of, 159.

  Windsor, Thomas, Lord, 114.

  Wolstenholme, Sir John, 57.

  Women and children, license for transporting of, 3.




  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.
  Bold text is denoted by =equal signs=.
  The oe ligature has been expanded to 'oe'.
  Superscripts in the text are indicated by ^. For example
     y^e, 10^{th}.

  Obvious typographical and punctuation errors have been corrected
  after careful comparison with other occurrences within the text
  and consultation of external sources.

  Inconsistent or archaic spelling of a word or word-pair within the
  text has been retained. For example: aswell as well; Green-land
  Greenland; shal be shall be shalbe.

  All spelling has been left as found in the text, except for those
  changes noted below.

  Pg viii  'Historial' changed to 'Historical'.
  Pg 7     Line of asterisks retained.
  Pg 9     'inhaitants' changed to 'inhabitants'.
  Pg 57    'Eng ish' changed to 'English'.
  Pg 59    'o  the' changed to 'of the'.
  Pg 64    'a  by' changed to 'as by'.
  Pg 86    'apppointed' changed to 'appointed'.
  Pg 113   'de- lare' changed to 'declare'.
  Pg 116   'Charls' changed to 'Charles'.
  Pg 124   (Footnote 1)   'Fitzgerald's' changed to 'Fitz-gerald's'.
  Pg 125   'Helen' changed to 'Hellen'.
  Pg 142   Dates modified to '1687/8'; '7/8' was a single character
             in the original text.
  Pg 153   Date modified to '1690/1'; '0/1' was a single character
             in the original text.
  Pg 158   Dates modified to '1700/1'; '0/1' was a single character
             in the original text.
  Pg 172, 173 'Argier' changed to 'Algier'.
  Pg 213   'Attamaha' changed to 'Altamaha'.

    Index entries:
  Pg 265   'Caribbee' changed to 'Caribee'.
  Pg 266   entry for 'Hellen'; 'Fitzgerald' changed to 'Fitz-gerald'.
  Pg 266   'Maurepas' changed to 'Mauripas'.
  Pg 267   'Nipissing' changed to 'Nipissim'.
  Pg 267   'Sackville' changed to 'Sackvile'.
  Pg 267   entry for 'Virginia';  '56, 56,' changed to '56, 58,'.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of British Royal Proclamations Relating
to America 1603-1783, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRITISH ROYAL PROCLAMATIONS, 1603-1783 ***

***** This file should be named 46167.txt or 46167.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/1/6/46167/

Produced by Colin Bell, John Campbell, Joseph Cooper and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
