Project Gutenberg's Elsie's Young Folks in Peace and War, by Martha Finley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Elsie's Young Folks in Peace and War

Author: Martha Finley

Release Date: July 4, 2014 [EBook #46188]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELSIE'S YOUNG FOLKS IN PEACE ***




Produced by David Edwards, Chris Whitehead and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  ELSIE'S YOUNG
  FOLKS
  IN PEACE AND WAR

  BY
  MARTHA FINLEY



  [Illustration]



  NEW YORK
  DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY
  PUBLISHERS




  COPYRIGHT, 1900.

  BY

  DODD, MEAD & COMPANY.




ELSIE'S YOUNG FOLKS.




CHAPTER I.


It was a lovely summer day, bright and clear, but the heat so
tempered--there on the coast of Maine--by the delicious sea breeze that
it was delightful and exhilarating. The owner and passengers of the
_Dolphin_ had forsaken her more than a fortnight ago, and since spent
their days and nights at a lovely villa on shore there in Bar Harbor;
but now no longer able to resist the attractions of the beautiful
sea, the most of them had come aboard, and were sitting, standing, or
roaming about the deck.

"Oh, I'm so glad to be in our own dear sea home again!" cried Elsie
Raymond. "Aren't you, Ned?"

"Yes; though we have been having a splendid time on shore in Bar
Harbor."

"Yes, so we have; but as we expect to be back again in a few days, we
needn't fret at all about leaving it."

"No, nor we needn't if we were just going back to Woodburn, our own
beautiful home--certainly a better place than this in fall and winter,
anyhow."

"But I'm glad to have a sail again," said Elsie.

"Brother Max says we'll soon see some places where they had sea fights
in our two wars with England," remarked Ned, with satisfaction.

"Oh, does he? I mean to ask papa or grandma to tell us about them,"
exclaimed Elsie, in tones of excitement.

"Oh, yes, let's!" cried Ned. "But the men are taking up the anchor," he
added hastily, "and I must see that first. Come," catching his sister's
hand and hurrying her along to a good position from which to view the
operation.

That duly attended to, they sought out their grandma, who happened to
be at the moment sitting a little apart from the others, and made
their request. She smilingly consented to tell them all she could
recall on the subject that would be interesting to them, and bidding
them seat themselves close beside her she began.

"Your father has told me that we are now going out to the extreme
eastern point of the State--and of our country--the United States. West
Quoddy Head is its name now, but in very early times it was called
Nurumbega. In 1580 John Walken, in the service of Sir Humphrey Gilbert,
conducted an expedition to its shores, and reached the Penobscot River.
In 1603 two vessels, the _Speedwell_ and the _Discoverer_, entered the
Penobscot Bay and the mouth of a river--probably the Saco. About three
years after that two French Jesuits, with several families, settled
on Mount Desert Island. A few years later some twenty-five French
colonists landed on Mount Desert and founded a settlement called St.
Saviour. But not long afterward they were driven away by some English
under command of Captain Argal, who considered them trespassers upon
English soil. That, I think, is enough of the very early history of
Maine, for to-day, at least."

"Oh, yes, grandma! but won't you please tell about Revolutionary times
and the war of 1812-14?" pleaded Elsie. "Maine was one of the thirteen
colonies, wasn't she?"

"No, dear; she was considered a part of Massachusetts at that time, and
did not become a separate State until 1820."

"Oh, didn't the people there care about the Revolution and help in it?"
asked Elsie in a tone of disappointment.

"Yes, dear, they did. In a county convention in 1774 Sheriff William
Tyng declared his intention to obey province law and not that of
parliament. He advised a firm and persevering opposition to every
design, dark or open, framed to abridge our English liberties."

"English!" exclaimed Ned, in a half scornful tone, at which his grandma
smiled, and stroking his curls caressingly, said, "Yes, Neddie, at
that time--before the Revolutionary War--our people liked to call
themselves English."

"But we don't now, grandma; we're Americans."

"Yes; that is the name we have given ourselves in these days; but we
consider the English our relations--a sort of cousins."

"Well, then I hope we and they will never fight any more," said Elsie.
"But, please, grandma, tell us something more of what has happened
along this coast."

"In 1775," continued her grandma, "the British kept the coast of New
England from Falmouth (now called Portland) to New London in continual
alarm; they were out in every direction plundering the people to supply
their camp with provisions."

"In this State, grandma?" asked Ned.

"Yes; and in Connecticut and Massachusetts. They bombarded Stonington,
in Connecticut, shattered houses and killed two men. That was in August
or September. In October Mowatt was sent to Falmouth in Maine to get a
supply of provisions from the people there, and to demand a surrender
of their arms. They refused and defied him; then--after giving time for
the women and children to leave the town--he bombarded and set it on
fire. More than four hundred houses were destroyed--nearly all the town
of about five hundred buildings."

"What a cruel thing!" exclaimed Elsie; "I suppose they had to give up
then?"

"No," said Mrs. Travilla; "so brave and determined were they that they
repulsed the marauders and would not let them land."

"Grandma," asked Elsie, "didn't Arnold go through Maine with an army to
attack Canada about that time?"

"Yes; about the middle of August a committee of Congress visited
Washington in his camp, and together they formed a plan to send a
force into Canada by way of the Kennebec River to co-operate with
General Schuyler, who was preparing to invade that province by way of
the Northern lakes. Arnold was well known to be brave. He had been
complaining of being ill-used upon Lake Champlain. Washington desired
to silence his complaints, and knowing that this expedition was suited
to his talents he appointed him to command, and gave him the commission
of colonel in the Continental army.

"The force under his command consisted of eleven hundred hardy men--ten
companies of musketeers from New England, and three companies of
riflemen from Virginia and Pennsylvania. Those riflemen were commanded
by Captain Daniel Morgan, who afterward did such good work for our
country in her hard struggle for liberty. Arnold and his troops marched
from Cambridge to Newburyport, where they embarked on transports which
carried them to the mouth of the Kennebec. They went up that river in
bateaux and rendezvoused at Fort Western, opposite the present town of
Augusta. Now they had come to the edge of a vast and almost uninhabited
wilderness."

"And had to go through it, grandma?" asked Ned.

"Yes; they were very brave men, ready to encounter difficulties and
dangers for the sake of securing their country's freedom. Two small
parties were sent on in advance to reconnoitre, and the rest moved
forward in four divisions, Morgan with his riflemen in the van. Arnold,
who was the last, passed up the river in a canoe."

"Hadn't they a very hard time going through that wilderness, grandma?"
asked Elsie.

"Yes, very hard indeed; over craggy knolls, deep ravines, through
creeks and ponds and deep morasses; sometimes paddling along a stream
in their canoes--sometimes carrying them around a fall on their
shoulders. Suddenly, at length, they came to a mountain covered with
snow. At its foot they encamped for three days. Then they went on
again, but a heavy rain set in, sending down such torrents from the
hills that the river rose eight feet in one night. The water came
roaring down the valley where our soldiers were, so unexpectedly and
powerfully that they had scarcely time to retreat and get into their
bateaux before the whole plain was flooded with water. Seven boats were
overturned and the provisions in them lost. Many of them were made
sick, too, by the storm and exposure, and so grew sad and discouraged.
Some gave up and went back to their homes, while Arnold went on with
the rest. The rain changed to snow, and there was ice in the water in
which the poor fellows had to wade to push their bateaux along through
ponds and marshes near the sources of the Dead River.

"At last they reached Lake Megantic. They encamped on its eastern
shore, and the next morning Arnold, with a party of fifty-five men on
shore with Captain Nanchet and thirteen with himself in five bateaux
and a birch canoe, pushed on down the river to a French settlement to
get provisions to send back to his almost starving men. They passed
seventeen falls, marching through snow two inches deep, then reached
the Highlands which separate the waters of New England from Canada. But
as it is of the history of Maine I am telling you, and Arnold and his
band have now passed out of it, we will leave the rest of his story
for another time."

"He did a good deal more for his country before he turned traitor,
didn't he, grandma?" asked Elsie.

"Yes; he fought bravely again and again. The great victory at Saratoga
was largely due to him; in a less degree to Morgan."

"Daniel Morgan who commanded at the battle of the Cowpens?" asked Elsie.

"The very same," replied Mrs. Travilla.

"Didn't some other things happen along this coast, grandma?" asked Ned.

"Yes, indeed; several things. In the war of 1812-14 there occurred a
naval battle near Portland, between the American ship _Enterprise_
and the English brig _Boxer_. On the morning of the 1st of September,
1813, the _Enterprise_ sailed from Portsmouth, New Hampshire, and on
the morning of the 3d chased a schooner suspected of being a British
privateer, into Portland harbor. The next day she left that harbor
and steered eastward looking for British cruisers. On the 5th they
discovered in a bay what Captain Burrows supposed to be a vessel of
war getting under way. She was a British brig, and on sighting the
_Enterprise_ she displayed four British ensigns, fired several guns
as signals to boats that had been sent ashore to return, and crowding
canvas, bore down gallantly for the _Enterprise_.

"Seeing that, Burrows cleared his ship for action, sailed out a proper
distance from land to have plenty of sea room for the fight, then
shortened sail and edged toward the _Boxer_. That was at three o'clock
in the afternoon. Twenty minutes later the two brigs closed within half
pistol shot, and both opened fire at the same time. The sea was almost
quiet, there was but little wind, and that condition of things made the
cannonading very destructive. Ten minutes after the firing began the
_Enterprise_ ranged ahead of the _Boxer_, steered across her bows and
delivered her fire with such precision and destructive energy that at
four o'clock the British officer in command shouted through his trumpet
that he had surrendered, but his flag being nailed to the mast, could
not be lowered until the _Enterprise_ should cease firing."

"And did she, grandma?" asked Ned.

"Yes; I do not think our men ever fired on a foe whom they believed to
be ready to surrender. Captain Blyth of the _Boxer_ was already dead,
having been nearly cut in two by an eighteen-pound ball, and Captain
Burrows was mortally wounded. He had been helping the men to run out a
carronade, and while doing so a shot, supposed to be a canister ball,
struck his thigh, causing a fatal wound. He lived eight hours, and must
have suffered terrible agony. He refused to be carried below until the
sword of the commander of the _Boxer_ should be brought to him. He took
it eagerly when brought, saying, 'Now I am satisfied; I die contented.'"

"What did they do for a commander after their captain was so dreadfully
injured?" asked Elsie.

"Lieutenant Edward R. M'Call took command of the _Enterprise_ and
showed great skill and courage," replied Grandma Elsie. "On the
morning of the 7th he took both vessels into Portland Harbor, and the
next day the bodies of the two commanders were buried side by side in
the same cemetery, and with all the honors to which their rank and
powers entitled them."

"Were the ships quite spoiled, grandma?" asked Ned.

"The _Enterprise_ was not, but the _Boxer_ was much cut up in both
hull and rigging," she replied. "The battle showed that the Americans
exceeded the English in both nautical skill and marksmanship. Lossing
tells us that a London paper, speaking of the battle, said, 'The fact
seems to be but too clearly established that the Americans have some
superior mode of firing, and we cannot be too anxiously employed in
discovering to what circumstances that superiority is owing.'"

"I think the man who wrote that was feeling mortified that one of their
vessels had been whipped by one of ours," remarked Ned sagely.

"Yes," said Grandma Elsie, "I think the nailing of their flag to the
mast showed that they felt confident of victory. Cooper tells in his
history that when the _Enterprise_ hailed to know if the _Boxer_ had
struck--as she kept her flag flying--one of the officers of the British
vessel leaped upon a gun, shook both fists at the Americans, and
shouted 'No, no, no!' adding some opprobrious epithets."

"Oh, didn't that make our fellows angry?" asked Ned.

"I think not," replied Grandma Elsie; "it seems to have amused them, as
they saw that he was ordered down by his superiors."

"Was it a long fight, grandma?" asked Elsie.

"It had lasted only thirty-five minutes when the _Boxer_ surrendered."

"Had a great many of her men been killed?" asked Ned.

"I don't know," replied his grandma, "but on the _Enterprise_ there
was but one besides Burrows; Midshipman Kervin Waters, who had been
mortally wounded, died a few weeks later. He was buried by the side of
his gallant leader--Burrows."

"Oh, dear!" sighed little Elsie, "war is so dreadful!"

"It is indeed," said her grandma, "and it was made especially dreadful
at that time to the people of this country by reason of our being so
much weaker than England in men, money, and ships."

"But it was a blessing that our seamen were so much more skilful than
hers, Grandma Elsie," said Max, who had drawn near in time to hear the
last few sentences. "Our little navy did good work in that war, small
as she was in comparison with the enemy's. We had but twenty ships to
her thousand, yet showed ourselves strong enough to put an end to her
tyrannical conduct toward our poor sailors. She has never interfered
again in that way with them."

"And never will, I think," added Grandma Elsie. "The two Anglo-Saxon
nations are good friends now, and I trust always will be."

"I hope so indeed," said Max. "We must be prepared for war, but I hope
may be long able to maintain peace with all other nations."

"A hope in which we can all join, I think," said Mrs. Travilla,
glancing around upon the circle of interested faces; for all the
_Dolphin's_ passengers had by this time gathered about them.

"You were talking of the war of 1812, were you, mother?" asked Captain
Raymond.

"Yes; I was telling the children of the fight between the _Boxer_ and
the _Enterprise_," replied Mrs. Travilla.

"And oh, won't you tell us some more, grandma?" entreated Ned.

"I think your father could do it better," she said, looking
persuasively at the captain.

"I am not at all sure of that," he said; "but if you wish it I will
tell what I can remember of such occurrences at the points along the
coast which we are about to visit. But first let me beg that every
one will feel free to leave the vicinity should my story seem to them
dull and prosy," he added, with a smiling glance about upon the little
company.

There was a moment's pause; then Violet said laughingly, "That was very
kind and thoughtful my dear, and I for one shall not hesitate to go
should I feel inclined."

The captain responded with a bow and smile; then, after a moment's
pause, began upon the chosen theme.




CHAPTER II.


"Eastport--which we will presently visit," began Captain Raymond,
"is on Moose Island, in Passamaquoddy Bay. At the time of our last
war with them the English claimed it as belonging to New Brunswick,
under the treaty of 1783. Early in July, 1814, Sir Thomas Hardy sailed
secretly from Halifax for that place, with quite a force of men for
land and sea service. On the 11th the squadron entered Passamaquoddy
Bay and anchored off Fort Sullivan, at Eastport. Major Perley Putnam
was in command of the fort, with a garrison of fifty men and six
pieces of artillery. Hardy demanded an instant surrender, and gave
only five minutes' time for consideration. Putnam promptly refused to
surrender--but the inhabitants of the island were greatly alarmed and
not disposed to resist, so entreated him to yield, which he did on
condition that private property should be respected.

"When the agreement was signed, the British took possession of the
fort, the town of Eastport, and all the islands and villages in and
around Passamaquoddy Bay, landing a thousand armed men, with women
and children, fifty or sixty pieces of cannon, and a battalion of
artillery."

"And did they stay there, papa?" asked Elsie. "Oh, I hope they are not
there now!"

"I have no doubt that nearly, if not all of them, are in their graves
by this time, daughter," replied the captain; then went on: "The
British made declaration that these islands were in their permanent
possession, and ordered all the inhabitants to take an oath of
allegiance within seven days, or leave the territory."

"Allegiance to the King of England, papa?" asked Elsie; "and did any of
them do it?"

"Yes, that is what was meant, and about two-thirds of the people
took it. They, the English, took all the public property from the
custom-house, and tried to force the collector to sign unfinished
treasury notes to the value of nine thousand dollars. But he refused,
saying, 'Hanging will be no compulsion.'"

"Did that mean that he wouldn't do it even if he knew they would hang
him if he refused?" asked Elsie.

"Yes, that was just it," said her father. "Having accomplished what
he wished to do at Eastport--securing it to his country, as he
thought--leaving eight hundred troops to hold it, Hardy sailed away
along the coast of Maine and Massachusetts, spreading alarm as he
went. But the people prepared to meet his expected attack--manning
their forts and arming them. When Sherbrook and Griffith sailed, they
intended to stop at Machias and take possession of it; but falling in
with the brig _Rifleman_, and being told by its commander that the
United States corvette _John Adams_ had gone up the Penobscot, they
made haste to the mouth of that river to blockade her. They passed up
the Green Island channel and entered the fine harbor of Castine on
the morning of the 1st of September. On the edge of the water south of
the village was the half moon redoubt called Fort Porter, armed with
four twenty-pounders and two fieldpieces, and manned by about forty
men under Lieutenant Lewis, of the United States army. At sunrise
Lewis was called upon to surrender. He saw that resistance would be
impossible, so resolved to flee. He gave the enemy a volley from his
twenty-pounders, then spiked them, blew up the redoubt, and with the
fieldpieces he and the garrison fled over the high peninsula to its
neck and escaped up the Penobscot. Then the British took possession of
the town and control of the bay.

"The _John Adams_ had just come home from a successful cruise, and
coming into Penobscot Bay in a thick fog had struck a rock and received
so much injury that it was found necessary to lay her up for repairs.
They did their best to take her out of harm's way, but it was with
difficulty they could keep her afloat until she reached Hampden, a few
miles below Bangor. Some of her crew were disabled by sickness, and so
she was almost helpless.

"Sherbrook, the commanding officer of the British vessels, was told all
this as soon as he landed at Castine, and he and Griffith, commander
of the fleet, at once sent a land and naval force to seize and destroy
the _John Adams_. The expedition sailed in the afternoon of the day of
the arrival at Castine. The people along the Penobscot were not at all
inclined to submit to the British if they could possibly escape doing
so. On the day the British sailed up the river word was sent by express
to Captain Morris, and he at once communicated with Brigadier-General
John Blake, at his home in Brower, opposite Bangor, asking him to call
out the militia immediately. Blake lost no time in assembling the
tenth Massachusetts division, of which he was commander. That evening
he rode down to Hampden, where he found Captain Morris busy with his
preparations for defence. He had taken the heavy guns of his ship to
the high right bank of the Soadabscook, fifty rods from the wharf, and
placed them in battery there so as to command the river approaches from
below.

"The next morning he and Blake held a consultation on the best methods
of defence, citizens of Bangor and Hampden taking part in it. Captain
Morris had little confidence in the militia, but expressed his
intention to meet the enemy at their landing-place, wherever that might
be, and also his resolution to destroy the _Adams_ rather than allow it
to fall into their hands.

"Belfast was taken the next morning by General Gosselin, at the head of
six hundred troops. At the same time another detachment marched up the
western side of the Penobscot unmolested, and reached Bald Hill Cove at
five o'clock in the evening. The troops and eighty marines bivouacked
there that night in a drenching rain. During that day about six hundred
raw militia, who had never seen anything more like war than their own
annual parade, had gathered at Hampden and been posted by General
Blake in an admirable position on the brow of a hill. Lieutenant
Lewis and the forty men who had fled from Castine had joined him. The
artillery company of Blake's brigade was there also, with two brass
three-pounders, and an iron eighteen-pound carronade from the _Adams_
was placed in battery in the road near the meeting-house in charge of
Mr. Bent of the artillery. Many of the militia were without weapons or
ammunition, but Captain Morris supplied them as far as he could.

"While these arrangements were being made Captain Morris had mounted
nine short eighteen-pounders from the _Adams_ upon the high bank over
Crosby's wharf, and placed them in charge of his first lieutenant,
assisted by the other two. With the rest of his guns he took his
position on the wharf, with about two hundred seamen and marines
and twenty invalids, ready to defend his crippled ship to the last
extremity.

"The next morning all that region was covered by a dense fog. The
different British detachments joined together, and by five o'clock
were moving on toward Hampden--moving cautiously in the mist, with a
vanguard of riflemen, and on the flanks detachments of sailors and
marines with a six-pound cannon, a six and a half inch howitzer, and a
rocket apparatus. The British vessels at the same time moved slowly up
the river within supporting distance.

"Blake had sent out two flank companies to watch and annoy the
approaching foe, and between seven and eight o'clock they reported them
as coming up the hill to attack the Americans. The fog was so thick
that they could not be seen, but Blake pointed his eighteen-pounder
in that direction, his fieldpieces also, and fired away with a good
deal of effect, as he learned afterward; but the fog was too thick for
him to see it at the time. His plan was to reserve his musket firing
until the enemy should be near enough to be seriously hurt; but his
men, being raw militia and without the protection of a breastwork in
front, lost courage while standing there awaiting the approach of the
enemy, and when it came suddenly into view, marching at double-quick
and firing volleys in rapid succession, they were panic-stricken, broke
ranks, and fled in every direction, leaving Blake and his officers
alone. Lieutenant Wadsworth saw it all from the upper battery where he
was, and sent word immediately to Morris, who was on the wharf.

"The flight of the militia had left Morris' rear and flank exposed,
and he saw that it would be impossible to defend himself against such
a force as was about to attack him. He therefore ordered Wadsworth to
spike his guns and retreat with his men across the bridge over the
Soadabscook, while it was yet open, for the stream was fordable only at
low water, and the tide was rising.

"Wadsworth obeyed, his rear gallantly covered by Lieutenant Watson
with some marines. At the same time the guns on the wharf were spiked,
the _John Adams_ was set on fire, and Morris' men retreated across
the Soadabscook, he being the last man to leave the wharf. Before
he reached the bridge the British were on the bank above him; but
he dashed across the stream, armpit deep in the water, and under a
galling fire from their muskets, unhurt, joined his friends on the
other side--Blake and his officers and a mere remnant of his command
among them--and all retreated to Bangor. Morris did not stay there,
however, but soon made his way overland to Portland."

"Did the British harm the people in that town, papa?" asked Elsie.

"They took possession, and there was no further resistance," replied
the captain. "Then they sent some vessels, with about five hundred men,
to Bangor. A mile from the town they were met by a flag of truce from
the magistrates, who asked terms of capitulation. The answer was that
private property would be respected. It was about ten o'clock when
they reached the town, and Commodore Barrie gave notice that if the
people would cheerfully send in the required supplies they should not
be harmed in person or property. But he had hardly done so before he
gave his sailors to understand that they might plunder as much as they
pleased."

"And did they, papa?" asked Elsie.

"Yes," he said, "history tells us that almost every store on the
western side of the creek, which there empties into the Penobscot,
was robbed of all valuable property. Colonel John, however, did all
he could to protect the inhabitants. The British forced the people to
surrender all their arms, military stores, and public property of every
kind, and to report themselves prisoners of war for parole, with a
promise that they would not take up arms against the British.

"Having robbed the people of property worth twenty-three thousand
dollars, destroyed, by burning, fourteen vessels, and stolen six, which
they carried away with them, they left Bangor for Hampden, which they
treated in the same way. There they desolated the church--tearing up
the Bible and psalm-books, and demolishing the pulpit and pews. Lossing
tells us that the total loss of property at Hampden, exclusive of the
cargo of the _Commodore Decatur_, was estimated at forty-four thousand
dollars. And in a note he adds that Williamson's 'History of Maine'
says, 'In the midst of the rapine a committee waited on Barrie, and
told him that the people expected at his hands the common safeguards
of humanity, if nothing more; to which the brutal officer replied, "I
have none for you. My business is to burn, sink, and destroy. Your town
is taken by storm, and by the rules of war we ought to both lay your
village in ashes and put its inhabitants to the sword. But I will spare
your lives, though I don't mean to spare your houses."'"

"Oh, what a cruel wretch!" said Evelyn.

"A perfect savage, I should call him!" exclaimed Lucilla hotly.

"I entirely agree with you, ladies," said Mr. Lilburn, "and am sorry
indeed to have to own him as a countryman of mine."

"Well, Cousin Ronald," returned Mrs. Travilla pleasantly, "there are
plenty of Americans of such character that I should be loth indeed to
own them as relatives."

"And there were plenty such in the days of our two wars with England,
as any one must acknowledge, remembering the lawless bands of
marauders called Cowboys and Skinners," said Violet; "they were more
detestable than the British themselves--even such as that Barrie,
Tarleton, and others too numerous to mention."

"Will they ever come here again, papa?" asked Ned.

"I think not, son," replied the captain; "most, if not all of them, are
now dead."

"Yes, it must have been a long, long while ago," remarked the little
lad reflectively.

"We are going now to Passamaquoddy Bay, aren't we, papa?" asked Elsie.

"Yes," he said, "and hope to reach there early this afternoon."

"And I hope we will see all that Lossing tells about," said Grace.

"I think you may feel reasonably certain of that," her father
responded, in his kindly, pleasant tones.

"We pass Machias on the way to Passamaquoddy Bay, don't we, father?"
asked Grace.

"Yes," he replied, "we are nearing it now."

"Oh, I remember something about what occurred there in the Revolution;
but won't you please tell us the story again?" she exclaimed.

"I will," he said. "We had then an exposed coast many miles in extent,
and not a single armed vessel to protect it, while Britain was the
first naval power of the world. A few of our planters and merchants
had been trained in the royal navy, and so had a good many American
seamen, to some extent, in helping England in her wars with the French
in the twenty years preceding our Revolution; but our wise men who
were directing public affairs could see no material for organizing
a marine force, so devoted themselves to the business of raising an
army. Immediately after the battle of Lexington the British began
depredations along the New England coast, and soon private vessels were
gotten out by patriot volunteers, who armed them as well as they could,
and did their best to defend the coast.

"You know news did not fly so fast in those days as it does now, but
when at length the people of Machias heard of the affair at Lexington
it of course caused great excitement, and a desire to defend their
country against the foe. There in their own harbor lay a British armed
schooner called the _Margaretta_. She had two sloops with her, and the
three were busied in getting lumber for the British army in Boston. A
party of the young men of the town determined to try to capture her
while her officers were at church on shore. They seized one of the
sloops, chased the schooner out of the harbor, and after a severe fight
compelled her to surrender.

"It was the first naval engagement of the Revolution. There were
forty of the Americans, commanded by Jeremiah O'Brien, and about
twenty of them, and as many of the British, were killed in the fight.
The captain of the cutter was one of the mortally wounded. Soon
afterward O'Brien captured two small English cruisers, making their
crews prisoners, and carrying them to Watertown, where the Provincial
Congress of Massachusetts was in session. That body then took measures
to establish a coast marine to intercept English transports bringing
supplies for the British troops, and gave O'Brien employment in that
service, with a captain's commission.

"The British force under Sherwood and Griffiths, after their raid up
the Penobscot, went back to Machias. They landed at Buck's Harbor,
three miles below the town, and marched against the fort, which the
garrison deserted and blew up."

"Are we going to Machias now, papa?" asked Ned.

"No," said his father, "we are nearing Passamaquoddy Bay now. We will
spend a little time there, then turn and go back to the Penobscot, to
visit historical scenes along its course. You perhaps remember that
the British went there shortly after having taken Eastport and Fort
Sullivan on Moose Island in Passamaquoddy Bay. They were taken on the
11th of July, 1812; Castine on September 1 of the same year."

"And about a year after came the fight between the _Enterprise_ and
the _Boxer_, which occurred September 5, 1813," observed Max.

"Yes," said his father, with a smile, "and of course you remember the
notable victory vouchsafed us by Providence five days later on Lake
Erie?"

"Perry's victory, sir? Yes, indeed! Also Macdonough's on Lake
Champlain, which was given him on the 11th of the next September, 1814."

But they were now entering the bay, and historical reminiscence gave
place to talk of the beauty of the scenery, Captain Raymond, who had
been there before, pointing out and naming the different islands and
villages. They did not land, but steamed slowly about the bay, finding
so much to interest them that they lingered there until nightfall. They
then steamed out into the ocean, taking a westward course. It was a
beautiful moonlight evening, and all gathering together on deck, passed
the time in cheerful chat concerning the scenes just visited and those
they expected to visit in the near future. At length there was a pause
in the conversation, presently broken by little Ned.

"Oh, dear!" he sighed, "I'm just hungry for a little fun. I don't see
what's the use of having ventriloquists along, if they don't make some
fun for us once in a while."

"Now, Master Ned, do you call that a polite speech?" asked a strange
voice that seemed to come from a short distance in his rear.

Ned sprang to his feet and turned toward it.

"I--I didn't mean to be rude, Cousin Ronald or Brother Max, whichever
you are; but I am ever so hungry for a bit of fun."

"And you consider that a healthful appetite, do you?" queried the voice.

"Yes, sir; for 'Laugh and grow fat' is an old saying, so I've heard."

"Well, well, well! I have understood that you rather objected to being
considered fat," laughed the invisible speaker.

"Oh, well, I don't believe a bit of fun once in a while would do much
harm in that way," returned the little fellow. "At any rate, I'm more
than willing to try it."

"Well, suppose we try it with the understanding that if you get too fat
you are to be reduced to your present suitable size by a low and spare
diet?"

"No, indeed!" cried Ned. "I won't consent to that. Don't you know that
boys need to eat plenty, if they are to grow up into big, strong men?"

"Enough, but not too much, Neddie," laughed his cousin, Dr. Percival,
sitting near.

"Uncle Harold, you know all about it, for you're a good doctor," said
Ned, appealing to Dr. Travilla; "oughtn't little boys to have plenty to
eat?"

"Yes, Ned; plenty, but not too much."

"Well, that's just what I want," laughed Ned. "Oh, what was that?" as
a cry, "Help! help, or I shall drown!" came from the water not far
from the side of the vessel. Cousin Ronald and Max exchanged inquiring
glances, and the latter rose hastily to his feet.

"Throw him a rope, my men!" he called to a group of sailors at the
farther end of the vessel.

The words had hardly left his lips ere the order was obeyed, and the
next moment the dripping figure of a young lad in a bathing suit was
drawn up and landed upon the deck.

"Thanks, thanks, gentlemen," he panted; "you've helped me to a narrow
escape from a watery grave. I ventured out too far--alone in the
moonlight and----"

"Don't try to talk, my man; you are too much exhausted," interrupted
Dr. Travilla, for he, Captain Raymond, Max, Mr. Lilburn, Chester, and
Dr. Percival had all hurried to the spot to see and assist the rescued
stranger.

"Thanks! I'll do," he said, "if you'll kindly help me to rub down, and
lend me some things till these can be made dry."

"Certainly," replied Captain Raymond, and at once gave directions that
the stranger be taken to a comfortably warm stateroom, provided with
everything needful, and his wet garments dried and returned to him as
quickly as possible. Then turning to his brother-in-law, "I leave the
rest to your care, Harold," he said.

"Oh, Brother Max," cried Ned, as the gentlemen rejoined the ladies and
children, "I thought it was you or Cousin Ronald calling for help just
for fun, and it was a real drowning man, after all."

"A mere lad, Ned, and I am very glad we were able to give him help in
season."

The incident had created quite a little excitement, and all eagerly
awaited Harold's report. He rejoined them in a few minutes, looking
so undisturbed that they at once felt that his new patient was in no
danger.

"He will be all right presently," he said, in answer to their eagerly
inquiring looks and questions. "When we heard his cry for help he had
hardly more than just realized his danger. He is somewhat ashamed of
his venturesomeness, and anxious to get back to his friends without
letting them know of the peril he was in."

Turning to Captain Raymond, "He will be very glad and grateful if you
will go a little out of your way and land him at the spot where he
entered the water, so that he may be able to steal up to the house of
his friends without arousing their suspicions concerning the danger he
has been in."

"I think we may do that," the captain said, in his kindly tones. "It
will probably not delay us more than an hour or so, and we are not so
hurried for time that we need decline to submit to that."

Max at once gave the necessary orders, the course of the vessel was
changed, and ere long the young stranger was landed at the spot where
he had entered the water. Then the _Dolphin_ proceeded on her westward
way, and when her passengers awoke in the morning they were nearing
Penobscot Bay.




CHAPTER III.


All were eager to visit the historical places immediately upon their
arrival. As they entered the harbor of Castine Mrs. Travilla remarked
that it was quite as picturesque as she expected from Lossing's
description.

"Ah, I entirely agree with you, Cousin Elsie," responded Mr. Lilburn;
"it is so bonny a place that I do not wonder it was coveted by the
enemy."

The whole party presently landed, a guide was found who promised to
conduct them to all the points of historical interest, and they set out
upon their search. They very much admired the situation of the town,
and the view from it of the bay, with its picturesque islands. They
visited old Fort George, built by the British in 1779, in the centre of
the peninsula, and repaired, fraised, and armed by them in 1814. It was
only a ruin now, but interesting because of what it had been in those
earlier days. The view from its banks, which were about eighteen feet
high from the bottom of the six feet deep ditch, was very interesting.
Looking northwestward from the fort they could see on the right the
entrance to the canal cut by the British across Castine Neck, turning
the peninsula into an island. It was about eighty rods long and twelve
feet deep, and now had a bridge across it. Between the promontory
and an island could be seen the mouth of the Penobscot River. On
the extreme left they could see the town of Belfast, thirteen miles
distant. Leaving that point they visited the remains of several other
forts built by the British, after which they returned to the yacht for
the evening meal and the night's rest.

The _Dolphin_ was allowed to remain stationary until all her passengers
were on deck again the next morning; then the anchor was lifted, and
she steamed up the river. Favored with delightful weather they greatly
enjoyed the trip up the beautiful, winding stream. They had taken on
board a man well acquainted with the river and every point of interest
upon its banks, and who pointed out each one as they neared it. As they
entered Marsh Bay the young people were told that the British squadron
lay there one night on their way toward Hampden. Elsie and Ned showed
keen interest when told of it, and in hearing from their father of the
cannon-ball of the British that lodged in a storehouse there in 1814.

"Do you remember the story Lossing tells about a Norway pine somewhere
in this region?" asked Mrs. Travilla, addressing Captain Raymond.

"Something of it," he said, with an amused smile, and the children at
once begged to hear it.

"Will you gratify them, mother?" asked the captain. "You probably have
a better recollection of his story than I."

"I will do my best," she said, and began at once. "Lossing says the
tree was about a mile above here, and the only one of its kind in that
region--a round, compact tree, its short trunk looking as if composed
of a group of smaller ones, and the limbs growing so near the ground
that it was difficult to get under it. At the time that the British
landed at Frankford some man who had a large quantity of bacon, being
afraid they would rob him of it, carried it to that tree and hung the
pieces in among the branches to hide them from the foe; and though the
British passed along the road only a short distance from the tree, they
did not notice its peculiar fruit, so did not meddle with it, and his
bacon was saved; always afterward that Norway pine was called the Bacon
Tree."

"Thank you, grandma; that was a nice story," said Elsie.

"Haven't you another little story for us, grandma?" asked Ned, in
coaxing tones. "I do always like your stories ever so much."

At that Grandma Elsie laughed a pleasant little laugh, then went on:

"Lossing tells us quite an interesting little story of a remarkable
black man whom he visited somewhere near here. His name was Henry Van
Meter, and he was then ninety-five years old. During the Revolution
he was a slave to Governor Nelson of Virginia. After that he became
a seaman, and was one of the crew of the privateer _Lawrence_, which
sailed from Baltimore in 1814. I suppose Lossing questioned him about
his long life, and heard his story of it. He remembered having seen
Washington many times. The estate of Governor Nelson, his first master,
was sold after the war, to pay his debts, and Henry was bought by a
planter beyond the Blue Ridge. The new master wanted him to marry one
of his slave girls, and told him if he did he would order in his will
that he should be made a free man at his (the master's) death. In
telling of it Henry said, 'I didn't like the gals, and didn't want to
wait for dead men's shoes. So master sold me to a man near Lexington,
Kentucky, and there was only one log house in that town when I went
there.'

"He was soon sold to another man, who treated him shamefully, and one
night he mounted one of his master's horses and fled to the Kentucky
River, where he turned the horse loose, and told him to go home if he
had a mind to, as he didn't want to steal him. Some kind white people
helped Henry over the river into Ohio, and at Cincinnati he then took
the name of Van Meter--the family name of some of the Shenandoah Valley
people who had been kind to him.

"Afterward Henry became the servant of an officer in the army of
General St. Clair, and served with our troops in the Northwest under
General Wayne. After that he lived in Chillicothe, then came East to
Philadelphia. There some Quaker sent him to school, and he learned to
read and write. He became a sailor, went to Europe several times in
that capacity, and when the war broke out he shipped as such on board
the privateer _Lawrence_. It was taken by the British, and he was
thrown into Dartmoor Prison, and saw the massacre there in 1815."

"Oh, what was that, grandma?" asked Ned, in tones of excitement. "I
didn't think I ever heard about it."

"Lossing tells us," replied his grandmother, "that Dartmoor was a depot
for prisoners in England; that it was situated in a desolate region,
was built in 1809 for a place in which to confine French prisoners. At
the time the treaty of peace was made with us there were six thousand
American prisoners in it--two thousand five hundred of them American
seamen, put there for refusing to fight in the British Navy against
their countrymen. They were there when the war began in 1812. For
some unknown reason there was great delay in setting those prisoners
free after the treaty of peace was made. It was nearly three months
before they were allowed to know that the treaty had been signed. From
the time they first heard of it they were every day expecting to be
set at liberty, and naturally grew very impatient over the delay. On
the 4th of April they demanded bread instead of hard biscuit, which
they refused to eat. On the evening of the 6th they showed great
unwillingness to obey the order to retire to their quarters, and some
of them not only refused to do that, but went beyond their prescribed
limits. Then Captain Shortland, who had charge of the military guard,
ordered them to fire on the Americans, which they did. The soldiers,
I believe, fired a second time. Five prisoners were killed and
thirty-three wounded."

"Why, that was just murder, wasn't it, grandma?" asked Ned. "And didn't
they hang those soldiers for doing it?"

"No; the British authorities called it 'justifiable homicide,' which
meant it was all right enough."

"In which decision I, for one, am far from agreeing," remarked Mr.
Lilburn emphatically.

"It created intense indignation in this country at the time," said the
captain; "but is now seldom remembered, and the two nations are, and I
hope always will be, good friends."

The _Dolphin_ ascended the river only as far as Bangor, and returned
by moonlight to Castine, where they anchored for some hours; then at
an early hour in the morning they steamed out into the ocean again,
and pursued a westward course until they reached Portland. There they
landed and paid a visit to the cemetery where lay the remains of the
brave captains of the _Enterprise_ and the _Boxer_; also those of
Midshipman Kervin Waters.

"They are buried side by side, as if they were brothers, instead of
enemies who were killed fighting each other," said little Elsie softly.
"But perhaps they were good Christian men, each fighting for what he
thought was the right of his own country. Papa, can you tell us about
the funeral? I suppose they had one?"

"Yes, daughter, a solemn and imposing one. The two battered vessels
were lying at the end of Union Wharf. A civil and military procession
had been formed at the court-house at nine in the morning of the 9th
of September. The coffins were brought from the vessels in barges of
ten oars each, rowed by minute strokes of ship-masters and mates, most
of the barges and boats in the harbor accompanying them. When the
barges began to move, and while the procession was passing through the
streets to the church, minute guns were fired by artillery companies.
Also while the procession marched from the church to the cemetery here,
which is about a mile distant from the church.

"The chief mourners who followed the corpse of Captain Burrows were Dr.
Washington, Captain Hull, and officers of the _Enterprise_. Those who
followed Captain Blyth's were the officers of the _Boxer_, on parole.
Both were followed by naval and military officers in the United States
service, the crews of the two vessels, civil officers of the State and
city, military companies, and a large concourse of citizens. Only a few
weeks before Captain Blyth was one of the pall-bearers at the funeral
of our Lawrence, the gallant commander of the _Chesapeake_, at Halifax."

"That dear brave man that said, 'Don't give up the ship,' papa?" asked
Elsie.

"Yes, daughter. Now let us read the inscription on his tombstone:
'In memory of Captain Samuel Blyth, late Commander of his Britannic
Majesty's brig _Boxer_. He nobly fell on the 5th day of September,
1813, in action with the United States brig _Enterprise_. In life
honorable; in death glorious. His country will long deplore one of
her bravest sons, his friends long lament one of the best of men. AE.
29. The surviving officers of his crew offer this feeble tribute of
admiration and respect.'"

"It sounds as though they had respected and loved him," said the little
girl. "That next grave is where Burrows lies, isn't it, papa? and won't
you please read its inscription?"

They drew nearer and the captain read aloud: "'Beneath this stone
moulders the body of William Burrows, late commander of the United
States brig _Enterprise_, who was mortally wounded on the 5th of
September, 1813, in an action which contributed to increase the fame
of American valor, by capturing his Britannic Majesty's brig _Boxer_,
after a severe contest of forty-five minutes. AE. 28. A passing stranger
has erected this memento of respect to the manes of a patriot, who, in
the hour of peril, obeyed the loud summons of an injured country, and
who gallantly met, fought, and conquered the foeman.'"

"And that one on the pillars, papa--whose is it?" Elsie asked, as her
father paused with a slight sigh.

"That is the tomb of Midshipman Waters," he said. "We will go nearer
and read its inscription: 'Beneath this marble, by the side of his
gallant commander, rest the remains of Lieutenant Kervin Waters, a
native of Georgetown, District of Columbia, who received a mortal
wound, September 5, 1813, while a midshipman on board the United States
brig _Enterprise_, in an action with his Britannic Majesty's brig
_Boxer_, which terminated in the capture of the latter. He languished
in severe pain, which he endured with fortitude, until September 25,
1813, when he died with Christian calmness and resignation, aged
eighteen. The young men of Portland erect this stone as a testimony of
their respect for his valor and virtues.'"

"Twenty days to suffer so," sighed Elsie. "Oh, it was dreadful!"

Max and Evelyn stood near, side by side.

"Dreadful indeed!" Evelyn sighed, in low quivering tones as they turned
away. "Oh, Max! I wish you did not belong to the navy!"

"Why, dearest?" he asked in tender tones. "It is not only in the navy
that men die suddenly and of injuries; and many a naval officer has
lived to old age and died at home in his bed. And we are under the same
Protecting Care on the sea as on the land."

"Yes, that is a cheering thought," she said, "and since you love
the sea, it is wrong and selfish in me to regret your choice of a
profession. And I could not be induced to resign my sailor lover for
any landsman," she added, with a charming blush and smile.

That evening, joining her father, as she so often did, in his quiet
promenade of the deck before retiring for the night, Lucilla spoke of
their visit to the cemetery, and said, "I have always been so glad that
you left the navy, papa, so that we could have you always at home with
us, and I am gladder still when I think that if we should have another
war you will not be in danger of such a fate as that which befell
Burrows and Blyth."

"Unless I am needed, volunteer my services, and am accepted," he
returned, in a slightly playful tone.

"Oh, papa, don't, please don't!" she exclaimed, clinging more closely
to him. "It will be dreadful enough to have Max in such danger, but to
have you, too, in it would be heart-breaking."

"Well, dear child, we won't be so foolish as to trouble ourselves about
what may never happen. And if it ever should happen, we must just put
our trust in the Lord, believing that he doeth all things well, and
trusting his promise, 'As thy days, so shall thy strength be.' And you
can rejoice in the fact that Chester is neither sailor nor soldier," he
added, with a smile, and softly patting the hand resting upon his arm.

"Yes, father dear, that is no small comfort," she said; "especially as
I know he is patriotic enough to do all in his power for his country."

"Ah, no doubt of that! I think Chester would be as ready as any one
else to take up arms in her defence if he saw that his services were
needed. And I don't believe this daughter of mine would say a word to
prevent him."

"I think not, papa; but I hope I may never be tried in that way."

"A hope in which I heartily join you, daughter. I should be glad indeed
to know that we were done with wars. But that is so uncertain that we,
as a nation, must be ever prepared to repel attack--on land or sea.
'Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty.'"

"And liberty is worth that price, isn't it, father?" she said, with a
bright smile up into his face.

"Yes; so we think; we could never be content without it."

They paced silently back and forth for a few moments, then Lucilla
asked, "How long are we going to lie quietly here in Portland harbor,
papa?"

"That will depend upon the wishes of the majority of our company," he
answered; "which I think we will learn at the breakfast table to-morrow
morning."




CHAPTER IV.


It was a bright and cheerful party that gathered about the _Dolphin's_
breakfast table the next morning. Greetings were exchanged, a blessing
asked upon the food, and Captain Raymond began helping his guests.

"I notice we are still lying quietly in Portland harbor," remarked Dr.
Percival. "Do we remain here another day, captain?"

"That must be as the majority decide," was the pleasant-toned
rejoinder. "Please, friends, express your wishes freely."

No one spoke for a moment--each waiting for the others. Then Violet
said, in her lively pleasant way, "Cousin Ronald, you are the eldest,
and should feel entitled to speak first."

"Thanks, cousin," he returned, "but I really have no choice; am
perfectly willing to go or stay, as may best please the majority of my
friends here."

"Do you think of returning directly to Bar Harbor, captain?" asked Mrs.
Travilla.

"If that is what you would all prefer, mother. But how would you all
like to take a short sea voyage--sailing eastwardly from here, at some
distance from the coast, and perhaps going on up the coast of New
Brunswick?"

Every one, from Mr. Lilburn down to little Ned, seemed charmed with
the idea, and as the weather was all that could be desired, it was
decided that they would start as soon as the anchor could be lifted
and sufficient steam gotten up. They carried out their plan, and had a
delightful voyage lasting several days.

It was on Saturday that they left Portland; the Sabbath found them far
from land, and, as at former times, services were conducted on board
the yacht with the singing of hymns, the offering up of prayers, the
reading of the Scriptures, and of a sermon by Captain Raymond.

After that they formed themselves into a Bible class, and Mr. Lilburn
was persuaded to take the lead, choosing the subject while the others
sat about him, Bibles in hand. Opening his, the dear old gentleman
began:

"Let us take for our theme Jesus Christ our Lord, and what it is so
to know him that we shall have eternal life. Here in the seventeenth
chapter of John's gospel in his--the Master's--wonderful prayer we
read, 'And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.' Paul tells us in
his letter to the Philippians, 'I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.' His acquaintance
was not with the Christ of Galilee, whom he had not known, but with the
ascended Christ; he who said to the Apostle John on Patmos, 'I am he
that liveth and was dead, and behold I am alive again forever more.'
In the tenth verse of the first chapter of his gospel John tells us,
'He was in the world and the world was made by him and the world knew
him not.' In first John third chapter and last clause of the first
verse, 'Therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not.'
A self-seeking, worldly-minded man does not know Christ, and cannot
understand him who is aiming day by day to live above the world and get
the Christ view of life. Captain, can you tell us why it is that the
worldly-minded do not know Jesus?"

"Because," replied the captain, "the cares and pleasures of this world
are crowding Him out of their hearts, as he himself tells us in the
parable of the sower. But some of those who loved him failed for a time
to recognize him when he was close to them. In the last chapter of his
gospel John tells us, 'But when the morning was now come, Jesus stood
on the shore; but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus.' Mary also
had failed at first to recognize him when he spoke to her as she stood
weeping beside his sepulchre. And how long he talked with those two on
the way to Emmaus, and they did not recognize him until he sat down to
eat with them, took bread, and blessed and brake it, and then vanished
out of their sight! Ah, Jesus is often near us and we know him not."

"And he is our Master," said Mrs. Travilla, in her low, sweet tones.
"In John thirteen, thirteenth, talking with his disciples Jesus says,
'Ye call me Master and Lord; and ye say well, for so I am.' And Paul
tells the Ephesians that their Master is in heaven. 'And ye masters do
the same things unto them, forbearing, threatening, knowing that your
Master also is in heaven.'"

"There are five Greek words translated Master," continued the captain;
"one meaning overseer, another teacher, still another signifying
absolute ownership; another, leader--one who goes before us; still
another, one exercising supreme authority or power. Oh, that to-day
each one of us may know Christ as our supreme Lord and Master who alone
has absolute ownership of our lives and all our powers."

"Let us look for other texts bearing upon this subject," said Mr.
Lilburn. "Have not you one for us, Harold?"

"Yes," replied Harold, "here in first John, second chapter, is given a
test of our knowledge of Christ. 'Hereby do we know that we know him if
we keep his commandments. He that saith I know him and keepeth not his
commandments is a liar and the truth is not in him.'"

"And here in John's gospel," said Mrs. Lilburn, "where Jesus is talking
with his disciples, that same night in which he was betrayed, he says:
'A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have
loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know
that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.'"

"And again," said Evelyn, "in the fifteenth chapter and twelfth verse,
'This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you.
Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends.'"

"What wonderful love--oh, what wonderful love was His!" exclaimed Mrs.
Travilla, in low moved tones. "And how sweet are those words: 'I have
loved thee with an everlasting love.' 'For a small moment have I
forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather thee.'"

"Let us sing to His praise," suggested Mr. Lilburn, and Violet, seating
herself at the instrument, struck a few chords, then started the hymn:

    "Oh, for a thousand tongues to sing,
    My dear Redeemer's praise,"

the others joining in with a will--evidently singing with spirit and
understanding, for the sweet words were familiar to all.

The short service over, they scattered in groups here and there,
chatting quietly with each other.

For a few moments Mrs. Travilla and her cousin and old-time intimate
friend, Annis--now Mrs. Lilburn--were together a little apart from the
others, talking low and confidentially. They talked of the past, the
present, and the future, as regarded life in both this world and the
next.

"How sweet is that Bible lesson which we have just had," said Annis,
at length. "How I love those words of Jesus--'Ye call me Master and
Lord; and ye say well; for so I am.'"

"Yes," returned Elsie; "they are very dear to me. Oh, how sweet to know
that he is ever with us--always close at hand, full of love, infinite
in power and willingness to bless; to help in every trouble, to give
'the oil of joy for mourning and the garment of praise for the spirit
of heaviness.' Oh, how true are the words: 'The joy of the Lord is your
strength.' If we only have that we can bear all troubles and trials.
It makes one happy in the present, and takes away all dread of the
future; so sweet and sustaining is it to know that He who has all power
in heaven and on earth is your friend, loving you with an everlasting,
infinite love; caring for you at all times and in all places."

"Yes, yes," said Annis softly. "'Sing, O daughter of Zion; shout,
O Israel; be glad and rejoice with all thy heart, O daughter of
Jerusalem' ... 'The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he
will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in his
love, he will joy over thee with singing.' Are they not sweet words,
Elsie?"

"Indeed they are! These others too--'God commendeth his love toward us,
in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.'"

There was a moment of silence; then Annis said, "You seem to me a very
happy Christian, Elsie. Is it not because the joy of the Lord is indeed
your strength?"

"Oh, Annis, who could be otherwise than happy in the consciousness of
that love; and in the thought of how soon one will be with the Master,
and like Him; and with all the dear ones gone before, never, never to
be separated from them again?"

"Yes, dear cousin, and how blest are we in the knowledge that our dear
ones gone before were His, and are with Him now, and will be ready to
greet us with great joy when we too shall reach that blessed shore."

"'The joy of the Lord is your strength,'" again quoted Mrs. Travilla,
in her low, sweet tones. "Don't you think, Annis, that the Covenanters
and Puritans,--good, devoted Christians as most of them were,--in
opposing the lightness, worldly-mindedness, and frivolity of their
foes, went too far to the other extreme, leaving out from their
teachings the joy of the Lord? Do you not remember that the Jews were
told by Nehemiah, Ezra, and the others, 'This day is holy unto the Lord
your God; mourn not nor weep. Go your way, eat the fat and drink the
sweet; and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared: for
this day is holy unto our Lord; neither be ye sorry; for the joy of the
Lord is your strength. So the Levites stilled all the people, saying,
Hold your peace, for the day is holy; neither be ye grieved. And all
the people went their way, to eat, and to drink, and to send portions,
and to make great mirth, because they had understood the words that
were declared unto them.'"

"Yes," said Annis, "it seems to be human nature to go to extremes,
and I think much harm is often done in that way. For instance, the
Covenanters and Puritans of old times were so disgusted with the
errors and selfish indulgences of the Papists--their turning the
Sabbath into a holiday, which might rightly be spent in merrymaking and
sport--that they themselves robbed it of all enjoyment, and made it a
dull, gloomy time to their young people, with little or no hint in it
of the strengthening joy of the Lord."

"I think you are right," returned Mrs. Travilla, in a musing tone.
"The Sabbath is not a day for frivolity, but it is one for joy and
gladness--the joy of the Lord strengthening us for duty, trial, and
temptation. What but that sustained the martyrs when called upon to
lay down their lives for the sake of Him who died to redeem them? And
oh, how that gracious, precious promise, 'As thy days, so shall thy
strength be,' relieves one of the dread of what the future may have
in store for us; what bereavements, losses, sufferings, mental or
physical! How often and sweetly He bids us fear not. 'O Israel, Fear
not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art
mine. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest
through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flames
kindle upon thee. For I am the Lord, thy God, the Holy One of Israel,
thy Saviour.'"

"Yes," said Annis, "oh, how often, how tenderly he bids us fear not. It
is like a mother hushing her frightened child. 'Say to them that are of
a fearful heart, fear not.... Fear thou not, for I am with thee.... For
I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying to thee, fear not,
I will help thee. Fear not, I have redeemed thee, thou art mine....
Fear not, O Jacob my servant, and Jeshurun whom I have chosen.'"

"'Whom I have chosen,'" repeated Elsie. "How those words bring to mind
what Jesus our dear Master said to his disciples in that last talk with
them in the room where they had eaten the passover--'Ye have not chosen
me, but I have chosen you.' Oh, what love and condescension to choose
us sinful creatures for his own!"

"'And ordained you that ye should go and bring forth fruit,'" said
Annis, going on with the quotation, "'and that your fruit should
remain; that whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will
give it you.' I remember," she went on musingly, "that when I was a
little girl I used to think I should like to be a Christian, and would
be if only I knew how. The way seems very easy now--just to listen to
the dear Saviour's gracious invitation, 'Come unto me all ye that labor
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest,' accept it, and give
myself to him."

"Yes," said Elsie, "his promise joined to that--'and ye shall find rest
unto your souls'--is sure; it never fails."




CHAPTER V.


Before the next Sabbath our friends had returned to Bar Harbor. For
some weeks longer they remained in that vicinity; then, cooler weather
making a more southerly climate desirable, they sailed for home. Dr.
Percival was so far recovered that he felt in haste to get back to
Torriswood and at work among his patients again. He and his Maude paid
a flying visit to old friends and relatives at the Oaks and Ion, then
hastened to Louisiana by rail.

Max Raymond, to the great satisfaction of himself, his _fiancee_, and
his friends, was favored with a lengthening of his furlough, which
enabled him to spend some weeks at home in his father's house. Lucilla
persuaded Evelyn to be her guest at the same time, Chester was there
every evening, and so the courting went merrily on. There was much talk
about the new house the captain proposed building, much discussion
of the question whether the one building should be made suitable and
sufficiently large for two families,--half of it for Max and Eva,--or
whether a separate house should be put up for them in another part of
the grounds. The decision was finally left to the brides-elect, and as
they were very strongly attached, and Max was likely to be often away
on the sea for months and years together, they thought it best the two
dwellings should be under the same roof, and their decision was highly
approved by the captain and all their relatives and friends.

Then followed consultations in regard to the exact spot upon which it
should stand, and the studying and comparing of plans to make it as
commodious, convenient, and beautiful as possible. The captain was
evidently ready to go to any reasonable amount of expense in order to
give them an ideal home, his means being ample and his love for his
children very great.

But all the time was not spent in that way, for other relatives
claimed a share in Max's prized companionship; invitations were given
and visits paid to the Oaks, Ion, Fairview, the Laurels, Roselands,
Pinegrove, Ashlands, and Riverside. Sometimes the invitation was for
dinner or tea, sometimes for the whole day--or longer for the young
folks, if not for the older ones and the children. It was on the last
day of October they dined at Riverside, nearly all the connection
meeting them there, and at Rosie's earnest solicitation Evelyn and
Lucilla, Max and Chester accepted an invitation to stay until the next
morning, Captain Raymond giving a rather unwilling consent to let
Lucilla do so.

"It is Hallowe'en, you know, and I'm just pining for a bit of fun,"
Rosie said privately to the girls, after seeing the older guests
depart. "You two are engaged, to be sure, but 'there's many a slip
'twixt the cup and the lip,'" she added, with a laugh and a twinkle of
fun in her eye.

"But we are not wanting slips," laughed Lucilla.

"Nor much afraid we will get them," added Evelyn merrily. "Still we
might have a little fun."

"Provided we take it early enough to get to bed in good season," added
Lucilla, in a mirthful tone. "My father, you know, is very particular
about that--so kindly anxious is he to keep me in good health."

"Which is altogether right, wise, and kind, I am sure," returned Rosie;
"and I don't intend to tempt you to go contrary to his wishes. I'm
obliged to him for granting my request for permission to keep you here
all night, and I shall not urge you to stay up later than he would
allow you to if you were at home. If we try some old-fashioned games we
can suit ourselves as to the hour for the experiments."

"Yes," laughed Evelyn, "I shall be quite as sure of the fulfilment of
the augury if we get it some hours earlier than people of old times
used to look for it."

"Then we will just wait till our old folks get to bed--which they
always do in good season," said Rosie.

"Your husband approves, I suppose?" remarked Lucilla inquiringly.

"Oh, yes!" laughed Rosie; "he sees no harm in it, and approves of his
wife having all the pleasure she can. I wish we could have had Grace
stay and share the fun, but her father vetoed that almost before I had
fairly given the invitation."

"Yes," said Lucilla, "poor Gracie is so feeble that father has to be
very careful of her."

"Yes; I know," said Rosie, "but I thought he might have left her
for once, considering that my two doctor brothers are here for the
night--unless called out by some inconveniently sick person."

"Which we will hope they won't be, for even doctors should have a
little amusement once in a while," said Evelyn.

"Yes," said Rosie, "and they enjoyed the golf this afternoon, and
appear to be having a pleasant time with Max, Chester, and the others
out on the river bank there now."

The girls were on the veranda overlooking the river, and just at
that moment were joined by Rosie's mother-in-law, the older Mrs.
Croly. She sat down and chatted with them for a few moments, then bade
them good-night, and went to her own apartments. It was growing dusk
then, the young men came in, and presently they all repaired to the
drawing-room, where for the next hour or two they entertained each
other with music and conversation. Max had some interesting adventures
to narrate, to which both young men and maidens were eager listeners.

In the pause that followed the conclusion of the second tale the clock
in the hall was heard to strike.

"Eleven!" exclaimed Lucilla, in a tone of surprise and dismay. "Father
would say I ought to have gone to my room and my bed more than an hour
ago."

"Oh, no! not on Hallowe'en," laughed Rosie; and just then a servant
brought in a basket filled with ears of corn, and set it down in their
midst.

"What's that for, Rosie?" asked Harold. "You can hardly ask your
guests to eat raw corn, especially at this late hour? As a physician I
must most emphatically enter my protest."

"Perhaps Rosie is benevolently trying to bring practice into her
brothers' hands," remarked Herbert facetiously. "But we are not looking
for that at present, but for fun--pure fun, that will bring damage to
nobody."

"Yes, my dear brothers, that's what I am endeavoring to do," she
returned in sprightly tones. "Perhaps you have not heard of the new
game with ears of corn? You folks are all invited to be blindfolded,
each in turn, and in that condition to draw out an ear of corn by which
to foretell your future fate. A tasselled ear will promise you great
joy, a big, full one good luck for a year. A short one will mean a gift
is coming, a red or yellow one no luck at all."

"Quite a new idea," said Herbert, "and as there is nothing said about
love or marriage, I suppose even engaged folks may try it; married ones
also."

"Oh, yes!" replied Rosie, producing a dainty lace-trimmed handkerchief.
"Eva, will you kindly consent to take the first turn?"

"If you wish it," returned Evelyn, and the handkerchief was bound about
her head and she was led to the basket.

"I suppose I am not to choose by feeling, either, but just to take the
first one I happen to touch?" she said inquiringly.

The others assented, and she drew out an ear.

"Oh, good luck for you!" exclaimed Rosie. "It is as big and full a one
as the basket holds."

Lucilla was told it was her turn, the handkerchief was bound about her
eyes, and she stooped over the basket and drew out quite a short ear.

"Ah, you see I am not so lucky as you were, Eva," she exclaimed,
passing her fingers from end to end.

"But it isn't bad," said Rosie. "That means a gift is coming to you
soon."

"A good or a bad one?" laughed Lucilla. "Perhaps papa would say I
deserved a bad one for staying up so late."

"Oh, no! I think he expected something of the kind--he declined to let
Grace stay, you know," said Rosie, "and I did want her badly. Well,
gentlemen, which of you will take his turn now?"

At that they all insisted that she should take hers first, which she
did, bringing out a tasselled ear.

"Oh, I am fortunate!" she cried, with a merry peal of laughter, "for a
tasselled ear is said to mean great joy."

After that the young men took their turns. Chester got a big, full ear,
Max a short one, Herbert a tasselled one, Harold a yellow one, which
Rosie told him with sighs and groans meant no luck at all.

"But don't be discouraged, brother dear," she said, patting him
affectionately on the shoulder, "though older than myself, you are
young enough to have lots of good luck after this year is out."

"Many thanks for the assurance, sister mine," he laughed, "and though
older than yourself, I believe I am young enough to wait a year for any
special good luck."

"And I hope you will have enough afterward to reward you for the
patient waiting, Uncle Harold," said Lucilla.

"If he gets all he deserves it will be a great deal," added Evelyn.

"You are good, kind comforters--both; accept my warmest thanks,"
laughed Harold.

There was a little more lively chat, then the young girls said
good-night and went to their rooms--two on the second floor with a
communicating door between. Rosie accompanied them, leaving her husband
to attend to the gentlemen guests.

"See here, girls," she said, pointing to a basket of rosy-cheeked
apples on a stand; "these were put here to induce you to try another
Hallowe'en experiment. If you want to see what your future husbands
will look like, eat one of these standing before the mirror, brushing
your hair all the time, and now and then--when you can get up courage
enough--look over your left shoulder."

"Oh, that won't require any courage, Rosie," laughed Evelyn. "I am not
in the least afraid of Max--brave officer though he is."

"And I stand in quite as little fear of Chester," said Lucilla. "So
that really it seems that your good apples will be almost thrown away."

"Ah, you two forget the 'many a slip 'twixt the cup and the lip,'"
laughed Rosie. "And it cannot possibly do your lovers any harm, or
alienate their affections from you."

"No, we are not at all afraid of that," said Lucilla, "and as your
apples look very tempting, I believe I shall run the risk of eating one
presently. I suppose I must first don a dressing gown and take down my
hair."

"Yes," said Rosie; "you are to stand before the mirror brushing it
diligently while eating the apple. And you will try it too, won't you,
Eva?"

"Well, yes," returned Evelyn, "just for fun; and if anybody but Max
comes to me I shall be sure it is not a truthful augury."

"Max is a fine fellow and has always been one of my favorites," said
Rosie, "but there are others in the world that might do just as well,
in case you and Max should have a falling out. Or you may live long
enough to marry several times."

Evelyn laughed at that, saying she was quite sure once would be enough
for her.

"I know you girls did not come prepared to stay all night," said
Rosie, "so I have laid out a night-dress and dressing-gown for each of
you. Get into them, and you will look nice and pretty enough for an
interview with your future husbands."

They thanked her, and, examining the garments which she took from a
wardrobe in Eva's room, pronounced them really pretty enough to wear to
the breakfast table.

They made haste with their toilets, and in a few minutes each was
standing before a mirror, eating an apple and brushing out her hair.
Then Rosie left them with a promise to be back again before very long
to learn of their success. She artfully left ajar both doors leading
into the hall. They opened noiselessly, and presently each had admitted
a young man, who, wearing slippers, moved with noiseless tread, and as
the girls looked over their left shoulders Eva caught sight of Harold
standing a few feet in her rear, gazing steadily at her, a kindly smile
upon his features; while at the same moment Lucilla perceived Herbert
at a similar distance from her, gazing intently and admiringly upon her.

"Oh, Uncle Herbert," she laughed, "this cannot be a true sign, for I
know well enough that neither of us has any loverlike feeling toward
the other."

Almost before she finished her sentence he had vanished, and she heard
Evelyn saying in mirthful tones, "Ah, Uncle Harold, this is the no luck
at all--prophesied by that yellow ear of corn; for, as you know, I am
already pledged to another."

At that Harold sighed deeply and withdrew.

But scarcely had he and his brother disappeared when Max silently took
his place, Chester at the same time coming up behind Lucilla so that
she saw him in the mirror, to which she had again turned, brush in hand.

"Oh, is it you, Chester? You are the right man in the right place," she
laughed.

"I hope so, darling," he returned. "What lovely hair!" passing his hand
caressingly over it; "so long and thick too. I never before saw it to
such advantage."

Max was standing silently behind Evelyn, and just at that moment she
caught sight of him in the glass. She turned quickly, and he caught her
in his arms, giving her a rapturous kiss.

"Don't be disappointed that I am your future mate," he said.

"Certainly not, since you were already my own free choice," she
returned, looking up into his face with one of her sweetest smiles.
Just then Lucilla's voice was heard coming from the next room, "Is
that you, Max?" and in a moment the four were together, gayly laughing
and chatting, both young men insisting that that style of wearing
the hair--streaming over the shoulders--was extremely becoming. Then
Rosie and her Will joined them for a moment, after which they all bade
good-night, and the girls were left alone to seek repose.




CHAPTER VI.


The young people had a merry time over their breakfast the next
morning, rehearsing all they had gone through in their celebration of
Hallowe'en, each one seeming to have enjoyed his or her part in it.
They lingered over the meal, but soon after leaving the table scattered
to their homes, excepting Eva, who returned to Woodburn with Max and
Lucilla.

On arriving there Lucilla hastened to the library, where she found her
father examining some business letters.

"Good-morning, papa!" she said. "Here is your amanuensis, and haven't
you something for her to do?"

"Yes," he replied, looking up at her with a smile, as she stood close
at his side, "and the first thing is to give her father a kiss; that
is, if she will not find it a disagreeable task."

"Anything else than that, father dear," she returned, bending down to
give and receive a caress. "And won't you let me help, as usual, with
your correspondence?"

"I shall be very glad to do so," he returned, rising to take the cover
from her typewriter, and put the paper in place. Then she seated
herself and he began dictating. When they had finished, "Did you miss
me last night and this morning, father?" she asked.

"I did indeed," he said; "but that is something I will have to get used
to, when Chester takes you from me."

He ended with a sigh.

"Oh, papa, don't sigh so over it!" she exclaimed. "You know it isn't as
if I had to go away to a distance from you. I shall be close at hand,
and you can call me to your side whenever you will."

"Which will be pretty often, I think," he said, with a smile, drawing
her closer to him, and caressing her hair and cheek with his hand. "Had
you a pleasant time last evening? And did you go to bed in season, as
your father would have seen that you did had you been at home?"

"No, I did not get to bed early, papa," she replied. "I thought you
would excuse me for staying up, for once, to try my fortune. For you
see, we all wanted to know who were to be our future life partners,
Rosie telling us that there was 'many a slip 'twixt the cup and the
lip,' so that our engagements didn't make us safe."

She concluded with a light laugh and look that seemed to say she felt
no fear that he would be seriously displeased with her.

"You stayed up to try your fortune, did you?" he returned, with a look
of amusement. "Why, my child, I thought you considered it already made."

"So I do, papa, and last night's experience only confirmed my belief."

Then she went on to tell him the whole story, he seeming to enjoy the
tale as she told it.

"You are not vexed with me, papa, for staying up so late, just for
once?" she asked, when her tale was told.

"No," he replied, "though I should be far from willing to have you make
a practice of it.

    "'Early to bed and early to rise,
    Makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise,'

the old saying is, and I want you to be all three."

"As you are, father; and I am the first, at all events," she returned,
with a happy little laugh. "You have never had to pay a big doctor's
bill for me."

"No; but to escape that is the least of my reasons for wanting to keep
you healthy."

Just then Max came in with Eva, bringing a book on architecture.

"Here are some plans for houses, father," he said, laying the book open
before the captain. "Please look at this, and tell me what you think of
it, as in some respects it is what would suit us. You too, Lu. Eva and
I like the most of it very much."

The captain and Lucilla examined it with interest, and were as well
pleased as were Max and Evelyn. It was a matter in which they and
Chester also were deeply interested, and they were taking time and
trouble to make sure of having their future home all that could be
desired. It was not to be built in haste. They had agreed to take
plenty of time and thought in regard to all the interior arrangements,
making everything as convenient as possible, as well as to the
exterior, which they were resolved should be such as to cause the
building to be recognized as an ornament to its neighborhood.

Chester was the one most anxious to get the house built and to secure
his bride; the other three seemed well content to defer their marriage
until the captain should give full and hearty consent.

The exact spot on which the building should stand had been selected,
and the plans for it almost matured, when there came an order for Max
to join a naval vessel about to sail for a distant foreign port.

There was a tender and sorrowful leave-taking, and Max was absent from
the home circle for many months.

For a time those left behind seemed to have lost much of their interest
in the building of the new home. Then came the fall rains, after that
the winter storms, and it was decided that the actual work should not
be begun until spring. Then Grace had a serious illness, which kept
her in bed for several weeks, and she had hardly recovered when the
little ones at Fairview were taken down with measles. They all passed
through that trouble safely, but the weather had now grown warm enough
to make a more northern climate desirable, and they--the whole Fairview
family, accompanied by their grandma and the Raymonds--went aboard
the captain's yacht and sailed up the coast and the Hudson River to
Evelyn's pretty home, Crag Cottage.

That became their headquarters for the summer, though occasional
short trips were taken to one or another of the points of interest
in New York and the adjoining States. They all enjoyed themselves,
though Chester and Max were missed--especially by Lucilla and Evelyn.
Chester, however, joined the party late in the season, and was with
them on the journey home.

Soon after their return, work was begun upon the proposed site of the
new double dwelling, the cellars were dug, and the foundation was laid.
But the work proceeded slowly. Max was not likely to be at home again
soon, and it was well to take time to have everything done in the best
possible manner.

Evelyn and Lucilla had fully decided upon a double wedding, which of
course could not take place until Max obtained a furlough, and came
home for a visit of some weeks or months. Chester felt the delay hard
upon him, but had to content himself with being allowed to spend all
his spare time with his betrothed.

Fall and winter passed quietly. There were the usual holiday
festivities and exchange of gifts, then quiet home duties and pleasures
filled up the days, and the weeks glided swiftly by.

One morning in February the captain, looking over his daily paper,
uttered an exclamation of mingled regret and indignation.

"What is it, my dear?" asked Violet. "Something that troubles you, I
perceive."

"Yes," he replied; "here is a piece of very bad news. The _Maine_, one
of our favorite battleships, lying at anchor in Havana harbor, has
been suddenly destroyed by a terrible explosion--wrecked and sent to
the bottom with 266 American seamen; only the captain and a few of his
officers who were on shore escaping the awful fate of the others."

"Oh, that is dreadful, dreadful!" cried Violet. "But how did it happen?
What was the cause?"

"That has yet to be discovered, my dear," replied Captain Raymond;
"but I have little doubt that it was the work of some enemy among the
Spaniards. They have been angry at the presence of the vessel in their
harbor--their newspapers calling it a taunt and a banter, for they know
our people sympathize with the Cubans. Somebody has done this evil
deed; it remains to be discovered who it was."

"This is Sigsbee's despatch to the government," he added, and read
aloud:

 "_Maine_ blown up in Havana Harbor at nine-forty to-night. Many
 wounded and doubtless more killed or drowned. Wounded and others on
 board Spanish man-of-war and Ward Line steamers. Send light-house
 tenders from Key West for crew and the few pieces of equipment above
 water. None has clothing other than that upon him. Public opinion
 should be suspended until further report. All officers believed to
 be saved. Jenkins and Merritt not yet accounted for. Many Spanish
 officers, including representatives of General Blanco, now with me to
 express sympathy."

  "SIGSBEE."

It was directly after breakfast and the family were all present.
Lucilla and Grace seemed much excited, and little Ned asked anxiously
if "Brother Max" was on that ship.

"No, my son," replied his father; "I am very glad to know certainly
that he was not. Have you forgotten that he is with Commodore Dewey on
the coast of China?"

"Oh, yes, papa! I forgot where Havana was. I remember now that it is
not in China, but in Cuba."

"Oh, that is a dreadful piece of news, papa!" said Lucilla, in
tones of excitement. "Won't it be likely to bring on a war with
Spain--especially as we have been feeling so sorry for the poor Cubans
whom she has been abusing so terribly?"

"I am really afraid it can hardly fail to cause war," replied the
captain. "But that will depend very much upon the result of the
investigation which will no doubt be made by our government."

"Oh, I hope we won't have war!" cried Grace, shuddering at the thought.

"War is a very dreadful thing," sighed her father, "but sometimes
the right thing on one side--that of those who undertake it for the
downtrodden and oppressed."

"But we are not such folks, are we, papa?" asked Ned.

"No, son; but the poor Cubans are, and the question is whether we
should not undertake to win their freedom for them."

"By fighting the Spaniards who abuse them so, papa?" asked little
Elsie.

"Yes."

"What have they been doing to them, papa?" asked Ned.

"Oppressing, robbing, murdering them, burning down their houses,
forcing them into the cities and towns and leaving them to starve to
death there."

"Why, papa, how dreadful! I should think our folks ought to go and
fight for them. I wish I was big enough to help."

"My dear little son, I am glad you are not," said his mother, drawing
him to her side and giving him a fond caress.

"Why, mamma?"

"Because you might be badly hurt or even killed, and that would break
your mother's heart."

"Then, mamma, I'm glad I don't have to go, for I wouldn't like to hurt
you so," said the little fellow, stroking and patting his mother's
cheek, and gazing fondly into her eyes.

"Oh, I hope it won't come to war for us!" exclaimed Grace; "though I
should like to have the poor Cubans helped. Just think how dreadful,
if Max should be engaged in a naval battle."

"Well, my child, we won't borrow trouble about that," said her father
soothingly.

"And I hope there is not much danger, as he is away off in the China
seas," said Lucilla, trying to cheer Grace, though she herself had
little idea that he would escape taking part if there should be war.

"In case of war, that will hardly excuse him from doing his duty," said
their father; "nor would our dear brave boy wish to be excused. But we
will all pray that he may be spared injury, if such be the Lord's will."

"Indeed we will, in that case, pour out constant petitions for him--the
dear fellow!" said Violet, with emotion. "But, Levis, do you think this
will bring on war?"

"It looks very likely to me," replied her husband, sadness perceptible
in both his countenance and tones. "And, really, I think it is our duty
to interfere for those poor, savagely treated Cubans. I think it is
high time that this powerful people undertook their cause."

"And I suppose the Spaniards are already angry with the Americans for
sympathizing with those poor, oppressed Cubans," said Lucilla.

"Yes," said her father, "and this awful deed--the blowing up of
our grand battleship with its hundreds of sailors--is doubtless an
expression of their ill-will."

And that was not the thought of Captain Raymond alone, but of many
others as well. The wrongs and sufferings of the Cubans had so touched
the hearts of thousands of the Americans that they felt strongly
impelled to make some effort to help them to win their freedom; and
now this wanton destruction of one of our favorite battleships--and,
what was far worse, the lives of nearly three hundred innocent
men--so increased their anger and distrust that it could scarcely be
restrained. Through all the land of the Americans there was a strong
feeling of indignation over the treachery and cruelty of the blow
that had destroyed that gallant ship and sacrificed so many innocent
lives; but the people were sternly quiet while the Court of Inquiry
was making its investigations. They were ready to punish the doers of
that dastardly deed, but not without proof of their guilt. For forty
days they and their Congress silently awaited the report of the board
of naval officers engaged in examining into the evidences of the cause
of the destruction of the _Maine_. Their verdict came at length, but
in rather vague form--that, according to the evidence obtainable,
the vessel had been destroyed by an explosion against her side from
without. So much was clearly proven, but they did not say by whom the
evil deed was done. More than a week before that report came in, both
Congress and the people had been greatly moved by the speech of Senator
Proctor, describing what he had witnessed in Cuba, the scenes of
starvation and horror; men, women, and children robbed of their homes,
their cattle--all their earthly possessions--driven into the towns and
left to starve to death in the streets.

The senator's speech made a great impression, and there were others
on the same subject and in a like strain, delivered by members of the
commission sent to Cuba by the New York _Journal_.

Some days later--on the 28th--came the report of the Court of Inquiry
into the _Maine_ catastrophe, and put an end to the patience of
Congress, which had long been ready to undertake the cause of the
oppressed and suffering Cubans.

It was not until noon of the 11th of April that the President's message
reached Congress. In that he turned over to it the whole policy of the
government toward Spain. Congress did not make a formal declaration of
war with Spain until the 25th of April, but actual hostilities began on
the 19th. Indeed, four days before the declaration of war the United
States navy began the blockade of Cuba, and captured a vessel on the
high seas.




CHAPTER VII.


Max Raymond, buried in thought, was pacing the deck of the _Olympia_.

"Hello, Raymond, have you heard the news?" asked a fellow officer,
hurrying toward him in evident excitement.

"No; what is it? News from home?" asked Max, pausing in his walk with a
look of eager interest.

"Just that. The commodore has had a warning to leave Hong-Kong. War
has been declared by our government, and Great Britain has issued
a proclamation of neutrality. The official warning comes from the
authorities here."

"Ah!" exclaimed Max, "I knew--we all knew--that it would come soon. It
is well the commodore has had all our vessels put in war paint, and
every preparation made for departure upon short notice."

"Yes; Commodore Dewey is a wise man and officer. I'm glad he's at
the head of affairs in this fleet. It looks as if we would have some
fighting soon, Raymond."

"Yes, Dale, and it behooves us to be prepared for wounds or death. We
are about to fight in a good cause, I think--for the freedom of the
poor, oppressed, downtrodden Cubans. But where are we to go now, do you
know?"

"Only that it must be out of this harbor quite promptly. It can hardly
be to travel the seven thousand miles back to San Francisco."

They were not kept long in suspense. Presently, anchors were taken up,
and with bands playing and flags flying the fleet of vessels steamed
out of the harbor, while the British residents of the city crowded the
quay and shipping, cheering and saluting the Americans as the warships
passed. That first voyage of the squadron was but a short one, a few
miles up the coast to Mirs Bay, a Chinese harbor, where they anchored
and awaited orders from home, the _McCulloch_ having been left behind
to bring them when they should arrive. The next day she came, bringing
this message, dated Washington, April 24:

 "DEWEY, Asiatic Squadron: War has commenced between the United States
 and Spain. Proceed at once to Philippine Islands. Commence operations
 at once, particularly against the Spanish fleet. You must capture the
 vessels or destroy. Use utmost endeavors."

  "LONG."

This message was what Commodore Dewey had been waiting for since his
arrival at Hong-Kong in January. He had formed his plans, and was
ready to carry them out without delay. His captains were called to a
short conference, and about midnight the fleet sailed on its errand
of battle. They turned south toward the Philippine Islands, 620 miles
away. The nearest United States port was San Francisco, 7000 miles
distant. No neutral power would permit him to take more than enough
of coal to carry his vessels home by the most direct route, so that
there was but one course open to Dewey and his fleet--the capturing of
a Spanish harbor somewhere in Asiatic waters, which he could make a
naval base. One of Dewey's ships--the _Petrel_--was slow, and as the
fleet of vessels must keep together, that delayed them. It was three
days before they reached the line of coast of the Island of Luzon. It
was reported that the enemy might be found in Subig Bay, so that was
carefully reconnoitred, but the Spanish were not there; the fishermen
about the harbor said they had seen no Spanish fleet, and though every
nook and corner of the bay was examined, not so much as a gunboat could
be found. So the American fleet passed on to Manila, 30 miles away.

It seemed evident that the Spaniards had chosen that station because
there they would have the aid of shore batteries. It is said that
their ships were comparatively antiquated, but not so much so as to
make their defeat at all certain. Their guns were as good as those of
the American ships, and they had more of them: to Dewey's six fighting
ships Admiral Montojo had ten, and two torpedo boats besides. The
Spaniards had no vessel to rank with the _Olympia_, but the numbers of
their vessels, it might have been expected, would probably, in skilled
hands, have more than made up for that. The Americans had the advantage
in batteries, but not overwhelmingly. The _McCulloch_ did not go into
action at all, and the Spanish torpedo boats were sunk before their
guns would bear. The Americans were greatly superior in everything that
goes to win victory; but that they did not know until the fight had
been going on for some time; and as Commodore Dewey led his fleet along
the coast of Luzon, toward the harbor where he knew the enemy lay in
wait for them, he had nothing less than a desperate battle to expect.
The Americans were brave; we know of no cowardice among them, but to
the thoughtful ones--Max Raymond among them--it was a solemn reflection
that they might be nearing mutilation and sudden, painful death. The
Spanish ships were anchored in a harbor protected by shore batteries.
To reach them the Americans must pass down a channel sixteen miles
long, guarded on each side by powerful forts armed with modern guns;
and it was to be expected that it held many mines prepared to blow up
our vessels.

Knowing all these things, Commodore Dewey, his officers, and his men
must have been expecting a hard fight, with no certainty of winning
the victory. There was probably but little sleep on board the vessel
that night. About ten o'clock Saturday night the men were sent to their
stations for battle.

Max had spent some leisure time in writing to the dear ones in his
home, and the still dearer one pledged to become his wife, telling
just where he was and the prospect immediately before him, expressing
his hope that all would go well with the Americans--now championing
the cause of the poor, oppressed Cubans and of these downtrodden
Filipinos--and that he would be able to write further after the
conflict ended, should he pass safely through it; but if he should be
killed or seriously wounded, doubtless the news would reach them in due
season, and they must think of him as having fallen in a good cause,
hoping to meet them all in a better land.

A little before that, the commodore was walking back and forth on the
starboard side of the upper deck, when he noticed an old sailor who
seemed to be trying to find something to do on the port side. He was
a man who had been forty years in the service of the navy and army of
the United States, and was a privileged character on the _Olympia_. He
seemed to be keeping a careful lookout on the commodore, who noticed it
and perceived that he had something on his mind.

"Well, Purdy, what is it?" he asked.

Purdy straightened up and saluted. "I hope, sir," he said, "ye don't
intend to fight on the 3d of May."

"And why not?" asked the commodore.

"Well, ye see, sir," Purdy replied, in the most serious manner, "the
last time I fought on the 3d of May I got licked--at the battle of
Chancellorsville, under Fighting Joe Hooker."

"All right, Purdy, we won't fight on the 3d of May this time," said the
commodore; "but when we do fight, Purdy, you'll have a different kind
of a May anniversary to think about. Remember that, Purdy."

"Ay, ay, sir," replied Purdy, saluting, then hurrying away to rejoin
his blue jacket comrades, whom he told, "We'll lick those Spaniards if
they was ten times as many as they are."

The moon was in its first quarter, and though often veiled by clouds
its light might enable the Spaniards on the fortified points here and
there to perceive the stealthy approach of their foe. Max, on the watch
with others, overheard the commodore say, as they neared the opening
between Mariveles and the Island of Corregidor, "We ought to hear from
this battery about now."

But its guns were silent. They went on two miles further without
perceiving any evidence that the Spaniards were awake and aware of
their approach.

"They seem far from alert and watchful," Max presently remarked. But at
that moment a bright light was thrown on the Point, an answering one
was seen on the island, as if they were signalling each other, then a
rocket soared up from the centre of Corregidor, and the commodore said,
"It has taken them a long time to wake up, but probably they will make
it all the hotter for us when they begin."

Day had not yet dawned when they reached the mouth of Manila Bay.
They did not stop to reconnoitre, but pressed on at once, running the
gantlet of batteries and concealed mines without waiting for daylight
to make it easier.

They waited a little for the setting of the moon, then went on in
single file, the _Olympia_ leading and the _McCulloch_ bringing up the
rear, and with no lights except one lantern at the stern of each ship
for the next to steer by.

A great light marked the entrance to the harbor, gleaming in the
darkness as though to welcome the gray ships stealing so quietly in,
as if to come suddenly and unexpectedly upon their prey. The forts
were as silent as though all their defenders were asleep or dead. That
was a wonder to the Americans, for the rush of their vessels through
the water seemed to make a sound that might be heard by the enemy,
and every moment they expected it to attract their attention; and so
anxious were they to pass unnoticed, that they spoke to each other in
whispers, and moved about with muffled tread. They were in momentary
expectation of a cannon shot or the explosion of a mine that might
rend the plates of some one of their ships; but nothing of either kind
occurred, until the last ship in the procession--the _McCulloch_--gave
the first alarm. Coal was flung on her furnace, and a red flame flared
up, lighting up the waters and the rigging of the ship itself and of
those ahead. All the men on the fleet turned expectantly toward the
batteries on the land, thinking that shots would certainly come now.
But all was silence there. Again and again the unlucky beacon flared,
and after the third time it was noticed by the flash of a gun on a rock
called El Fraile. But the aim was not good, and the shot did not strike
any of our vessels. The _Concord_ fired in return, and cannon roared
from the _Boston_, the _McCulloch_, and again from the _Concord_, but
the _Olympia_ and other big ships passed on in silent dignity.

The commodore was standing on the bridge of the _Olympia_, piloting his
fleet, and the shot from El Fraile had given him a clear idea of how
the shore lay. And now, having passed that battery, all the defences
of the harbor's mouth were left behind, and excepting mines that might
lie concealed under the water there was no further danger to meet until
they should reach the city with its forts at Cavite.

As the ship steamed on up the bay, Max and Dale standing together on
deck fell into conversation.

"What ails these Spaniards?" queried Dale. "I, for one, expected
nothing less than a severe fight at the very mouth of this bay, but
they have let us come in and on up toward their city almost unnoticed.
The strait where we came in is only about five miles wide, and broken
by three islands, all fortified, and armed with Krupp guns. And on the
mainland there are two forts--one on each side--which, as I have been
told, are armed with steel rifled cannon."

"Yes," said Max, "and we passed them all within easy range, and
received only ineffective fire from one battery. But this is only the
beginning; at any minute we may come in contact with a mine in the
channel which will explode, or an electric mine may be discharged in a
way to work us serious mischief."

"True enough," said Dale; "and it behooves us to be ready for the
worst. There will probably be men killed and wounded on both sides."

"Yes," sighed Max; "war is an awful thing; but in this instance right
is on our side, because we have undertaken the cause of the oppressed.
And," he added with an effort, "if we have made our peace with God--are
believing in the Lord Jesus Christ and trusting in his perfect
righteousness--death will be no calamity to us; and if we are wounded,
no matter how painfully, he will give us strength to bear it."

"I do not doubt it," said Dale; "nor that you are in that state of
preparation, Raymond. I hope I am also; and that being the case, we
surely can go bravely on to meet whatever awaits us."

"I hope so," said Max, "and believing, as I do, that we are in the
right, I have a strong hope that God will give us the victory."

"Ah, see!" cried a voice near them, "yonder are the Spanish ships,
lying at anchor under the batteries at Cavite."

"Yes," said another, "and there is the old town of Manila, with its low
clustering roofs and towering cathedral."

Men crowded to the best points from which to obtain a good view, and
stood in silence gazing upon it. Max had a glass, and looking through
it could see the roofs and quays of the city crowded with spectators.
Evidently the engagement with the battery at El Fraile had been heard
and had alarmed the city.

Dewey had planned for a prompt fight, but did not intend to have his
men go into it hungry; and now some of his sailors were passing up and
down distributing cups of hot coffee and biscuits.

That duly attended to, signals fluttered from the gaff, black balls
were run up to every peak on all the vessels, and, breaking out,
displayed the great battle flags. At that, some nine-inch guns on Fort
Lunette were fired--without doing any damage--and the American vessels
suddenly moved on to closer quarters.

"Hold your fire!" was the order from the flagship, and two shots from
the _Concord_ was the only answer given to the forts. Onward the fleet
sped toward that of the Spaniards, which was silent also. Suddenly
there was a muffled roar, and a great volume of mud and water was
thrown into the air right before the flagship, showing that the dreaded
mines were near. In an instant there was another explosion, but neither
did any harm; and they were all our men saw of the Spanish explosives
of that sort.

Now the fleet was nearing the enemy. On the _Olympia's_ bridge stood
Commodore Dewey, with Captain Gridley and Flag-captain Lamberton at his
side. The Spanish ships now joined the forts in pouring their fire on
the advancing foe, but still there was no response. Presently the sun
rose red and glaring with midsummer heat, and at that the commodore,
turning to the officer at his side, said quietly, "You may fire now,
Gridley, when ready."

Gridley was ready, and the next instant an eight-inch shell was on its
way toward the enemy, who was only about 4500 yards distant. Presently
a signal from the flagship gave the same permission to the other
vessels, and the whole fleet was engaged.

Shortly before that, Dewey had assembled the men of the _Olympia_ and
given them this final direction for their conduct during the fight:
"Keep perfectly cool, and pay attention to nothing but orders." Such
was the watchword through his whole fleet that morning, and the result
was a deliberate and deadly fire. The ships steamed along in regular
order--the _Olympia_, the _Baltimore_, the _Raleigh_, _Petrel_,
_Concord_, and _Boston_--parallel to the Spanish ships, working every
gun that could be brought to bear, and receiving the fire of ships and
forts in return. The fire of the Spanish guns was a succession of
brilliant misses--shots that came very near hitting, but did not quite
do so. It was, as Dewey put it in his report, "vigorous, but generally
ineffective."

But the aim was not always bad. One shell struck the gratings of the
bridge of the _Olympia_; one narrowly missed the commodore himself, and
so hot did the fire become that he bade Captain Gridley go into the
conning tower lest both of them might be killed or disabled at once.
On the _Boston_ a six-inch gun was disabled, and a box of ammunition
exploded. Also a shell burst in a stateroom, and set it on fire. Our
six vessels steamed along down past the Spanish line, the port side of
every ship a mass of flame and smoke, then circling around in a grand
sweep--that made the Spaniards think for a moment they were pulling out
of action--the column returned again on its course, and the men of the
starboard batteries had a chance to try their skill while their fellows
rested. They had made this circuit but three times when three of the
Spanish ships were on fire. Looking through glasses the shots could be
seen striking the Spanish hulls, which were thinly plated.

Admiral Montojo, stung into fury by his losses, slipped the cables
of his flagship, just as the Americans were beginning their third
round, and under full steam darted out as if intending to attack the
_Olympia_. But as his vessel--the _Reina Christina_--swung away from
her fellows the fire of the whole American fleet was concentrated upon
her. The storm of shot and shell came pouring down upon her, pierced
her hull like paper, swept her decks and spread death and destruction
on every side. Her engines were pierced, her bridge shot away. She
could hardly be controlled by her helm, and as she turned her stern to
the American fire an eight-inch gun on the _Olympia_ sent a projectile
that struck her there, tore its way forward, exploding ammunition,
shattering guns, killing men, piercing partitions, tearing up decks,
and finally exploding in her after-boiler.

Agonized screams of wounded men were heard rising above the thunder
of the battle, and the _Reina Christina_ staggered back with flames
leaping from her hatches.

While this was going on the two Spanish torpedo boats slipped out and
ran for the American fleet. One hastened toward the supply ships, but
was caught by the _Petrel_, driven ashore, and fired upon until she
blew up. The other, running for the _Olympia_, was struck by a shell,
broke in two, and sank out of sight.

Five times the circuit was made by the American ships; then a signal
fluttered from the yard of the _Olympia_, and the fleet turned away to
the other side of the harbor, where the _McCulloch_ and the colliers
had been lying.

At that the Spaniards, supposing the Americans were retreating, raised
a resounding cheer. The men on the American ships were not so well
pleased. They were asking what this move was for, and when told that it
was in order to give them their breakfast, there was much grumbling.

"Breakfast!" exclaimed one of the gunners, "who wants any breakfast?
Why can't we finish off the Dons, now we've got them going?"

But breakfast was not what the delay was for. A misunderstood signal
had made the commodore fear that the supply of ammunition for the
five-inch guns on board of some of the vessels was running low, and
he wished to replenish their stock. It was found, however, not to be
necessary. But officers and sailors had their breakfast and a three
hours' rest, during which guns and machinery that had been used in
that morning's fight were examined and a supply of fresh ammunition
was prepared. Then the signals for a renewal of the battle were given,
and the ships again bore down upon the enemy, revolving as before in a
great circle of smoke and fire, but at closer range than at first.

The Spaniards seemed desperate, fired wildly, and in a half-hearted
way. The _Reina Christina_ was blown up by the shells of the
_Baltimore_; quickly after the _Don Juan de Austria_ was destroyed by
the _Raleigh_, and so on till all of the ten Spanish ships had been
destroyed or had surrendered.

Admiral Montojo had transferred his flag to the _Isla de Cuba_, and
fought till her guns were silenced and she was in flames; then leaving
her to her fate, he escaped to the city. It is said that a great crowd
of people had come out from that city that morning to see "the pigs of
Yankees" annihilated.

The last ship left fighting was the _Don Antonio de Ulloa_, and at
length she sank, with her flag still nailed to her mast. One of
the American shots entered the magazine at Cavite, and that ended
the resistance of the shore batteries. Then from the _Olympia_ was
flung out the signal, "The enemy has surrendered," the hot, weary,
smoke-begrimed men swarmed cheering out of turrets and up from the
bowels of the ships, and the flagship's band broke out with the "Star
Spangled Banner," for the victory of Manila was won, the first victory
of the war with Spain for the help of the sorely oppressed Cubans.




CHAPTER VIII.


Max had done bravely and well, and no one rejoiced more keenly in the
victory than he, though his heart bled for the wounded and slain. He
as well as others listened eagerly for the accounts of the captains of
the other vessels of the fleet as they came on board to report to the
commodore.

"How many killed?" was demanded of each one, as he stepped on the deck,
and great was the surprise and satisfaction on learning that none had
been killed.

"Only eight wounded, none seriously," was the reply of Captain Dyer
of the _Baltimore_. "But six shells struck us, and two burst inboard
without hurting any one."

"Not a dashed one," was the next captain's answer. "None killed and
none wounded," said the third, "but I don't yet know how it happened.
I suppose you fellows were all cut up."

"My ship wasn't hit at all," was the next report.

It was known that the _Boston_ had been on fire, therefore it was
expected that her captain would have to report a serious list of
casualties, and when he announced that no one had been killed or
wounded on his vessel the news spread quickly through the flagship,
and the men cheered vociferously. The _Baltimore_ had been struck by a
sixty-pound projectile, fired from a land battery. It struck the ship
about two feet above the upper deck, between two guns which were being
served; pierced two plates of steel each one-quarter of an inch thick;
then ploughed through the wooden deck, striking and breaking a heavy
beam, by which it was turned upward; then it passed through a steel
hatch-combing; disabled a six-inch gun; hurtled around the semicircular
shield which surrounded the gun, missing the men at it; reversed its
course and travelled back to a point almost opposite that at which it
had entered the ship, and thus passed out. It had passed between men
crowded at their quarters and had touched none, but it exploded some
loose ammunition, by which eight were wounded.

Max listened to the accounts of the almost bloodless victory with
a heart swelling with gratitude to God, and full of hope for the
success of America's effort to free the victims of Spanish cruelty and
oppression. What glad tidings his next letter would carry to the dear
ones at home. They would rejoice over the victory, and his safety too,
though that might be again imperilled at any time.

This naval battle had been fought on Sunday. On Monday morning Captain
Lamberton went on shore to receive the formal surrender of the fort at
Cavite. They had hauled down their flag the day before, but now tried
to prove that they had never done so. Perceiving that, the captain drew
out his watch. Before leaving his ship he had directed that unless he
returned in an hour those works should be bombarded. Forty-five minutes
of that hour were now gone, and he said to the Spaniards: "Unless you
surrender unconditionally so soon that I can get back to my ship in
fifteen minutes, the _Petrel_ will open fire on your works."

That had the desired effect; they surrendered at once, and priests and
nuns came humbly to beg him to restrain his men from murdering all
the wounded in the hospitals. They had been told that that was the
invariable practice of the barbarous "Yanquis."

The next day the _Raleigh_ and _Baltimore_ went down to the mouth of
the bay and, after a brief attack, captured the forts on Corregidor
and Sangley Point. The guns in these works were destroyed by wrapping
them with gun cotton and exploding it with electricity. The officer in
command at Corregidor went aboard the _Raleigh_ to surrender himself,
and while there seemed greatly alarmed to find the ship drifting in
the main channel, or Boca Grand, and demanded that he be at once put
ashore. Asked the reason of his alarm and haste to get away, he said
the channel was full of contact mines, and though the Americans might
be satisfied to brave death by them he was not, and it was not fair
to expose a prisoner to almost certain destruction. And that was the
channel through which the American fleet had entered the harbor.

Four days after his victory Dewey, having all the harbor defences at
his command, sent off the _McCulloch_ to Hong-Kong with his first
despatches to Washington. So a week had passed after the rumors from
Madrid before the American people received definite information
in regard to Dewey's successes in the Philippines. These are the
despatches:

 MANILA, May 1.--Squadron arrived at Manila at daybreak this morning.
 Immediately engaged the enemy and destroyed following Spanish
 vessels: _Reina Cristina_, _Castilla_, _Don Antonio de Ulloa_, _Isla
 de Luzon_, _Isla de Cuba_, _General Lezo_, _Marques del Duoro_,
 _El Correo_, _Velasco_, _Isla de Mindanao_, a transport, and water
 battery at Cavite. The squadron is uninjured, and only a few men are
 slightly wounded. Only means of telegraphing is to American consul at
 Hong-Kong. I shall communicate with him.

  DEWEY.


 MANILA, May 4.--I have taken possession of the naval station at
 Cavite, Philippine Islands, and destroyed the fortifications. Have
 destroyed fortifications at bay entrance, Corregidor Island,
 parolling the garrison. I control the bay completely, and can take the
 city at any time. The squadron is in excellent health and spirits. The
 Spanish loss not fully known, but is very heavy. One hundred and fifty
 killed, including captain, on _Reina Cristina_ alone. I am assisting
 in protecting Spanish sick and wounded. Two hundred and fifty sick and
 wounded in hospital within our lines. Much excitement in Manila. Will
 protect foreign residents.

  DEWEY.

A message of congratulation from the President and people of the United
States was the immediate response to Dewey's despatches, and with
it the information that the President had appointed the victorious
commander a rear-admiral. Doubtless a rumor concerning the nature of
that despatch quickly reached all the vessels of the fleet, for the
next morning watchful eyes on many of them turned to the flagship to
see what flag would be run up to the mainmast, and when they saw that
it was a blue flag as of yore, but had two stars instead of one, the
guns of the squadron roared out a salute to the new admiral. No one
there was more rejoiced than Max, who both respected and loved his
gallant commander; and no one in America felt happier over the good
news in Dewey's despatches than those to whom Max was so dear. It was
a blessed relief to their anxiety to learn that no one in the squadron
had been killed, and none more than slightly wounded.




CHAPTER IX.


The news of the destruction of the _Maine_ was quite as exciting to
our friends at Ion as to those of Woodburn. All saw that war between
the United States and Spain could not be long delayed, and when it was
declared, both Harold and Herbert Travilla volunteered their services
as physicians and surgeons to the troops to be sent to Cuba or Puerto
Rico. Their mother gave consent, though her heart bled at thought of
the toils and dangers they would be called upon to endure, but she
felt that they were right in their desire to help the poor Cubans to
such freedom as we enjoy. No one had felt a deeper sympathy for the
despoiled and starving reconcentradoes than she. Her sons were not
going as soldiers, to be sure, but as greatly needed help to those who
were to do the fighting.

Captain Raymond was strongly inclined to offer his services to the
government, but was deterred by the earnest, tearful entreaties of his
wife and daughters. They urged him to refrain, for their sakes, as
there seemed to be no lack of men who could be better spared--at least
so it seemed to them.

"Oh, father," said Grace, "don't think of such a thing! There are
plenty of other men who are not so much loved and needed in their own
homes; so that the poor Cubans will be sure to get free without our
risking the loss of the dearest father that anybody ever had."

It was shortly after breakfast on a beautiful May morning, and the
whole family were together on the front veranda, the captain occupying
an easy chair, while looking over the morning paper. Grace had come
close to his side, and was standing there as she spoke.

"Is that your opinion of him?" he asked, smiling up into her eyes.

"Yes, sir; and always has been," she answered, accepting a silent
invitation to a seat upon his knee, and putting an arm around his
neck. "Oh, father, I don't know how I could live without you!" she
exclaimed, her eyes filling with tears at the very thought.

"Nor I," said Lucilla. "No greater calamity than the loss of our father
could possibly befall us. And there are plenty of other people to look
after the Cubans."

"So I think," said Violet. "If our country was in peril it would
be a different matter. And, my dear, as your eldest son is in the
fight--such a dear fellow as he is too!--I am sure that ought to be
considered your full share of giving and doing for the Cuban cause."

"I should think so indeed!" chimed in Lucilla and Grace in a breath.

"And, oh, I can't bear to think that my dear brother Max may get
wounded!" exclaimed Elsie; and Ned added, "And if he does, I'd just
like to shoot the fellow that shoots him."

"We must try not to feel revengeful, my little son," said his father.

"Well, papa, please promise not to offer to go into the fight," pleaded
Grace, and the others all added their earnest solicitations to hers,
till at length they won the desired pledge. They were too dear to the
captain's heart to be denied what they pleaded for so earnestly and
importunately.

Grace was feebler and oftener ailing that spring than she had been for
several years before, and Dr. Arthur Conly, or one or the other of his
partners,--Harold and Herbert Travilla,--was often there to give advice
and see that it was followed. It had been Harold oftener, of late, than
any one else, and he had grown very fond of the sweet girl who always
listened with such deference to his advice, and called him "uncle" in
her sweet voice. The thought of leaving her gave him a keener pang than
anything else, as he contemplated leaving his home for the labors and
dangers of the seat of war. He was glad indeed when he learned that the
captain would remain at home to take care of her and the rest of his
family.

Grace noticed with pleasure that as the time of his leaving drew near
his manner toward her grew more affectionate, till it seemed almost
as tender as that of her father, and she thought it very nice that
Uncle Harold should be so fond of her. She looked up to him as one who
was very wise and good, and wondered that he should care particularly
for her, as she was not really related to him at all. He was fond of
Lucilla also, but Grace seemed to him the lovelier of the two. He had
always been fond of her, but did not know until about to leave her for
that dangerous field of usefulness that his affection was of the sort
to make him long for her as the partner of his life. But so it was.
Yet could it be? Would the captain ever consent to such a mixture of
relationships? He feared not; and at all events it was quite certain
that he would not be allowed to try to win his coveted prize for years
to come--she being so young, and far from strong and well. Then as he
was about to risk his life on battlefields, it would be cruelty to her
to try to win her love before he went.

He resolved to go without revealing his secret to any one. But he had
never had an important secret from his mother; all his life he had
been used to talking freely with her, telling of his hopes, aims, and
wishes, his doubts and perplexities, and almost before he knew it he
had said enough of his feelings for Grace to show to that mother's
keen-sighted affection how the land lay.

"Grace is very lovely, and a dear child," she said low and gently;
"but, as you know, she is not well or strong. Also she is so young that
her father would not hear of her marrying for years to come."

"No, mother, nor would I advise it; unless," he added with a low,
embarrassed laugh, "to a physician who would take special care of her
health."

"You refer to one physician in particular, I perceive," returned his
mother, with a low, musical laugh, and laying her hand in his, for they
were sitting side by side on the veranda. "Well, my dear boy. I advise
you to wait till your return home before you say anything to either her
or her father. But have you thought what a mixture of relationships
such a marriage would make? Your brother-in-law would be also your
father-in-law, and Grace aunt to her half-brother and sister."

"Yes, mother, it would cause some awkward relationships; but as there
is no tie of blood between us, perhaps that need not matter. But I
shall say nothing till I come home, and not then without the captain's
permission."

"That is right. But do you think Grace suspects?"

"Hardly, mother; I am only her 'uncle,' you know," Harold answered,
with a laugh in which there was little or no mirth.

"Although I am certainly very fond of Grace," said his mother, "I
cannot help regretting that your affections have not gone out to some
one else rather than to her--because of her feeble health and the
connection through your sister and her father."

"Yes, they are objections," he returned, with a sigh; "but mother dear,
you will not consider them insuperable if I can persuade the captain
not to do so?"

"Oh, no! not if you win, or have won, her heart. I should not think of
raising the least objection, and surely the captain, who is a devoted
father, would not, should he see that her affections are engaged."

"That is my hope," said Harold; "and, as I have said, I do not intend
to offer myself without his knowledge and consent, though I had hard
work to refrain to-day when Grace and I were left alone together for
a few minutes, and she expressed, with tears in her sweet blue eyes,
such anxiety at the thought of my being in danger of wounds or death
in the coming struggle in Cuba. Mother dear, Herbert and I will not,
of course, be in as great danger as will the fighting men of our army
and navy, but there is a possibility that we may not return unharmed,
and in case I should not I would not have Grace know of my love and
intention to--ask her to become my wife."

"I think you are right, my son," his mother said, with emotion. "But,
ah, I hope and shall pray constantly that my dear boys may come back to
me unharmed."

"And it will be a great help and comfort to them to know that their
dear mother's prayers are following them," rejoined Harold, tenderly
pressing the hand she had laid in his.

The next moment Herbert joined them, and he too had a farewell talk
with his mother, for the brothers were to leave for Tampa the next
morning to join the troops about to sail for Cuba.




CHAPTER X.


By the last of May there were sixteen thousand men at Tampa under the
command of General Shafter, but it was not until the 14th of June
that they set sail for Cuba. On a clear, scorchingly hot morning,
June 22d, they landed at Daiquiri, twelve miles east of the entrance
to Santiago Bay. From all accounts things seem to have been wofully
mismanaged, so that our poor soldiers had no facilities for landing.
Those who loaded the ship, it would appear, must have been great
bunglers--either exceedingly ignorant in regard to such work or most
reprehensibly careless. In consequence, scarcely anything could be
found when wanted. Medical stores were scattered among twenty vessels;
so that when fever broke out in the trenches before Santiago it was
almost impossible to get the needed remedies; probably--though there
were never enough on the field--some medicines were left on the ships
and carried back to the United States. All this made the work of the
physicians doubly trying. Besides, they were too few in number, the
wounded many more than it had been expected they would be, and brought
in faster than they could be attended to; the surgeons worked all night
by the light of spluttering lamps, and there was not enough of even
surgical instruments. But the poor wounded men were wonderfully brave
and patient. Harold and Herbert Travilla felt that they had not engaged
in a cause which did not need them. After the fighting began their
labors were exhausting; all the more so because of the drain upon their
sympathies.

On the morning of July 2d our troops were found safely intrenched on
the ridge of the hill above Santiago. The day before had been one of
heavy losses to our army--many officers and men killed and wounded.
And now, just as light began to show in the east, the Spaniards opened
a heavy fire on our works. Our men made few replies, for ammunition
was getting scarce; and so anxious for it were the soldiers that
they hailed an ammunition train with great joy, though they were half
starved and knew that no provisions could come while the road was
crowded with such trains.

The war artist, Frederic Remington, tells of the delight with which the
poor hungry fellows hailed a pack-train loaded with ammunition, though
they knew that no food would be brought them that night. "The wounded
going to the rear cheered the ammunition, and when it was unpacked at
the front the soldiers seized it like gold. They lifted a box in the
air and dropped it on one corner, which smashed it open.

"'Now we can hold San Juan hill against them garlics; hey, son?' yelled
a happy cavalryman to a doughboy.

"'You bet! until we starve to death.'

"'Starve nothin'--we'll eat them gun-teams.'"

The soldiers refilled their cartridge belts, then crouched all day in
trenches, watching for an assault, and firing just often enough to
keep the enemy from advancing upon them. While doing so they could
hear the thunder of the navy's guns far away in the southwest, where
it was engaging a battery. At the same time, down in the harbor of
Santiago, Cervera was getting ready to make his rush out of the harbor
the next day.

The Spaniards made a dash at our men about half-past nine that night,
and drove them back for a few minutes from several points on their
line, but they soon returned and drove the Spaniards back with heavy
loss.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day, July 3d, was Sunday, and on the great ships of the
American squadron, floating heavily in a half-circle about the mouth
of Santiago harbor, the men were swarming on deck in fresh clean white
clothes, ready for muster. About nine o'clock the flagship _New York_
showed the signal: "Disregard flagship's movements," and steamed away
toward the east. Admiral Sampson had gone in it for a conference with
General Shafter, whose troops were then resting after their dreadful
fight on San Juan hill and El Caney.

Of our ships on watch outside of the harbor, the _Brooklyn_ was
to the southwest, the _Texas_ directly south, while the three big
battleships, _Indiana_, _Iowa_, and _Oregon_, made a curve inshore
east of the Morro. The little picket boat _Vixen_ was there also, and
the _Gloucester_ farthest east and nearest inshore. The _New York_,
now absent, was the one ship supposed to be able to compete with
the Spaniards in speed, and her departure left a broad gap in the
blockading line.

The lookouts on the fleet had reported fires burning on the hills all
the night before, and Commodore Schley, who was in command in Admiral
Sampson's absence, signalled to the _Texas_ the query: "What is your
theory about the burning of the block-houses on the hill last night?"

He sat on the deck waiting for an answer, and at the same time watching
a cloud of smoke rising from the interior of the harbor behind the
hills. It did not necessarily mean anything serious, for about that
time in the morning a tug was apt to make a visit to the Estrella
battery. Still, they watched it, and presently the quartermaster on the
forward bridge said quietly to the navigating officer, "That smoke's
moving, sir." That officer took a peep himself, and what he saw nearly
made him drop the glass. "Afterbridge there," he called loudly through
a megaphone; "tell the commodore the enemy is coming out."

His words were heard all over the ship, and commodore, officers,
sailors, powder-boys were all rushing for their station.

The cry rang out, "Clear ship for action," and gongs and bugles which
call to general quarters clanged and pealed on the quiet air. There
were echoes of the same sounds from the other ships, and the signals,
"The enemy is escaping," ran to the masthead of the _Brooklyn_, the
_Texas_, and the _Iowa_ at the same moment; for that suspicious smoke
had been watched from all the ships.

It seemed that all the vessels of the blockade had caught the alarm
at the same time, and the flagship's signal was quickly changed for
another--"Clear ship for action!"

But it was quite unnecessary. On every ship men were dropping off the
white clothes which they had donned for general muster, and hurrying
to their quarters without waiting for a command. Every wooden thing
was tumbled overboard, water-tight compartments were hastily shut,
hose was coupled up and strung along the decks ready to fight fire,
battle-hatches were lowered, and in less time than it takes to tell
of it all this was accomplished. Then at the sudden blast of a bugle
the five hundred and more men to a ship stood at their posts, each one
where he would be most needed in battle, and all perfectly silent.
Doubtless every eye was turned toward Estrella Point, where the Spanish
vessels, if indeed coming out, must first show themselves, and there
presently a huge black hull appeared. It came out far enough to show a
turret, and from that came a flash, and then the boom of a heavy shot,
instantly answered by a six-pounder from the _Iowa_. The battle had
begun, and "Fighting Bob" Evans had fired the first shot.

That ship just coming out was the _Maria Teresa_, and she was followed
by the _Vizcaya_, the _Cristobal Colon_, and the _Almirante Oquendo_.
All the American ships were standing in toward the harbor to meet
them, firing rapidly from every gun that could be brought to bear. It
was uncertain at first which way the Spaniards would turn when they
had passed the shoals that extend half a mile beyond the mouth of the
harbor. If they turned eastward they would have to run into the midst
of the most formidable ships of our squadron. If they went directly
west they might outrun the battleships and escape. The _Brooklyn_ was
the fastest ship on the blockade, and was also in the best position
to head off the Spaniards should they take that course. But it was
possible she might be lost, as she was no match for the number of the
enemy that would be in a position to engage her when she came up to
them. Commodore Schley says that the possibility of losing his ship
in that way entered very clearly into his calculations, but also that
in sinking the _Brooklyn_ the Spaniards would be delayed long enough
for the battleships to come up to them and that then there would be
no reason to fear their escape. The difficulty was that because the
_Brooklyn_ was on a parallel course with the Spaniards, and going in a
directly opposite direction, she would have to make a complete circle
in order to chase them; and had they had the speed with which they were
credited, that would have put the _Brooklyn_ out of the fight, one
of her engines being uncoupled, and in consequence her speed greatly
reduced.

But the Spanish vessels fell far behind their estimated speed, so that
the _Brooklyn_ was able to circle about and still overhaul the fleetest
of them, and the _Texas_, the slowest of our battleships, held its own
in the race.

The _Maria Teresa_ passed the shoals and turned west. The little
_Vixen_, lying near the _Brooklyn_, when she saw the _Maria Teresa_
turn toward her, fired off her six-pounders, then slipped away, while
the rest of the American ships came rushing down toward the enemy
with their funnels belching black smoke, and turrets, hulls, and tops
spurting out red flames and yellow smoke. They steamed toward the foe
as fast as possible, at the same time firing fiercely from every gun
that could be brought to bear, and paying no attention to the shore
batteries which were firing upon them. The _Indiana_ was nearest the
shore and nearest the _Maria Teresa_, the leading ship of the enemy,
when the fight began. It is said that the water fairly boiled with the
flood of projectiles from Morro and the broadside with which the _Maria
Teresa_ opened battle. As she turned toward the west the shot from the
_Indiana_ struck her more than once; but after that the _Indiana_ gave
her attention to the _Vizcaya_.

By this time all the American ships were engaged, but in the dense
smoke it was almost impossible to make out how great was the success of
any single one.

But Commodore Eaton, who was watching the fight from the tug
_Resolute_, says: "As the _Vizcaya_ came out I distinctly saw one of
the _Indiana's_ heavy shells strike her abaft the funnels, and the
explosion of this shell was followed by a burst of flame, which for
a time obscured the after part of the stricken ship." The _Iowa_ and
_Oregon_, belching forth great clouds of smoke until they looked like
huge yellow clouds on the water, steamed straight toward the fleeing
enemy. Says Mr. Abbott: "As the battleships closed in on their prey,
they overlapped each other, and careless use of the guns or failure to
make out accurately the target might have resulted in one of our ships
firing into another. But so skilfully were they handled that at no time
were they put in jeopardy from either the guns or the rams of each
other, though at one time the _Oregon_ was firing right across the deck
of the _Texas_."

The end of the _Maria Teresa_, the first ship to leave the harbor,
came upon her very swiftly, and was frightful. The shells and small
projectiles searched out every part of her, spreading death and ruin,
and soon setting her woodwork ablaze. The scarlet flames like snakes'
tongues darted viciously from her sides; but her gunners stood manfully
to their guns. Little smoke hung about her, and her bold black hulk
seen against the green background of the hills made her a perfect
target. A shot from the _Brooklyn_ cut her main water-pipe, and a
shell--probably from the _Oregon_--entered her hull and exploded in
the engine room; a six-inch shell from the _Iowa_ exploded in her
forward turret, killing or wounding every man at the guns; while the
storm of smaller projectiles swept her decks, and with the noise of
their bursting made it impossible for the men to hear their officers'
commands.

Admiral Cervera was on that vessel. One of his officers, telling of it
afterward, said: "He expected to lose most of his ships, but thought
the _Cristobal Colon_ might escape; that is why he transferred his flag
to the _Maria Teresa_, that he might perish with the less fortunate."
And this is the story told an American journalist by another officer
who stood by the admiral's side while that dreadful fight went on.
Of a shell from the _Brooklyn_ he said: "It struck us in the bow,
ploughing down amidships; then it exploded. It tore down the bulkheads,
destroyed stanchions, crippled two rapid-fire guns, and killed fifteen
or twenty men." Of a shell from the _Iowa_ he said: "It struck the
eleven-inch gun in the forward turret of the cruiser, cutting a furrow
as clean as a knife out of the gun. The shell exploded halfway in the
turret, making the whole vessel stagger and shake in every plate. When
the fumes and smoke had cleared away so that it was possible to enter
the turret, the other gunners were sent there. The survivors tumbled
the bodies which filled the wrecked turret through the ammunition hoist
to the lower deck. Even the machinery was clogged with corpses. All
our rapid-fire guns aloft soon became silent, because every gunner had
been either killed or crippled at his post and lay on the deck where
he fell. There were so many wounded that the surgeons ceased trying to
dress the wounds. Shells had exploded inside the ship, and even the
hospital was turned into a furnace. The first wounded who were sent
there had to be abandoned by the surgeons, who fled for their lives
from the intolerable heat."

The _Teresa_ came under the fire of our guns about 9.35 that morning.
Fifteen minutes later smoke was rising from her ports and hatches,
showing that she had been set afire by the American shells. The shot
from the _Brooklyn_ that cut her water-main made it impossible to
extinguish the flames, and the fire from the American ships grew more
accurate and deadly every minute; so she was beached and her flag
hauled down in token of surrender.

The men on the _Texas_ raised a shout of joy. But Captain Philip spoke
from the bridge: "Don't cheer, men; those poor fellows are dying."

For less than forty minutes Admiral Cervera had been running a race
for life, and now, clad in underclothes, he tried to escape to the
shore on a raft, directed by his son, but was captured and taken to the
_Gloucester_, where he was received with the honors due his rank. His
voyage from Santiago had been just six miles and a half, but had cost
the lives of nearly half his officers and crew.

The _Vizcaya_ had followed the _Teresa_ at a distance of about eight
hundred yards in coming out of Santiago harbor. Upon her decks, in
Havana harbor, Cuba, Spanish officers had looked down with careless
indifference upon the sunken wreck of our gallant battleship, the
_Maine_, and it may be supposed that when she came ploughing out of the
bay, Wainwright, late of the _Maine_, now on the little _Gloucester_,
aimed some shots at her with a special ill-will. But the _Vizcaya_,
under gathered headway, rushed on to the west, passing the heavier
battleships _Iowa_ and _Indiana_, but receiving terrible punishment
from their guns. A lieutenant of the _Vizcaya_, taken prisoner to the
United States, in an interview by a newspaper reporter, told of the
murderous effect of the shells from the _Indiana_.

"They appeared to slide along the surface of the water and hunt for
a seam in our armor," he said. "Three of those monster projectiles
penetrated the hull of the _Vizcaya_, and exploded there before we
started for the shore. The carnage inside the ship was something
horrible and beyond description. Fires were started up constantly. It
seemed to me that the iron bulkheads were ablaze. Our organization was
perfect. We acted promptly and mastered all small outbreaks of flame,
until the small ammunition magazine was exploded by a shell. From that
moment the vessel became a furnace of fire. While we were walking the
deck, headed shoreward, we could hear the roar of the flames under our
feet above the voice of artillery. The _Vizcaya's_ hull bellowed like a
blast furnace. Why, men sprang from the red-hot decks straight into the
mouths of sharks."

But the _Vizcaya_ lasted longer than the _Almirante Oquendo_, which
followed her out of the harbor. The _Vizcaya_ turned at the mouth of
the harbor and went west, the _Brooklyn_, _Oregon_, and _Texas_ in hot
pursuit, while the _Indiana_ and _Iowa_ attacked the _Oquendo_. She
had been credited with as great speed as that of her sister ships, but
this day moved so slowly that she fared worse than any of her comrades.
She stood the fire of her foes five minutes longer than had the
_Teresa_, then with flames pouring out of every opening in her hull,
she ran for the beach, hauling down her flag as she went, in token of
surrender, while at the same time men were dropping from her red-hot
decks into the water.

Thus, in the first three-quarters of an hour two great Spanish war
vessels were destroyed, and the American fleet was concentrating its
fire on the other two.

The fighting men on the vessels were not the only ones who did noble
work for their country that day. In the engine rooms and stoke-holes
of the men-of-war, on that scorching hot July day, men worked naked in
fiery heat. They could hear the thunder of the guns above them, and
feel the ship tremble with the shock of the broadsides. How the battle
was going they could not see. Deep in their fiery prison, far below the
lapping waves that rushed along the armored hull, they only knew that
if disaster came they would suffer first and most cruelly. A successful
torpedo stroke would mean death to them, every one. The clean blow
of an enemy's ram would in all probability drown them like rats in a
cage, even if it did not cause them to be parboiled by the explosion of
their own boilers. A shot in the magazine would be their death warrant.
All the perils which menaced the men who were fighting so bravely at
the guns on deck threatened the sooty, sweating fellows who shovelled
coal and fixed fires down in the hold, with the added certainty that
for them escape was impossible, and the inspiration which comes from
the very sight of battle was denied them. They did their duty nobly.
If we had not the testimony of their commanders to that effect, we
still should know it, for they got out of every ship not only the
fullest speed with which she was credited under the most favorable
circumstances, but even more--notably in the cases of the _Texas_ and
_Oregon_, which, despite bottoms fouled from long service in tropical
waters, actually exceeded their highest recorded speed in the chase.
On the _Oregon_, when she was silently pursuing the _Colon_ at the end
of the battle, Lieutenant Milligan, who had gone down into the furnace
room to work by the side of the men on whom so much depended, came up
to the captain to ask that a gun might be fired now and then. "My men
were almost exhausted," said Milligan, "when the last thirteen-inch gun
was fired, and the sound of it restored their energy, and they fell to
work with renewed vigor. If you will fire a gun occasionally it will
keep their enthusiasm up." On most of the ships the great value of the
work the men in engine rooms were doing was recognized by the captain's
sending down every few minutes to them an account of how the fight
progressed. Each report was received with cheers and redoubled activity.

On the _Brooklyn_, when the _Colon_ was making her final race for life,
Commodore Schley sent orderlies down to the stoke-holes and engine room
with this message: "Now, boys, it all depends on you. Everything is
sunk except the _Colon_, and she is trying to get away. We don't want
her to, and everything depends on you." The _Colon_ did not get away.

The _Vizcaya_ was still making a gallant running fight, and in some
degree protecting the magnificent _Cristobal Colon_. While these
fled, disaster fell upon the two torpedo-boat destroyers, _Pluton_
and _Furor_. Instead of dashing at the nearest American ship--which
would have been their wisest course--both followed the example of the
cruisers, and turned along the shore to the westward. Either of them
would have been more than a match for the little _Gloucester_, but her
commander, Richard Wainwright, sped forward in a cloud of smoke from
her own guns, receiving unnoticed shots from the batteries and the
nearer Spanish cruisers, though one six-inch shell would have destroyed
her. The batteries of the _Pluton_ and _Furor_ were of twice the power
of the _Gloucester's_, and they had, besides, the engine of destruction
which they could send out from their torpedo tubes. But in a few
minutes Wainwright was engaged with them both at short range and under
the fire of the Socapa battery. The other American battleships had been
firing at them, but desisted when they perceived that the _Gloucester_
alone was capable of managing them. In a very few minutes they both
began to smoke ominously, and their fire became much less rapid. Then
the _Furor_ moved as if her steering gear had been cut. Wainwright and
his men redoubled their efforts at the guns. Suddenly, on the _Furor_,
amidships, there shot up a great cloud of smoke and flame, with a
deafening roar and shock that could be felt across the water, even
amid the thunders of the guns. A shell from one of the battleships had
struck her fairly, and broken her in two, exploding either the magazine
or the boilers, or both, and she sank like a stone.

Wainwright pursued the other torpedo boat, the _Pluton_, more
vigorously. She was already badly crippled, and tried hard to escape;
but at last, fairly shot to pieces, she hauled down her flag, and ran
for the line of breaking surf, where her men leaped overboard to
escape the fierce flames that were sweeping relentlessly below from bow
to stern.

The sight of their danger and distress changed Wainwright from a
pitiless foe to a helping friend. He manned his boats and went to the
rescue of those still alive on the burning ship. Many were saved, and
the Americans had hardly left the smoking ship when it blew up with a
resounding roar, and vanished as had its companion. Just forty minutes
they had lasted under the American fire, and without being at any time
a serious menace to our ships.

The battle had now lasted for about three-quarters of an hour. The
_Infanta Maria Teresa_ and the _Oquendo_ were blazing on the beach
with their colors struck. The battleship _Indiana_ had been signalled
to turn in toward the shore and give aid to the survivors on the
burning ships. Only two Spanish vessels were left--the _Vizcaya_,
running and fighting bravely in a hopeless struggle for life, and the
_Cristobal Colon_, which was rushing at great speed down the coast to
the westward. In the chase of these two vessels the _Brooklyn_ held
the place of honor. Her position on the blockade at the time that the
enemy came out was a commanding one, and her speed kept her well to
the front. At the beginning of the fight the _Texas_ was next her. In
this battle she developed marvellous speed, and fought with reckless
gallantry. The _Oregon_ was third at the start, but by a wonderful dash
passed the _Texas_ and actually caught up with the _Brooklyn_, whose
tars turned out on deck to cheer her--the wonderful fighter from the
Pacific coast dockyard. The _Iowa_ was only a short distance in their
rear, and the fire of the four was now concentrated upon the unhappy
_Vizcaya_, which had escaped serious injury while the attention of the
entire American fleet was given to the _Oquendo_ and the _Teresa_,
but now with four of the best fighting machines in the world devoting
their entire attention to her, she began to go to pieces. The heavy
shells and smaller projectiles that struck her made a great clangor,
and caused her great frame to quiver. When an hour had passed the
_Brooklyn_, _Oregon_, and _Texas_ were the only ones still pursuing
her. The _Indiana_ had been left behind, and the _Iowa_ had stopped to
aid the burning and drowning men on the blazing warships. The fire of
the three warships was concentrated on the _Vizcaya_. Word was passed
to the turrets and tops of the _Brooklyn_ to aim at the _Vizcaya_ only.
They were scarcely more than half a mile from her, and the effect of
the shots began to tell. One of the _Brooklyn_ gunners reported to the
lieutenant who had charge of that turret that he didn't see any of the
shots dropping into the water. "Well, that's all right," replied the
officer; "if they don't drop into the water they are hitting." And
so they were. The beautiful woodwork inside of the vessel was all in
a blaze. The hull was pierced below the water line, the turrets were
full of dead and wounded men, and the machinery was shattered. Captain
Eulate, her commander, was a brave officer and a gentleman, but he
found himself compelled to abandon the fight, so turned his ship's prow
toward that rocky shore on which lay the wrecks of the _Oquendo_, the
_Teresa_, and the _Furor_.

As the _Vizcaya_ swung about, a shell from the _Oregon_ struck her
fairly in the stern. An enormous mass of steel, charged with explosives
of frightful power, it rushed through the steel framework of the
ship, shattering everything in its course, crashed into the boiler,
and exploded. Words are powerless to describe the ruin that resulted.
Men, guns, projectiles, ragged bits of steel and iron, splinters, and
indescribable _debris_ were hurled in every direction, while flames
shot up from every part of the ship. A fierce fire raged between her
decks, and those who were gazing at her from the decks of the American
men-of-war could see what looked like a white line reaching from her
bow to the water, which was in fact the naked men dropping one after
another over the side to seek the cool relief of the ocean from the
fiery torment they were enduring.

The _Colon_ was now left alone, and was doing her utmost to escape.
The men on our foremost pursuing ships soon perceived that there
could be no hope of escape for her. Commodore Schley saw it, and
began to lighten the strain on his men. They were called out on the
superstructure to see what had been done by the guns of the fleet and
to watch the chase. They came pouring out from the turrets, up from
the engine rooms and magazines--stalwart fellows, smoke-begrimed and
sweaty. Almost abeam they saw the _Vizcaya_ with men dropping from
every port. Far astern were the smoking wrecks of the _Teresa_ and
_Oquendo_, ahead on the right was the _Colon_, fleeing for her life,
while the _Brooklyn_ rushed after her relentlessly.

As the men crowded on along the decks and on the turret top, they
suddenly and spontaneously sent up a cheer for Admiral Schley. The
admiral, on the bridge above them, looked down upon them with moistened
eyes. "They are the boys who did it," he said to one who stood beside
him, and he spoke truly.

Then the men cheered the _Oregon_, which was coming up gallantly,
and her men returned the cheer. Now all felt that even the last of
Cervera's vessels was sure to be soon taken, and signals of a social
and jocular character were exchanged. One from the _Brooklyn_ suggested
to the _Oregon_ that she try one of her thirteen-inch guns on the
chase. The great cannon flashed and roared from the forward turret, and
the shell, which rushed past the _Brooklyn_ with a noise like a railway
train, fell short. On they rushed, the _Oregon_ visibly gaining on the
fastest ship of the Spanish navy; a battleship built for weight and
solidity overhauling a cruiser built for speed! Another shell was sent,
and fell so near the _Colon_ that the captain seemed to read in it the
death-warrant of his ship. He turned her toward the shore and beached
her, hauling down his flag as she struck. Captain Cook went in a boat
to take possession of the prize, his crew being ordered not to cheer
or exult over the vanquished. The _Colon_ surrendered at 1.10 P.M.,
ending a naval battle that lasted less than four hours, and possessed
many extraordinary and unique qualities. It completed the wreck of
Spanish naval power and dealt the decisive stroke that deprived Spain
of her last remnant of American colonies. It was of absorbing interest
to naval experts in all parts of the world, and it was unique in
that while the defeated fleet lost six ships, more than six hundred
men killed and drowned, and eighteen hundred prisoners, many of them
wounded, the victors had but one man killed and one wounded.

No wonder that when the fight was over, the victory won--such a victory
too--a Christian man, such as Captain Philip of the _Texas_, whose crew
were cheering in a very delirium of joy, should call them about him,
and, uncovering his head, say in a reverential tone: "I want to make
public acknowledgment here that I believe in God the Father. I want you
all to lift your hats and from your hearts offer silent thanks to the
Almighty."

And truly they had abundant reason for great thankfulness, having
escaped with so few casualties, while the foe suffered so terribly,
scores of them being literally roasted alive, for the whole interior
of the ships, _Vizcaya, Oquendo_, and _Teresa_ became like iron
furnaces at white heat. Even the decks were red hot, and the wounded
burned where they lay. So crazed by the sight of the agony of men
wounded and held fast by the jamming of gratings, were some of those
otherwise unhurt, that they could hardly be induced to respond to
efforts for their own rescue. They would cling to a ladder or the side
of a scorching hot ship and have to be literally dragged away before
they would loose their hold and drop into a boat below. Our sailors
worked hard on blistering decks, amid piles of ammunition that were
continually being exploded by the heat, and under guns that might
at any minute send out a withering blast, risking life and limbs in
succoring their defeated foes; for it is not too much to say that in
that work of mercy the bluejackets encountered dangers quite as deadly
as those they had met in the fury of battle.

The poor marksmanship of the Spaniards saved our ships from being much
damaged. A good many shots struck: the _Brooklyn_ bore in all some
forty scars of the fight, twenty-five of them having been shells; but
she was so slightly injured that she could have begun all over again
when the _Colon_ turned over on the shore. The _Iowa_ was hit twice,
the _Texas_ three times, one shell smashing her chart-house and another
making a hole in her smokestack. The injuries to the other ships were
of even less importance.




CHAPTER XI.


That morning that Cervera attempted his flight from Santiago, General
Shafter sent into the Spanish lines by a flag of truce a demand for the
surrender of the city. "I have the honor to inform you," he said, "that
unless you surrender I shall be compelled to shell Santiago de Cuba.
Please instruct the citizens of all foreign countries, and all women
and children, that they should leave the city before 10 A.M. to-morrow."

That flag of truce had been gone only two or three hours when there
came a sudden rumor that the Spanish fleet had gone to destruction,
depriving Santiago of her chief defence. Our soldiers were so sure of
the prowess of our sailors that they hailed the rumor as fact,--as news
of a victory,--and when later in the evening the actual intelligence of
Schley's glorious triumph reached them they went wild with joy; danced
on the crest of the defences, in full view of the Spaniards, venturing
to do so because--as there was a truce--no jealous sharpshooter would
dare fire on them. And the band played patriotic and popular airs,
particularly "There'll be a Hot Time in the Old Town To-night."
Bonfires were made and salutes fired.

Drs. Harold and Herbert Travilla, wearied with their labors for the
sick and wounded, rejoiced as heartily as any one else over the good
news, yet at the same time felt pity for the suffering of those of
the foe who had perished so miserably by shot, shell, and fire. They
would have been glad to aid the wounded prisoners, but their hands
were already full, in giving needed attention to our own men so sorely
injured by Spanish shot and shell. So incessant and arduous had been
their labors in that line, and so fierce and exhausting was the heat,
that they were themselves well-nigh worn out. There had been hope that
the city would surrender, but on the night of the 3d--the day of the
naval battle--four thousand fresh Spanish troops entered it, and the
hoped-for surrender was not made.

The Americans in the trenches were hot, hungry, and water-soaked, and
some of them grew very impatient. Said one of the Rough Riders: "Now
that we've got those Dagoes corralled, why don't we brand them?"

On the 6th something happened that broke the monotony and gave great
joy to the soldiers in the trenches. A cavalcade of men was seen coming
from the beleaguered city, the first of whom was quickly recognized
as Lieutenant Hobson, who with his seven comrades had gone out one
night, weeks before, on a vessel, the _Merrimac_, to sink her across
the narrow entrance to the channel leading into Santiago harbor, and so
bottle up the Spanish fleet.

They failed, and were taken prisoners by the Spaniards, and had been
spending weeks shut up in Morro castle, but now were exchanged for
seven prisoners taken at San Juan. At sight of them the American
soldiers seemed to go mad with joy. They yelled, danced, laughed, and
even wept for joy. Then the band on the foremost line struck up "The
Star Spangled Banner," and all stood silent at a salute. But the moment
the music ceased it seemed as if Bedlam had broken loose. The regulars
crowded about the heroes, cheering them, shaking them by the hand,
while they from their ambulance yelled compliments and congratulations
to the tattered and dirty soldiers.

And when those returned sailors reached the fleet after dark, they
found the ships' companies turned out as if to greet an admiral at
least, coming to visit them, and as their launch was seen approaching
from the shore the cheers of their brother tars made the hills of Cuba
ring almost as had the thundering fire of Morro and Estrella when
levelled against them nearly six weeks before.

The surrender of Santiago took place on the 18th of July. By that time
there was a great deal of sickness among our troops, and our friends
Harold and Herbert Travilla were kept very busy attending to the sick
and wounded. So overworked were they, and so injuriously affected by
the malarious climate, that both became ill; Herbert so much so that
he could scarcely keep about, and his brother began to question whether
it were not his duty to take or send him home, or farther north, to
join their mother and a number of the relatives and connections who
were spending the summer on the Hudson, or at some Northern seaside
resort, which he was at liberty to do, as they were serving as
volunteer surgeons, and without pay.

On the morning after the surrender Herbert found himself entirely
unfit for duty, and on his account Harold felt much depressed as he
went through the hospital examining and prescribing for his patients.
Presently he heard a quick, manly step, then a familiar voice saying in
cheery tones:

"Good-morning, Harold! How are you?"

The young doctor turned quickly with the joyous exclamation:

"Why, Brother Levis! can it be possible that this is you?" holding out
his hand in cordial greeting as he spoke.

"Not only possible, but an undeniable fact," returned Captain Raymond,
with his pleasant smile, and giving the offered hand a warm, brotherly
pressure.

"And you came in your yacht? Have some of the family come with you--my
mother----"

"Oh, no!" returned the captain quickly; "at present it is much too
warm for her--or any of our lady friends--in this locality. She and my
family are at Crag Cottage, and by her request I have come to take you
and Herbert aboard the _Dolphin_ and carry you to her. And I didn't
come alone; your brothers Edward and Walter are with me, and your
cousin Chester also."

"Oh, what delightful news!" exclaimed Harold, his eyes shining with
joy. "And your yacht is here?"

"Lying down yonder in the harbor, just waiting for two additions to
her list of passengers. But where is Herbert?" looking about as if in
search of him.

"Lying in our tent; on the sick list, poor dear fellow!" sighed Harold.
"Can you wait five minutes for me to get through here for the present?
Then I will take you to him."

"Certainly; longer than that, if necessary. Ah, I see it was time--high
time for me to come for you boys."

Harold smiled in a rather melancholy way at that.

"I have grown to feel quite old since we have been here in the midst
of so much suffering, and obliged to take so heavy a load of care and
responsibility--performing serious operations and the like," he said
with a sigh. "I must find you a seat," he added, glancing about in
search of one.

"No, no," the captain hastened to say; "I should prefer walking around
here and making acquaintance with some of these poor brave fellows--if
you think it would not be unpleasant to them."

"I think they would be pleased to have you do so," was Harold's reply.

A few minutes later he and the captain went into the tent where Herbert
lay in a burning fever. The very sight of the captain and the news
that he had come to carry him and Harold north to cooler climate,
mother, and other dear ones seemed so greatly to revive him that he
insisted upon being considered quite able to be taken immediately on
board the yacht, and his brother and brother-in-law promptly set about
preparations to carry out his wish.

"You will go too, Harold?" he said inquiringly to his brother.

"To the _Dolphin_? Yes, certainly, old fellow; you are my patient now,
and I must see to it that you are well accommodated and cared for,"
returned Harold in a sprightly tone.

"And you are going with me to see to that throughout the voyage?"

"I don't know," Harold returned in a tone of hesitation; "these poor,
wounded, and sick fellows----"

"You'll be down on your back as sick as any of them if you stay here
another week," growled Herbert. "And with nobody to take care of you
you'll die, and that'll break mother's heart. And as you are working
without pay, you've a right to go as soon as you will."

"Yes," said the captain, "and if you fall sick you'll be no service,
but only in the way. Better let me attend to the necessary arrangements
for you, and carry you off along with your brother."

After a little hesitation Harold consented to that, saying that after
seeing Herbert on board the yacht he would return, make all necessary
arrangements, bid good-bye to his patients, then board the _Dolphin_
for the homeward voyage.

"That's right, brother mine," Herbert said, with a pleased smile; "I'd
be very unwilling to go, leaving you here alone; and what would mother
say?"

It took but a few minutes to pick up their few belongings, and they
were soon on the deck of the yacht receiving the warm greetings of
their brothers and cousins, who, however, seemed greatly concerned over
their weary and haggard looks.

"You are worn out, lads," said Edward, "and the best and kindest thing
we can do will be to carry you up north to a cooler climate; and to
mother and the others, who will, I hope, be able soon to nurse you back
to health and strength."

"So say I," said Chester.

"And I," added Walter. "I have always found mother's nursing the best
to be had anywhere or from anybody."

"Yes," said the captain, "and there are sisters and others to help with
it at Crag Cottage, where I hope to land you a few days hence."

In a brief time Herbert was comfortably established in one of the neat
staterooms, and left in Edward's charge, while Harold went ashore
to make his farewell visit to his hospital patients, while Chester
and Walter accompanied the captain in paying a visit to some of the
men-of-war officered by old acquaintances and chums of the last-named
when he belonged to the navy.

It was most interesting to them all to see both the men and the vessels
that had taken part in that remarkable battle, and to hear accounts of
its scenes from the actors in them. In fact, so much interested were
they that Captain Raymond said he could not have Edward and Harold miss
it; they must visit the vessels later, leaving Chester and Walter in
charge of Herbert, since he was too ill to accompany them.

That afternoon the plan was carried out, and that night the _Dolphin_
started on her return voyage to the north. The change from the rough
camps on Cuban soil to the luxurious cabin of the _Dolphin_ was
very agreeable and refreshing to the young volunteer physicians,
but they were too thoroughly worn out with their toils, anxieties,
and privations for even so great and beneficial a change to work an
immediate cure. They were still on the sick list when they reached Crag
Cottage.




CHAPTER XII.


Crag Cottage had been at Evelyn's desire so added to in the past years
that it could now accommodate a large number of guests. There were so
many who were near and dear to her, and whom she loved to gather about
her, that she could not be content till this was done. Now the families
of Fairview, Ion, and Woodburn were all spending the summer there;
also Ronald Lilburn and Annis, his wife--though just now several of
the gentlemen had gone to Cuba to learn of the welfare of Harold and
Herbert Travilla, about whom their mother had grown very solicitous.
They had been gone long enough for hopes to be entertained of their
speedy return, but there was no certainty in regard to the time of
their arrival at the cottage.

It was late in the afternoon. The elder people were gathered on the
front porch overlooking the river, most of the younger ones amusing
themselves about the grounds. Grandma Elsie was gazing out upon the
river, with a slightly anxious expression of countenance.

"Looking for the _Dolphin_, mamma?" asked her daughter Violet.

"Yes; though it is hardly time to expect her yet, I fear."

"Oh, yes, mamma, for there she is now!" exclaimed Violet, springing to
her feet in her delight, and pointing to a vessel passing up the river,
which had just come into sight.

Many of those on the porch and the young folks in the grounds had also
caught sight of her, and a joyous shout was raised: "The _Dolphin!_ the
_Dolphin!_ there she is! the folks have come!"

"Oh, can we run down and get aboard of her, mamma?" asked Elsie
Raymond. "I'm in such a hurry to see papa and get a kiss from him."

"You won't have long to wait for that, I am sure," returned her mother,
with a smile. "But it will be better to wait a few minutes and get
it here. There are so many of us that if we should all go down to the
landing we would be very much in the way."

Others thought the same, and the ladies and children waited where they
were while Mr. Leland and Edward, his eldest son, went down the winding
path that led to the little landing-place at the foot of the hill, to
greet the friends on board the yacht and give any assistance that might
be needed.

They found all well but the two doctors, Harold able to walk up to the
house with the help of a sustaining arm, Herbert having to be borne
on a litter. The mother's heart ached at sight of his wan cheeks and
sunken eyes, but he told her the joy of her presence and loving care
would soon work a change for the better. He was speedily carried to a
comfortable bed, and everything done to cheer, strengthen, and relieve
him.

Nor was Harold's reception any less tenderly affectionate and
sympathizing. His mother was very glad that he was not so ill as his
brother, and hoped the pure air and cooler climate would soon restore
him to his wonted health and strength.

"I hope so, mother dear," he said, forcing a playful tone and a smile,
"and that they will soon do as much for Herbert also. He, poor fellow,
is not fit to be up at all, and I think it will be well for me to
retire early."

"You must do just what you deem best for your health, my dear boy,"
said his mother. "But shall I not send for a physician, as I fear
neither of you is well enough to manage the case of the other?"

"No, no, mother, please don't!" exclaimed Herbert; "Harold is well
enough to prescribe for me, and I prefer him to any other doctor."

"As I should, if he were quite well," she said, regarding Harold with
a proud, fond smile, which he returned, saying in cheerful tones, "My
trouble is more weariness than illness, mother, and I hope a few days
of rest here in the pleasant society of relatives and friends will
quite restore me to wonted health and vigor."

"I hope so, indeed," she said, "and that Herbert may not be far behind
you in recovering his."

In the meantime joyful greetings were being exchanged among the
relatives and friends upon the porch, and the returned travellers were
telling of what they had seen and heard in their absence, especially on
the coast of Cuba. It was all very interesting to the auditors, but the
tale was not half told when the tea-bell summoned them to their evening
meal.

Chester had a good deal more to tell Lucilla as they wandered about
the grounds together after leaving the table. And she was greatly
interested.

"I should like to get aboard a battleship," she said; "particularly the
_Oregon_. What a grand vessel it must be!"

"It is," said Chester, "and did grand work in that battle; a battle
which will go down in history as a most remarkable one. I am proud of
the brave tars who fought it, and not less so of the fine fellows who
kept up the fires under the engines, which were as necessary to the
gaining of the victory as was the firing of the guns."

"But, oh, the terrible carnage!" exclaimed Lucilla, with a shudder.

"Yes, that was awful; and what a wonder--what a cause for gratitude to
God--that but one was killed and so few badly wounded on our ships."

"Yes, indeed! and truly I believe that was because we were fighting for
the deliverance of the downtrodden and oppressed. Don't you, Chester?"

"Most assuredly I do," was his emphatic rejoinder. "Has there been any
news from Manila?" he asked presently.

"No," she said, "but we are looking every day for a letter from Max.
Oh, I do hope he is still unharmed! That victory of Dewey's seems to me
to have been as great and wonderful as this later one at Santiago."

"So I think. Ah, Lu, darling, I wish Max might be ordered home soon,
both for his own sake and ours."

"Yes; but try to be patient," she returned, in a light and cheery tone.
"I am sure we are having pleasant times as things are, and we are
young enough to wait, as my father says. I am still almost three years
younger than he thinks a girl ought to be to undertake the cares of
married life."

"I don't mean you shall have much care, and I am sure you are fully
capable of all you would be called upon to do. My darling, if you don't
have an easy life it shall be from no fault of mine."

"I am sure of that, Chester, and not in the least afraid to trust my
happiness to your keeping. But I am willing to wait somewhat longer to
please father and to have Max present--especially as Eva's bridegroom.
Oh, I think a double wedding will be just lovely!"

"If one didn't have to wait for it," sighed Chester. "Yet it is a great
consolation that we can be together pretty nearly every day in the
year."

"Yes, you are a very attentive lover, and I appreciate it."

Later in the evening, when most of the guests had retired to their
apartments for the night, the captain and his eldest daughter had a bit
of private chat upon the porch, for she still retained her love for
that, and it was hardly less enjoyable to him.

"You don't know how I missed this bit of private talk with you, father,
while you were away on your little trip," she said, with a loving look
up into his eyes as she stood by his side with his arm about her waist.

"Probably not more than I did, daughter mine," he returned, stroking
her hair caressingly, then pressing his lips to her forehead and cheek.
"Pacing the deck alone I missed my little girl more than I can tell
her."

"Ah, didn't you almost wish you had granted my request to be allowed to
go along with you?" she asked, with a pleased little laugh.

"No, my child; you are too great a treasure for me willingly to expose
you to the risks of such a voyage at such a time."

"You dear father! you are so kindly careful of me, and of all your
children."

"It behooves a man to be careful of his treasures," he said. "I should
have greatly enjoyed your companionship, daughter, if I could have had
it without risk to you."

"I should have liked to see the warships and the scene of the battle,"
she said. "What a terrible battle it was, father--for the Spaniards, at
least."

"Yes," he sighed. "May the time soon come when men shall learn war no
more, but shall beat their swords into ploughshares and their spears
into pruning hooks."

"It doesn't seem as though that time can be very near," she said.
"Papa, do you think Max is in much danger there in Manila?"

"I hardly know, daughter; I hope we shall hear from him soon. I hardly
think there will be much, if any more, fighting for him to do there at
present. But his next letter will probably enable us to judge better
about that."

"Oh, I hope it will come soon!" she exclaimed in a tone of ardent
desire.

"As I do," he sighed. "I cannot but feel anxious about my dear boy;
though the worst seems to be over, there."

The next morning's mail brought the desired letters to father, sisters,
and ladylove. The captain's gave news of the doings of the army and
navy, and after a private perusal he read the greater part of it
aloud to the family and friends. It told of the irksomeness of their
situation, the weariness of the watching and waiting for troops that
did not come, the admiral's patience and forbearance in taking the
delay so quietly, the troubles with the insurgents under Aguinaldo,
and the commanders of the warships of several European nations. "We
know," he said, "that those fellows are looking out for the first sign
of weakness on our part, or the first disaster that might befall us,
intending to take advantage of it to intervene. I can tell you, father,
that Admiral Dewey is a credit to his country and that country's
navy. He is very kind-hearted, and takes excellent care of his men;
he is gentle, kind to all, but thorough, determined, and energetic;
everything under his control must be as perfect as possible. When
it comes to the necessity for fighting he believes in being most
thoroughly prepared, and striking quick, hard blows, soon putting the
enemy in a condition where it cannot fight. He says little or nothing
about what he expects, but seems to be always ready for whatever
happens. The behavior of the foreign ships must be a constant worry to
him, though he says little or nothing about it. The Germans here seem
to study methods of annoying us. Their ships are constantly coming in
or going out of Manila Bay at all hours, and on the most frivolous
pretexts--sometimes at night, in a way that makes our lookouts think
them Spanish torpedo boats; and should we send a shot at one of them
it might cause the gravest international complications. And the German
navy officers make the Spanish officers their chosen companions.

"The other day our admiral learned that one of the German vessels had
violated neutrality by landing provisions in Manila. He summoned the
flag lieutenant to his cabin and when the officer came--'Oh, Brumby,'
he said, 'I wish you to take the barge and go over to the German
flagship. Give Admiral von Diederich my compliments, and say that I
wish to call his attention to the fact that the vessels of his squadron
have shown an extraordinary disregard of the usual courtesies of
naval intercourse, and that finally one of them has committed a gross
breach of neutrality in landing provisions in Manila, a port which I
am blockading.' The admiral spoke in a quiet, gently modulated voice,
but as the lieutenant turned to go he called him back and added in a
wrathful tone, 'And, Brumby, tell Admiral von Diederich that if he
wants a fight, he can have it right now.'

"The message had the desired effect, and we have had much less
annoyance from the Germans since.

"The English squadron here is equal to the German, and I am glad to
be able to say that the British officers lose no opportunity to show
their friendship for us. I am told that the German admiral asked
Captain Chichester, the British commander, what the English would do
in case the Germans should protest against an American bombardment of
Manila, and that the messenger received the answer: 'Say to Admiral
von Diederich that he will have to call on Admiral Dewey to find out
what the British ships will do in such an event. Admiral Dewey is the
only man authorized to answer that question.' I cannot vouch for the
exact truthfulness of this report," Max went on, "but I can for the
hostility of the Germans and the friendliness of the English. And we
hear reliable reports of sailors' fights in Hong-Kong, in which British
and Yankee bluejackets fight shoulder to shoulder against German seamen
subjects of the Kaiser."

"Oh, that is good!" exclaimed Lucilla, as her father paused in his
reading, "and I hope we and the British will always be friends after
this. Don't you think, father, that joining together we could rule the
world?"

"Yes; and I hope, with you, that we may always be friends; though it
is not necessary that we should always take part in each other's
quarrels."

"I hope Max is well?" said Violet inquiringly.

"Yes," said his father, "he tells me he is, and that he came through
the battle without the slightest wound."

"I hope the President will let Dewey come home soon, and Brother Max
with him," said little Elsie. "Doesn't he say anything about it, papa?"

"No, my child, except that he fears it will be months, if not years,
before we see each other again. But we won't despair; it may be that
the war will be short, and peace return our dear boy to us sooner than
now seems likely."

The captain seemed to have finished reading the part of Max's letter
which he thought best for all to hear, and was folding it up. "Mother,"
he said, turning to Mrs. Travilla, "the air out here is delightful this
morning; don't you think it might do Harold good to lie yonder in the
hammock? and that he could come out with the assistance of my arm?"

"I certainly do," she said, "and thank you for your kind offer. Both
he and Herbert will be deeply interested in the contents of Max's
letter--if you are willing to let them see or hear it."

"Certainly, mother," the captain hastened to say. "I will carry it in
and read it to them before we bring Harold out."

And so he did. They were both greatly interested, and upon the
conclusion of the reading Harold was glad to accept the offer of the
captain to help him out to the porch and into a hammock, where he
could lie at ease and enjoy the companionship of other members of the
party, older and younger. They were all ready to wait upon him and
to do whatever they could for his comfort and entertainment. None
more so than Grace, whose ministrations he seemed to prefer to any
other. As the days went on they were often left alone together, while
husbands and wives and lovers devoted themselves to each other; Mrs.
Travilla herself to her sicker son, and Evelyn to her housekeeping and
correspondence, especially the letters to Max, her affianced.

Grace was fond of Harold, as she thought any one might be of so kind an
uncle, whose medical skill had many times relieved suffering for her,
and who had always shown kindly sympathy in her ailments. She wanted
to make a suitable return for it all, so endeavored to amuse him with
cheerful chat, music, and reading aloud anything that he seemed to care
to hear.

He fell more deeply in love with her day by day, and often found it
difficult to refrain from telling the tale to her, and pleading for a
return. His mother saw it all, and at length advised him to speak to
Grace's father, tell him the whole story, and crave permission to do
and say what he could to win her heart.

"I have thought it might be best to wait some years, mother," he said.
"I fear he will be astonished, indignant, and deprive me of her sweet
society."

"Astonished he probably will be," she said, "but surely not indignant;
and when he has fully considered the matter, remembering that there is
no tie of blood between you, I think he will not withhold his consent,
provided you are willing to defer marriage till she is of suitable age."

"I hope you are right, mother, but such a mixture of relationships as
it would make--I fear he will think that an insurmountable difficulty."

"But to rob his dearly loved daughter of a life of wedded happiness he
will think still worse, if I am not greatly mistaken in him. And as for
the mixture of relationships, you can still be brother to him and your
sister Violet, and Grace remain his daughter."

"You are the best of comforters and advisers, mother," he said, "and I
will take your advice, and make a clean breast of it to the captain at
the earliest opportunity."

He did so before the day was over. Seeing the captain in the grounds,
he joined him with a request for a bit of private chat.

"Certainly," said the captain, leading the way to the summerhouse on
the edge of the cliff. "If you want assistance in any way that I can
give it, I need hardly tell you that it will be a pleasure to me to do
so; especially as you are the brother of my dear wife."

"Thank you, Brother Levis, I do not doubt that in the least; and
yet----" He stammered and paused, coloring deeply.

"I think you need not hesitate to tell me," the captain said, with a
look of surprise. "I feel very sure you would not ask anything wrong or
unreasonable."

"No; my request is neither, I think. It is that I may, if I can, win
the heart and hand of your daughter Grace."

"Surely, surely you must acknowledge that that is unreasonable!"
exclaimed the captain, in a tone of astonishment not unmixed with
indignation. "Such a mixture of relationships--making you your sister's
son-in-law, and my daughter my sister-in-law!"

"My mother's idea is that we might keep to our own relationships as
they are now; and she thinks as there is absolutely no tie of blood
between us there could be nothing wrong in such a marriage."

"No, perhaps not absolutely wrong, but very distasteful to me. Besides,
as you yourself must acknowledge, Grace is entirely too young to marry."

"But all the time growing older, as well as more and more beautiful,
and I can wait. She is worth waiting for as long as Jacob served for
Rachel. And would it not be wise to give her to a physician, who will
make her health his constant care?"

"Perhaps so," returned the captain, with a rather perplexed and sad
sort of smile; "and if you have won her heart and are willing to wait
till she is of suitable age, I--don't forbid you to tell her--how
dearly you love her--if you can."

"A thousand thanks, Brother Levis!" exclaimed Harold, seizing the
captain's hand in a vise-like grasp, and giving it a hearty shake.

"I don't know how to put my love into words--it seems to me they would
be powerless to express it--but I shall try and hope to win a return
by untiring devotion."

"She has a loving heart, and her father finds it hard to be called upon
to resign the first place in it," the captain said, with an involuntary
sigh.

"But let us hope that it will be for her happiness, captain; and I
think we both love her well enough to resign a good deal for that."

"Her father certainly does," said the captain. "Dear child! she has
been a great comfort and blessing to me since my eyes first rested upon
her dear little face. She has never caused me a pang, except by her
ill-health and feebleness."

"I have known her long enough and well enough to be sure of that," said
Harold. "She certainly has a lovely disposition, as well as a beautiful
face and form. I feel that to win her for my own will be the greatest
good fortune that could possibly come to me."

"I am glad you appreciate the worth of my dear child," the captain
said, with emotion, "and if you have won her heart I am not afraid to
trust her happiness to your keeping. But, understand, I cannot let you
take her at once."

"Yes, I understand, and shall not take any unfair advantage of
your reluctantly granted permission, Brother Levis; but if I can
win her consent, her heart, I shall be a very happy man, and wait
contentedly--or at least ungrumblingly--until you grant us leave to
become husband and wife."

Harold was not long in availing himself of the consent given. He was on
the watch for an opportunity to tell his tale of love to the one most
deeply concerned. He coaxed her out to that very spot where he and her
father had had their private talk, there told her what she was to him,
and asked if she could return his affection and willingly give herself
to him. She was evidently much surprised, listened with an agitated air
and face suffused with blushes, then said low and hesitatingly:

"Oh, Uncle Harold! how can you? You are so good and wise--so much older
than I am--and--and father has often told me that I am only a little
girl--not nearly old enough to think about--about such things--and so I
am sure he wouldn't want you to talk to me as you did just now."

"But I spoke to him first, and gained his permission to tell you of
my love. He probably will not let us marry for some years to come,
even if you care for me in that way; but he is willing that we should
become engaged if we choose, and be lovers till he thinks you are old
enough to marry. And oh, darling! if you care for me, and will promise
to be mine at some future day, it will make me the happiest of men.
Oh, dearest! can't you love me in that way, even just a little?" he
concluded imploringly, taking her hand in his and holding it in a
tenderly affectionate pressure.

"I can't help loving you, Uncle Harold, you are so, _so very_ good and
kind to me. But I never thought of--of your being my lover; for I'm not
wise and good enough for you."

"I should put it just the other way, that I am not half wise and good
enough for you, my darling, my fairy queen," he said, venturing to put
an arm about her, draw her into a close embrace, and press an ardent
kiss upon her lips.

She made no resistance, and a few more words of love and whispered
tenderness caused the sweet, blushing face to grow radiant with
happiness. She did not deny that she returned his affection, but at
length owned in a few low-breathed, hesitating words that she did.

Her face was beaming when they returned to the house, and when she came
to her father for the usual good-night caress, he folded her close to
his heart and gazing searchingly into the sweet, blushing face, said
tenderly:

"My darling little daughter looks very happy to-night. Won't you let
your father into the secret of it?"

"Yes, indeed, papa; I never meant to keep anything from you," she
murmured, half under her breath, and hiding her blushing face on his
breast. "I always mean to tell you every thing worth while, because we
love each other so very, very dearly. I am happy because of what Uncle
Harold has been telling me; and he says he told you first, so you know.
And you are willing, papa?"

"Yes, daughter, when the right time comes, since it seems it will make
you happy. But," he sighed, "it is a little hard for your father to
find other men getting the love of his dear daughters away from him."

"Oh, papa, dear, dearest papa, don't think that!" she said, with tears
in her voice. "I've always loved you dearly, and it seems to me that I
love you better just now than I ever did before."

"Ah, is that so, daughter mine?" he said, giving her another tender
caress; "it makes me happy to hear it, and to believe that my dear
Grace will never cease to love me, and will always feel sure of her
father's loving sympathy in all her joys and sorrows."

"It is very sweet to know that, papa dear," she said. "Oh, I am just
the happiest girl, with so many and such dear loved ones. But even with
all the others, father, I couldn't do without your love."

"I hope not, dear child. It would be hard indeed for me to doubt that,
or to be deprived of yours. But now bid me good-night and go to your
rest, for late hours have always been bad for you."

"Yes, sir, I know; and my dear, kind father is always so tenderly
careful of me," she said, giving and receiving a close, loving embrace.

It had been a sultry day, followed by a delightful evening, a cool,
refreshing breeze coming from the river, and a full moon in a clear
sky making it almost as light as day in the grounds, about which the
elder members of the party were scattered. The captain left the porch
where he and his daughter Grace had had their little chat, and joined
a group under the trees on the lawn. It consisted of Mrs. Travilla--or
Grandma Elsie, as his first set of children had been accustomed to call
her--her daughters, Mrs. Leland and Mrs. Raymond, and her sons Harold,
Herbert, and Walter. There was a slight flutter of excitement among
them as he joined them and took possession of a vacant seat.

"I am glad you have come, captain," said Mrs. Travilla. "Harold has
just been telling us of your great kindness to him, and I want to thank
you for it."

"Ah! what was that?" he asked in a tone that seemed to express
surprise. "There are few things I would not do for you or yours,
mother."

"I believe that, and you have given him the right to win, if he can, a
precious treasure; and to give to me the dearest of little daughters."

"Ah, yes!" he said, as if just comprehending her meaning, "and to her
father she is such a treasure as any man might covet and be rejoiced to
win."

"An opinion in which I am sure we will all agree," said Violet. "I, who
certainly know her well, think she is an inestimable treasure."

"An opinion in which we can all join you, I am sure," added Herbert,
"and I think my brother a most fortunate man."

"That is exactly what he thinks of himself," said Harold, with a happy
laugh. "Though there has to be a long, long waiting spell before the
full extent of that happiness can be realized."

"How our young folks are pairing off!" remarked Mrs. Leland, with a
slight sigh.

"Ah, yes," said Violet, "but fortunately they don't pair off with
strangers and leave us. That makes it much easier to bear, doesn't it,
my dear?"

"Yes; except for the mixture of relationships," returned the captain a
trifle ruefully.

"Is the thing to be kept a secret?" queried Mrs. Leland.

"I am entirely willing it should be known in the connection," said
Captain Raymond.




CHAPTER XIII.


It was growing late, and Evelyn's guests, accustomed to keeping early
hours while at Crag Cottage, had nearly all retired to their rooms for
the night. But Chester Dinsmore and Lucilla Raymond were just returning
from a stroll down the river bank, and as they neared the house they
could see the captain pacing the front porch.

"There is papa now," said Lucilla. "I am afraid he will think I have
been out rather late."

"Are you afraid of a scolding?" asked Chester.

"No; I may get a gentle reproof, but nothing worse. Papa never really
scolds; but I can't bear to have him displeased with me. My dear, dear
father! I believe I give him all the love that would have been divided
between him and my mother had she lived."

"I am not surprised at that," returned Chester, "for he is certainly
worthy of it. I have learned to love and honor him myself as if I were
his own son."

"Oh, Chester, how glad I am to hear you say that!" exclaimed Lucilla.

But that ended the talk, for they were at the foot of the porch steps,
and the captain spoke, addressing them. "Ah, so here you are at last,
my dears. I was beginning to feel a trifle anxious lest something had
befallen you."

"Oh, no, father! we are all right," exclaimed Lucilla, in lively tones,
"but the bewitching moonlight and pleasant breeze tempted us to linger
longer than usual. I hope you are not vexed with us?"

"Not very seriously, daughter," he said, with a smile, "but it is high
time now that you were getting ready for your night's rest. I want you
to have plenty of that, and I know you like to be up early."

"Yes, indeed, father; for my early walks and talks with you are among
my greatest pleasures."

"Your father in the morning, your lover at night," Chester said, with
a pleasant laugh. "I'm glad and thankful, captain, that you let me have
her for something like half the time. Good-night, now! and pleasant
dreams to you both," he added, turning away and passing into the house,
hardly waiting for their return of his parting good wishes.

"Now I suppose I must say good-night and go too," Lucilla said, putting
her arms about her father's neck and looking up lovingly into his face.

"I shall take about five minutes of your society first," he returned,
smiling and patting her cheek. "I have something to tell you; something
that will, perhaps, be a little surprise to you."

"Nothing bad, I hope, father?"

"No, not exactly bad--though I must own it is something of a trial to
me. Your sister Grace has followed your bad example, and given the
first place in her heart to another; my consent has been asked, given,
and they are engaged, though not to marry for the next five years."

"Father!" exclaimed Lucilla, in a tone of utter astonishment, "to whom?
Chester's brother Frank?"

"What a guess!" laughed her father. "No; try again."

She reflected a moment, then--"It can't be Uncle Harold?" she ventured,
in a tone that seemed to say that that was hardly possible. "He is
surely much too old for her."

"Unfortunately I cannot make that objection, since there is some years'
less difference in their ages than in your Mamma Vi's and mine."

"Oh, papa! and are they really lovers, and engaged?"

"Yes; though such a match is very distasteful to me--simply on account
of the mixed-up relationship that their marriage would bring about; but
when I found the fancy and affection were mutual, I could not withhold
my consent."

"You dear father! you are always so kindly considerate of other
people's welfare and happiness," she said in tones tremulous with
emotion. "I am sure nobody ever had a kinder, better father than ours."

"It is most pleasant to have my daughter think so, whether I deserve
it or not," he said low and tenderly, holding her close to his heart
and pressing kisses on her forehead, cheek, and lips. "Now go and
make yourself ready for bed," he added, "and don't let this bit of
surprising news keep you from sleeping. I want my dear eldest daughter
fresh and bright for my entertainment in the morning."

The house being so full, Lucilla, Grace, and Evelyn shared the same
room. Grace was in bed, but not asleep as usual, Eva preparing for
rest, when Lucilla came in from her talk with her father. She glanced
at her sister, and seeing her eyes closed thought her sleeping.

"Oh, Eva!" she whispered to her friend, "do you know--have you heard
the news?"

"News? No. I have been busy about household matters, and no one has
told anything. What is it--war news?"

"No, oh, no!" glancing smilingly toward Grace; "something even more
interesting, I think, unless Max were concerned in it. It is that
we have another pair of lovers in the house--Gracie there and Uncle
Harold. I'll have to quit calling him 'uncle,' though, since he is to
be my brother one of these days."

"Is it possible! Well, he has won a prize, I think."

Grace was not asleep now; her wide open eyes were fixed upon the two
girls and her cheeks rosy with blushes. "No, it's I that have, Eva,"
she said. "I don't know how anybody so good and wise and kind could
take a fancy to poor silly little me!"

At that Lucilla ran to the bed, threw her arms about her sister, and
showered kisses upon her lips and cheeks. "You dear, dear thing! you
are neither poor nor silly," she said. "I think the only wonder is that
all the men don't fall head over ears in love with you. They certainly
would if they had good sense, taste, and discernment."

At that Grace indulged in a peal of low, soft laughter. "You funny
girl!" she said. "I am glad indeed that they are not so silly, for
what in the world could I do with so many lovers? One is quite a
plentiful supply for me."

"That's right, Gracie," exclaimed Evelyn. "I'm sure one such as mine
should be quite enough for anybody."

"Well, I'm not going to say 'Uncle Harold' any more," laughed Lucilla.

"No, he doesn't want either of us to," said Grace. "But now I suppose
both he and papa would say I must try to go at once to sleep."

"Yes; so I'll stop hugging and kissing you, and be quiet as a mouse,
getting ready for bed, so as not to keep you awake," said Lucilla,
giving her a final loving embrace, then gliding away from the bed to
the toilet table.

"Do you think Max will like it?" asked Evelyn, in an undertone.

"Yes, I do. He and Harold have always been good friends. But as papa
says, it will make an unpleasant mixture of relationships. He will be
brother-in-law to Grace besides being her own father," she added, with
a slight laugh; "yet I know very well she will always remember that he
is her father--her dearly loved and honored father."

"I am certain of it," said Evelyn; "and that she would never make the
match without her father's knowledge and consent."

"No, indeed!" responded Lucilla, turning a loving look upon the now
sleeping Grace.

Lucilla had scarcely left her father on the porch when Violet joined
him there.

"I thought it possible, Levis, that you might not object to your wife's
company in your walk here," she said in a lively tone, and slipping her
hand into his arm.

"Object, my darling, light of my eyes and joy of my heart!" he said in
a loving, mirthful tone, bending down to kiss the sweet lips. "Yours is
the sweetest companionship I know of. I should be glad to think mine
was as delightful to you."

"As I don't know how to measure either one, I can only say that it is
the most delightful of all in the world to me," she returned with a
happy laugh. Then in a somewhat graver tone, "Oh, my dear husband, you
don't know how dearly I and all your children love you! Neither Elsie
nor Ned is ever willing to go to bed without your fatherly good-night
caresses, and they always bewail the necessity for doing that when you
are away from home."

"Probably not regretting it more than their father does," he said.
"Yes, the love of my children is a highly esteemed blessing to me,
and, unfortunately, I cannot help feeling it something of a grief and
disappointment when I learn that their tenderest affection has been
transferred to another."

"Ah, you are thinking of Grace and Harold. But be comforted, my dear; I
am certain that Grace does not love her father less because Harold has
won a place in her heart. I do not love my dear mother any the less for
loving you, my dear husband, or you any the less for loving her."

"I am glad to hear it, my darling," he said, tenderly pressing the hand
she had laid in his.

"And surely we cannot blame my brother and your daughter for loving
each other when they are both so worthy of affection that no one who
knows them can help giving it to them."

"You are a special pleader, my dear," he said with a smile; "and they
hardly need one with me, for I am fond of them both--particularly of my
frail young daughter."

"Ah, and does not that cause you to rejoice that she loves, and is
beloved by, a good and successful physician?"

"That is a cause for thankfulness, my dear," he returned pleasantly.
"But shall we not go in now and retire to rest? It is growing late."

"Yes, if you have finished your evening promenade; I don't want to rob
you of that."

"I think I have taken sufficient exercise, and now prefer rest and
sleep," he answered laughingly, as he drew her on toward the doorway.

As Lucilla came tripping down the stairway the next morning, Harold was
passing through the lower hall.

"Good-morning, Lu," he said, looking up at her.

"Good-morning, Dr. Travilla," she returned demurely.

"What!" he exclaimed, "what's that you are calling me?"

"Dr. Travilla. That's your name, isn't it?"

"Yes--to strangers and people not related to me; but--you called me
'uncle' yesterday."

"But you're not my uncle, and it seems you intend to become my
brother-in-law, so----"

"So Harold without the 'uncle' would be the most appropriate name,
wouldn't it?"

"Perhaps so, if--if you won't think it disrespectful."

"Not a bit of it. Call me Harold, or I'll be very apt to call you Mrs.
Dinsmore one of these days."

They ended with a laugh and cordial handshaking, just as the captain
appeared in the outer doorway. Then they joined him in a stroll about
the grounds.

"There is a dark cloud in the east," remarked Lucilla, in a regretful
tone; "we are likely to have a rainy day, are we not, papa?"

"Yes," he said, "but it need not necessarily be an unpleasant one. We
may find plenty of indoor employment and recreations."

"Yes," said Harold, "there have been many pleasant rainy days in my
past experiences. And they are not so bad for a strong, healthy man,
even if he must go out in the rain."

"And when gardens and fields are needing rain, we long and pray for
it," added Lucilla.

"How is Grace this morning?" asked Harold.

"She was still sleeping when I left the room," replied Lucilla; "but
probably she is up and ready for the call to breakfast by this time."

"And there it is," said the captain, as the sound of the ringing of a
hand-bell came from the house; "so let us go in and not keep the others
waiting."

They met Violet and Grace in the hall as they entered, and it was
pretty to see the latter's blush and smile as Harold greeted her.

The clouds were increasing and growing darker, and before they left the
table the rain had begun to fall. So they talked of indoor occupations
and amusements.

"We might have a little fun, if everybody's willing," remarked Ned
Raymond, giving Mr. Lilburn a significant look and smile.

"Yes; little boys--big ones too--can generally get up some fun among
themselves when they try," was Cousin Ronald's answering remark,
without the slightest indication that he took Ned's hint.

"And I know Cousin Ronald is very kind about helping in that," returned
Ned insinuatingly.

"Yes, he is fond of giving pleasure to his young friends," remarked
Mrs. Lilburn, with a loving smile up into her husband's face. "I think,
Ned, he will help you to some before the day is over."

They were on the porch, for there was no wind at the moment to drive
the rain in upon them, and it was cooler there than within doors. As
Annis finished speaking there was a sudden cry of distress, seemingly
coming from the river just below. "Help! help! I shall drown! nobody
will help me!"

It was a man's voice and there was a foreign accent in the tones.
It made quite a stir in the little assembly on the porch, the lads
exclaiming: "Oh, the poor fellow! Can't we help him, Grandma Elsie?
Surely the men on the _Dolphin_ will do what they can!" But hardly were
the words spoken when another voice called out in reply to the first:

"Hould on there, me jewel, an' I'll give ye a lift. I'm the b'ye that
kin do it."

"Oh, I hope he will get him out!" cried Ned, in great excitement.
"Papa, you'll let them take him on board the yacht, won't you?"

"Certainly, if he wishes to be taken there," replied the captain, with
a smiling glance at Cousin Ronald.

Just then the second voice called out, "Here he is--the half drownded
Frenchman; an' now will the likes of yees aboord that craft take 'im in
an' dry 'im off?"

"Of course; that's exactly what the captain would do if he were here,"
answered a third voice, which sounded exactly like that of the man at
present in charge of the yacht.

"Oh, I'm glad he didn't drown!" exclaimed Elsie Raymond, with a sigh of
relief.

"I presume such people don't often drown, Elsie dear," laughed her
mother.

"Oh, mamma, I often hear of people drowning," said the little girl.
"And, Uncle Harold, don't they need a doctor when they are nearly
drowned?"

"They are very apt to," he replied with a slight laugh. "Do you want me
to go down now and see about that man?"

"If you could, without getting wet," she answered hesitatingly.

"Suppose I go," said her Uncle Herbert; "I'm pretty well now, and am
perhaps almost as skilful a physician as my older brother."

But now the captain interposed.

"I can't have either of my young brothers expose himself to this
rain, for the men on the yacht are quite competent to deal with that
Frenchman's case."

"I should say so indeed," said Mr. Lilburn gravely, "for it is not
likely that he was in the water many minutes. So, my wee bonny bairnie
Elsie, dinna fash yersel' ony mair aboot him," he concluded, with an
affectionate look and smile into the face of the little girl.

"Oh, Cousin Ronald, did you do it all?" exclaimed Ned. "Dear me, how
stupid I am! I might have known it was you."

"I doubt if you really know it yet, laddie," laughed the old gentleman.

Ned turned to his father. "Papa, may I take an umbrella and just run
down to the _Dolphin_ for a few minutes to ask about it?"

"It is not worth while," replied the captain; "I am very sure you would
make no discoveries."

"Then it was you, Cousin Ronald, wasn't it, now? Please own up,"
exclaimed Ned, with a laughing look into the old gentleman's face.

"Folk shouldna find fault with what they've asked for," was the old
gentleman's non-committal rejoinder.

"Oh, no, sir! no indeed! but I was not meaning to find fault," laughed
Ned; "I think it was good fun, and hope you will give us more of it."

Just as he pronounced the last word a fierce bark, seemingly that of a
very large dog, followed instantly by a scream as if a woman were in
pain and terror, startled them all, and there were outcries of affright
from the children, while several of the grown people started to their
feet and looked anxiously in the direction of the sounds, which had
seemed to come from the vicinity of the porch, but a little farther
toward the rear of the house.

Another bark from the dog, then a woman's voice in tones of wild
affright, "Oh, somebody help, help! this dog will tear me to pieces."

Mr. Leland and Walter Travilla stepped quickly to the end of the porch
nearest the sounds and looked around the corner of the house, but
instantly reported that neither woman nor dog was to be seen.

"Oh, another sell from Cousin Ronald!" laughed Ned. "Oh, there it is
again!" for just then there was a sound as of a loud knock at a side
door, and a man's coarse voice thundering, "Let me in oot o' this rain,
ye slowgoing, good-for-naught biddies. Let me in, I say, and be quick
about it."

A woman's scream followed instantly, "Oh, captain, or some o' you
gentlemen, come here quick and save us from this drunken rascal."

Some of those on the porch were a little startled for an instant, but
a laugh quickly followed, and the fun went on for some minutes--bees,
mice, chickens, and puppies being heard, but not seen or felt.

But the rainfall was growing heavier, and at length Harold suggested
that it might be well for Grace, if not for all, to go within doors to
escape the dampness.

Nearly all at once complied with the suggestion, and Mrs. Travilla,
inviting Grace to a seat by her side, said low and tenderly:

"Harold gave me a piece of news last night that has made me very happy.
I hope one of these days to number you among my dear daughters, and
shall feel most happy in doing so."

"Oh, Grandma Elsie, it is so kind in you to say that!" returned Grace
tremulously, but blushing with pleasure as she spoke; "it will be very
sweet to have you for my mother, for I have loved you dearly ever since
I first saw you."

At that moment Walter came and took a seat on the other side of her.

"Oh, Gracie," he said in an undertone, "I am so glad of Harold's
news--that I am to have you for a sister at some future day. I'll try
to be a good brother to you."

"And I certainly intend to do my best to be a good sister to you,
Walter," she answered in the same low tone, and with a vivid blush and
one of her sweetest smiles.

"Thanks," he said. "I wish the wedding was to take place directly;
some time this fall, at least. Couldn't we coax your father to allow
it?"

She laughed and shook her head. "Papa would never allow it, and
I--don't believe I could consent myself. Really, the very thought of
doing anything so important so suddenly more than half frightens me."

"Harold is a mild, good-natured kind of fellow; you needn't be afraid
of him," laughed Walter.

"No, not of him exactly," returned Grace, laughing a little also and
blushing quite a good deal, "but of--of the sudden change in my way of
life--leaving my father and all the rest of my family."

But there the talk between them ended for the time, for Harold's near
relatives came up, one after another, to tell Grace how welcome a new
member of their near connection she would be. Chester Dinsmore was
the only one who expressed any regret, and that not to Grace, but to
Lucilla.

"I am sorry for my brother Frank," he said. "He has been desperately
in love with her, but your father would not let him speak. And I
thought it would be pleasant to be so closely and doubly connected--two
sisters marrying brothers."

"I am sorry, since it disappoints you," said Lucilla. "But I hope Frank
will soon get over his disappointment and find some one who will suit
him still better. Besides, Grace being so delicate, it is well for her
to get into the hands of a good physician."

"True enough," returned Chester, "and we may as well look at it in that
way, for there is no use in fretting over what can't be helped."

September had come; the summer heat was over and business called the
gentlemen of our party to their more southern homes. Preparations
began, and one little company after another departed, leaving the rest
feeling somewhat lonely and dull without them. The captain and his
family, Grandma Elsie, Evelyn, and Mr. and Mrs. Lilburn were to go in
the yacht, which carried them away a few days later--down the Hudson
River and down the Atlantic coast to the seaport near their Southern
homes.

A joyous welcome from lovers, relatives, and friends awaited them
there. Then followed the fall, winter, and early spring months, filled
up and made delightful by the accustomed round of study, needlework,
social calls, and visits, interspersed with religious duties and
charitable work, etc.

Evelyn was often at Woodburn, and she and Lucilla made many pretty
things for the adornment of their future homes. The weddings were
to be postponed till Max came home, and to their disappointment
that home-coming was deferred month after month till Chester grew
exceedingly weary of waiting. Letters were received occasionally from
Max, but he knew no more than they when he would be able to rejoin them
and claim his bonny bride. The waiting was doubtless harder for him
than for Chester or either of the girls. They indeed seemed to take it
quietly and contentedly.

Grace was very happy with her lover close at hand and often visiting
her professionally or otherwise. And with her this state of things
seemed to be conducive to health; she grew rosier, stronger, gayer, and
more lively in her speech and manner than she had ever been before. So
great a joy was it to her father to perceive the change that he soon
fully forgave Harold for seeking her affection while she was still so
young and feeble. Harold seemed to be waiting very patiently, and when
Chester grumbled at his long enforced wait, Lucilla sometimes playfully
called his attention to the good example set him by Harold.

"But there isn't the same need of waiting in our case," he would reply,
"for, I am thankful to say, you are as healthy a girl as any that I
know of."

"Yes; but think of the disappointment to Max and Eva if we shouldn't
wait for them, when we can be together almost as much as if we were
married, and all the time doing things to make our new home as lovely
as possible."

The continuance of war in the Philippines, a cause of more or less
regret to everybody, was doubly so to Max's friends and relatives,
because it delayed his return month after month. They missed him
particularly when Christmas time came and he was not there to share
in the pleasant exchange of gifts and greetings. They had sent gifts
to him, hoping they would reach him in good season, and as usual they
bestowed them upon each other. For weeks beforehand Violet had spent a
good deal of time in her studio, and the result was a handsome portrait
of the captain for each of his older daughters. They were highly
pleased with them, saying that nothing else could have given them so
much pleasure. The captain's gifts to them and Violet were valuable
books and some fine paintings for their walls.

"You see, Chester," Lucilla said, when exhibiting hers to him, "that we
are getting more and more for the adornment of our home while we wait
for it."

"Adornment which could go on just as well if we were already in it," he
returned, with a rather rueful laugh.

"Well, for your consolation please remember that it is near enough to
be looked at every day," replied Lucilla, in a sprightly tone. "And see
here what your _fiancee_ has prepared for you," drawing a small package
from her pocket as she spoke.

"Thanks! Some of her own work, I hope," he said, with a gratified look
and smile.

"Yes, I would have you enjoy as much of my work as possible."

He had it opened now, and found it a beaded purse.

"Oh, how handsome!" he cried. "Many, many thanks, dearest! I have no
need of a reminder of you, but if I had, this would be one every time I
looked at it. Now here is my gift to you," taking in his turn a little
package from his pocket and putting it in her hand. It was a miniature
of himself--a fine likeness--attached to a beautiful gold chain.

"Oh, it is excellent, and nothing could have pleased me better!" she
exclaimed, as she examined it.

Harold had the same sort of gift for Grace, and she had embroidered for
him a set of fine linen cambric handkerchiefs, with which he seemed
greatly pleased.

Every member of that family, and each of the others in the connection,
had prepared some gift of more or less value for each of the others,
for their servants and dependents, and for the neighbors poor enough to
need assistance from those able to give it.

As usual there was a grand dinner at Ion, to which all the connection
were invited; and pretty much the same thing was repeated at Woodburn
on New Year's day. Max was missed and talked of at both gatherings,
always being mentioned as one of whom they were proud and fond, while
to Evelyn and the Woodburn family his absence detracted much from the
enjoyment of the festivities. Yet they comforted themselves with the
hope that the trouble in the Philippines would soon be over, and he
allowed to return to his home and dear ones, now so anxious to see him,
and to claim his promised wife.




CHAPTER XIV.


The winter passed away without any untoward event to our friends at
Woodburn, Ion, Fairview, and the vicinity; March and April succeeded,
then early in May came the news that Admiral Watson was ordered to
proceed to Manila and relieve Admiral Dewey. He sailed from San
Francisco on the 16th. It was not until late in June that he reached
his destination, but Admiral Dewey had left there for Hong-Kong on the
23d of May, and placed the _Olympia_ in dry-dock for the ten days he
thought best to stay at that point in order to recruit his own health
and that of his men. He left Hong-Kong on June 6, and reached Singapore
June 11. On the 23d he was at Colombo, on the island of Ceylon. He
touched at various points on his homeward route--Port Said, Trieste,
Naples, Leghorn--at every place being received with highest honors. On
August 28 he was in the neighborhood of Nice and Villefranche, enjoying
the delightful climate and beautiful scenery of that part of the world.
On the 4th of September he reached Gibraltar. His vessel gave the usual
salute, heartily acknowledged by the garrison, and the admiral was
warmly welcomed by its commander-in-chief, General Biddulph. He seems
to have stayed there six days, as it was on the 10th he sailed for
New York by way of the Azores. On Tuesday morning, September 26, he
anchored inside Sandy Hook--three days earlier than he was expected.

A reception committee in New York City had been busily making ready to
give him a grand "Welcome Home," which they intended should eclipse in
gorgeous pageantry everything that had preceded it in the way of public
demonstration. They had written to Admiral Dewey to know when he would
arrive in order that they might fix a date for the grand display, and
he had written them from Leghorn, more than a month before: "I shall,
without fail, reach the Lower Bay on Friday, September 29."

The glad news of his arrival quickly spread by telegraph, and cannon
were fired and bells rung in many cities throughout the country.
The New York Reception Committee hastened to welcome him as soon as
they knew of the arrival of the _Olympia_. Rear-Admirals Philip and
Sampson came also; but first of all came Sir Thomas Lipton, the British
challenger for the cup which has been so long in our possession, his
vessel lying near where the _Olympia_ anchored.

But presently another yacht came steaming rapidly down the river,
and Max recognized it with an exclamation of delight, for it was the
_Dolphin_, and in a few minutes more Captain Raymond was on the deck
of the _Olympia_, grasping his son's hand, while his eyes shone with
fatherly pride and affection.

"My boy, my dear boy!" he said, in tones tremulous with emotion; "thank
God that we are permitted to meet again."

"Father, my dear, dear father, how I have longed for this meeting with
you!" was Max's answering exclamation. "Oh, tell me, are all our dear
ones alive and well?"

"Yes, my son, and waiting yonder in the yacht for you. Surely the
admiral will allow you to go aboard her with me for a little visit."

The admiral and the captain were not strangers to each other. A cordial
greeting passed between them, they chatted as old friends for a few
minutes, then Captain Raymond carried his son off to the _Dolphin_,
where he was received most joyfully, and exchanged loving embraces with
his affianced, his sisters, "Mamma Vi," "Grandma Elsie," and little
brother.

They told him they had spent the greater part of the summer at Crag
Cottage--which they still considered their temporary home--but for the
present were on board the yacht, as the best place from which to view
the naval welcome to Admiral Dewey.

Time flew fast in the glad mutual intercourse they had lacked for so
many months. Max had many questions to ask in regard to friends and
relatives and all that had been going on in the neighborhood of his
home and theirs. But his short leave had soon expired, and his father
conveyed him back to the _Olympia_ and left him there with the warmly
expressed hope that they would soon be able to be together constantly
for a time.

At the naval anchorage at Tompkinsville a fleet was gathered to welcome
Dewey's return, and his vessel steamed thither on Wednesday--the day
after her arrival at Sandy Hook. As she swept up the bay the salute due
to an Admiral of the United States Navy rang out over the harbor from
the forts and the assembled fleet for the first time in many years.
There were also the music of marine bands, the pealing of naval bugles,
the shrill whistles of numerous small craft, the cheering of excursion
parties, and the rapid dash of the steam launches, all combining to
make the scene a very lively one.

During that day and the next the admiral and his officers had little
rest, for their time was devoted to receiving the hurried visits of
State and city officials, of naval and military officers, and of
thousands of private citizens. One of the calls was that of a committee
from Washington, to tell Dewey of the arrangements for his reception
and the sword presentation there, and of an invitation to dine with
President McKinley on October 3d.

On Thursday, Captain Lamberton of the _Olympia_ had a pleasant
task--that of pinning upon the breast of each man of Dewey's fleet who
had taken part in the fight at Manila the bronze medal of honor voted
him by Congress. That was followed by the presentation to Admiral Dewey
of the first American admiral's flag ever flung to the breeze, the flag
first hoisted to the mast-head of Farragut's flagship, the _Hartford_,
before New Orleans.

Another thing very pleasing to the admiral was the receipt of an order
from Washington granting special permission to the thirty-four Chinamen
on board of the _Olympia_ who had taken part in the battle at Manila
to land and have a share in the great parade. The city was a blaze of
flags and bunting by day, and of electric lights by night. On the
Brooklyn Bridge over eight thousand electric bulbs were arranged to
form the words "Welcome Dewey"; powerful searchlights flashed from
the towers over city and bay, and red fire burned along shores on the
vessels at night.

The naval parade on Friday was the most magnificent display of the
kind ever seen in this country. The _Olympia_ led the way, followed by
battleships, cruisers, revenue cutters, torpedo boats, and innumerable
craft of all descriptions. Over three million people lined the river
banks to see the magnificent pageant. At Riverside--where Grant is
buried--a salute was fired in his honor. Two beautiful allegorical
floats were anchored there, representing "Victory" and "Peace."
Here the _Olympia_ and her consorts dropped anchor, while the long
fleet passed in review. In the evening there was a fine electric and
pyrotechnic display throughout the city and along the river.

The next day, Saturday, September 30, came the land parade, which was
as interesting as had been the naval one. At five o'clock the admiral
was up, and personally inspected his men. A committee of gentlemen
escorted him to the City Hall, where he was met by Admiral Schley,
Captain Walker, Captain Coghlan, Captain Dyer, Governor Roosevelt, and
others who had won distinction in the war. It was observed that he
greeted Schley with marked cordiality. From there the party went to a
stand in front of the Hall, and Dewey was presented by Mayor Van Wyck,
on behalf of the City of New York, with a handsome and costly loving
cup of fine gold.

The admiral and his party then hastened to the pier to take the boat
to Grant's tomb, where the procession formed. It was a great one,
and every step of the way was an ovation. First came Sousa's immense
band of musicians, then the sailor boys of Manila, the bluejackets of
Santiago, and the boys from fifteen States, who had taken part in the
Spanish-American war. The immense crowds along the sidewalks cheered
them lustily; none more so than the "Fighting Tenth" of Pennsylvania.

But the part of the procession which attracted the most attention was
the carriage drawn by four beautiful bay horses in which rode Admiral
Dewey and Mayor Van Wyck. Dewey rode with uncovered head bowing right
and left until he reached the reviewing stand. The triumphal arch with
its marble-like colonnade made a beautiful picture. On its top was a
heroic figure of Farragut--who gave Dewey his first lesson in sailing
over hidden mines and destructive torpedoes--seeming to look down
upon his brave and successful pupil with admiration and approval. The
celebration was a great success, showing how heartily the American
people appreciated their gallant hero. The next day, being the Sabbath,
was spent in rest and comparative quiet. On Monday, October 2, Dewey
went by rail from New York to Washington, his journey thither proving
a continual ovation. It was in the early evening he reached that city,
and as the train neared the station a battery boomed out the admiral's
salute, announcing his arrival to the waiting multitudes. The Third
Cavalry was there to receive him, and he was driven to the White House
to pay his respects to the Chief of the Nation. He was warmly welcomed
by the President and his Cabinet and many naval officers.

After that the entire party went to review the civic parade which had
been planned in honor of the admiral.

The next day Admiral Dewey was presented with the sword voted him by
Congress. A vast concourse of people assembled to witness the imposing
and impressive ceremony, which took place in front of the Capitol,
in the presence of the President and his Cabinet and the principal
officers of the several departments of the government. General Miles
was grand marshal of the escort, attended by a large staff of officers
of the army and navy, all in full dress uniform and superbly mounted.

Just as the meridian gun sounded high noon, Admiral Dewey, leaning upon
the President's arm, walked upon the platform. Following them were
judges of the Supreme Court, governors of States, senators, and members
of Congress, and the general officers of the army and navy.

Congress had directed that the sword should be presented by the
Secretary of the Navy, and he did so in most appropriate and eloquent
language.

"No captain," he said, "ever faced a more crucial test than when, that
morning, bearing the fate and the honor of your country in your hand,
thousands of miles from home, with every foreign port in the world shut
to you, nothing between you and annihilation but the thin sheathing
of your ships, your cannon, and your devoted officers and men, you
moved upon the enemy's batteries on shore and on sea with unflinching
faith and nerve, and before the sun was halfway up in the heavens had
silenced the guns of the foe, sunk the hostile fleet, demonstrated the
supremacy of the American sea power, and transferred to the United
States an entire of the islands of the Pacific."

In closing his speech the Secretary handed the sword to the President
as Commander-in Chief of the Army and Navy, and the President,
speaking a few appropriate words as he did so, handed it to the
admiral, who took it, saving:

"I thank you, Mr. President, for this great honor you have conferred
upon me. I thank the Congress for what it has done. I thank the
Secretary of the Navy for his gracious words. I thank my country for
this beautiful gift, which shall be an heirloom in my family forever,
as an evidence that republics are not ungrateful. And I thank you, Mr.
Chairman and gentlemen of the committee, for the gracious, kindly, and
cordial welcome which you have given me to my home."




CHAPTER XV.


It was a lovely evening, and a pleasant company had gathered upon the
deck of the _Dolphin_, Captain Raymond's yacht, lying in New York
harbor; there were Mrs. Travilla, or Grandma Elsie, as some of her
loved ones called her, Captain Raymond himself, his wife and children,
older and younger, Evelyn Leland, Dr. Harold Travilla, and Chester
Dinsmore. They were scattered in groups--the three pairs of lovers in
one, and conversing in low, earnest tones, now and then varied by a
ripple of laughter.

"I should like it very, very much," said Eva, "but doubt if the captain
proves willing."

"Doubtless if he consulted only his own inclination he would not
consent," said Max; "but father is anything else but selfish, and loves
you so dearly, Eva, that I by no means despair of persuading him to
give you your wish in regard to this."

"I have hardly a doubt of that," said Lucilla, "and I am highly in
favor of the plan, though I was not at first."

"It suits me exactly," remarked Chester, in a gleeful tone. "I greatly
like the idea of taking my wife home with me."

"Something that more than one of us would be glad to do," sighed
Harold, squeezing affectionately a little hand of which he had taken
possession a moment before.

"Never mind, old fellow, your turn will come one of these days, I
hope," said Chester. "Perhaps when you two have waited as long as Lu
and I have now."

"Ah, I'm afraid we have even a longer wait than that before us,"
returned Harold.

"But we can see each other every day--be together a good deal of the
time," remarked Grace, in low, soothing tones.

"Well, let us have the thing settled, by hearing what father has to
say about it," said Max, for at that moment the captain might be seen
approaching their group.

"About what, my son?" he asked, as he took a vacant seat close at
hand, for he had overheard the last few words.

"As to the place where our nuptials should be celebrated, sir,"
returned Max, with a little, happy laugh.

"Where else but in your homes?" asked his father. "I should like to
have both my children married in my house, but Eva and you, I suppose,
would prefer to have yours and hers in her home--Fairview."

"No, sir," said Evelyn, "my very strong wish is to have mine celebrated
in my own old home--the house my father built and owned--Crag Cottage."

"Ah, my dear child, that is natural!" returned the captain in a tone of
mingled surprise and acquiescence, "and I should be loath to stand in
the way of such a wish. But I thought you and Lucilla were planning to
have but one ceremony for the two couples of you?"

"Yes, sir; and since talking it over we have concluded that Crag
Cottage would be a suitable place for it, if you do not object."

"It seems to me that there are reasons both for and against it,"
he said thoughtfully, "but since you four are the ones most nearly
concerned, I think it will be only right and kind to let you decide the
question among yourselves. But it is growing late in the season, and if
the ceremony is to be performed here at the North, it should take place
quite soon. Can you make needed preparations in a few days?"

"I think we can," both girls answered to that question.

"Very well, then, so far as I am concerned you shall do just as you
please. For that matter, you are all of legal age to do so whether you
have my permission or not."

At that all four instantly disclaimed any intention or desire to go
contrary to his wishes, and Eva added:

"I shall of course write at once to my uncle and aunt asking their
consent and approval; for, though of legal age, I owe to them more than
that for the great kindness they have shown me ever since the death of
my dear father."

"That is a right feeling you have toward them," remarked Captain
Raymond, in a tone of commendation, "but I have no idea that they will
oppose your wishes in the least in this matter."

"No, I am almost sure they will not," she said; "but I shall write them
to-night, and hope for a prompt reply. There will be some necessary
shopping to do, and New York City will be the best place for that."

"Decidedly," assented the captain, "and you could have no better
helpers in that than my wife and her mother."

"And yourself, papa," laughed Lucilla.

"As purse-bearer?" he asked, with a smile. "I shall certainly be that,
and ready to exercise my taste as regards the choice of the goods."

"And I may be the housekeeper here on the _Dolphin_ while you are away
on your pleasant errands, I suppose," said Grace.

"Yes, if you like, daughter," returned the captain; and Harold added,
"And I as your assistant, if you are willing to make use of me."

"To see to it that she does not overwork herself," said the captain.

"And what may Chester and I be allowed to do?" queried Max.

"To keep them company,--if they desire it,--manage the vessel, and keep
the children out of mischief, especially from falling overboard, and
entertained in harmless ways."

"I think we can do all that," said Max; "but how long do you expect
to be absent, father? Are we to lie still in the harbor here till you
return?"

"Just as you please," said his father. "If you choose to steam along
the shores, out into the ocean or up the river, you have full liberty
to do so. All I ask is that you take good care of the children and the
vessel."

"Well, sir, I think that with Chester's and Harold's help I can engage
to do all that," laughed Max. "Don't you think so, lads?" turning first
to one, then to the other of the young men.

Both returned an affirmative reply, then they all joined the group of
older ladies, told of their plans and purposes, and asked for advice,
and whether the assistance they wanted in their shopping might be
confidently expected.

At first both ladies were surprised that the young people should think
of having their weddings before returning home, but, after a little
discussion, highly approved of the plan, and expressed themselves
as willing as possible to assist in the shopping and all needful
preparations. Then they discussed the question what it would be needful
or advisable to purchase, what dresses should be made and where the
work could be done in the speediest and most approved manner, as it
was wisest and best to consider and decide upon these matters before
setting out to do their errands.

Evelyn wrote her letter to her uncle and aunt before retiring for
the night, and had it posted early the next morning. Shortly after
breakfast the shopping party went into the city on their pleasant
errand, and a little later the _Dolphin_ weighed anchor and steamed out
of harbor, going seaward.

The party on its deck was a cheerful, even merry one, Max and Chester
rejoicing in the near approach of their long looked-for nuptials;
Harold happy in having full possession for the time of his affianced,
and Elsie and Ned Raymond in gay, youthful spirits, for they loved to
be on the yacht and with Brother Max, Uncle Harold, and also Chester,
with whom they had become almost as free and affectionate as if he were
an own brother.

"Where are we going now, Brother Max?" asked Ned.

"I think we will put it to vote," replied Max. "My idea is that it
might be very pleasant to steam along near the shore of the Sound on
one side going out, and on the other returning; so getting a view of
the country on both. Grace, as you are the only lady present, I think
you should have the first vote. Shall we do as I have proposed, or
something different?"

"It sounds very pleasant, Max," replied Grace, "but I don't wish to
decide the question, for I shall enjoy going anywhere in the _Dolphin_,
and with such pleasant company."

"Rather non-committal," laughed Max. "Well, Chester and Harold, what do
you say?"

Both answered that they approved his plan, and would like nothing
better, and Elsie and Ned exclaimed with enthusiasm that _they_ would
like nothing better.

"A unanimous vote in favor," commented Max, "so the thing is settled."

"And we can settle to something," remarked Elsie, in a tone of
satisfaction; "Uncle Harold, don't you want to tell us about some of
the poor wounded or sick fellows you attended in Cuba?"

"I fear I have not much to tell of them--seeing I have already told so
much--except that they were wonderfully brave and patient, full of love
for their country and compassion for the downtrodden, inhumanly treated
Cubans," replied Dr. Travilla.

"I think our soldiers were very brave, patient, and uncomplaining,"
said Elsie. "I am very proud of them, especially because they didn't do
cruel deeds such as I have read of soldiers of other nations doing in
time of war."

"Yes, I think they deserved that commendation," said Harold. "And the
attempt of Hobson and his men to block the entrance to Santiago harbor
by sinking the _Merrimac_ there was brave as brave could be. We have
indeed cause to be proud of our soldiers."

"And so we are!" cried Ned enthusiastically, "and," turning toward his
brother, "just as proud of the brave fellows that were at Manila as of
those in Cuba."

"Thank you, young man," returned Max, with a bow and a smile. "We
certainly have every reason to believe that our doings there have been
appreciated by our kind countrymen."

"Brother Max, could you help feeling a little bit afraid when your ship
went into that long channel with its many forts and torpedoes?"

"I certainly cannot say that I was entirely free from fear,"
acknowledged Max; "but I had no desire to escape the danger by giving
up my part in the coming fight, for I felt that we were on the right
side of it--undertaken for the oppressed--and that my Heavenly Father
was able to protect me, and all of us."

"And he did," exclaimed Elsie, in joyful tones; "it was just wonderful
how you all escaped being killed, and only a few were slightly wounded."

"It was indeed," assented Max, "and a great cause for thankfulness."

"Do you like Admiral Dewey, Brother Max?" asked Ned.

"Yes, yes indeed!" was the earnest, smiling reply. "He is determined
with his men, but very kind-hearted. The man who has been guilty of a
fault may be pretty sure of pardon if he confesses it, but not if he
tells a falsehood to escape his deserts. Lying is a thing which Dewey
utterly detests."

"I wish I could get acquainted with him," said Elsie; "though I suppose
he wouldn't like to be bothered with talking to a little girl of my
age."

"I don't know about that," laughed Max; "he is said to be very fond of
children."

"Has he any of his own?" she asked, with a look of interest.

"One son; but he is grown up and is in business."

"Oh, do tell me what sort of folks the Filipinos are?"

"I will do my best," replied Max. "The men are not tall, but have good
forms and well-shaped heads. Their looks are boyish, and they seem
never to grow old. They have black, glossy hair that seldom grows gray.
The women are graceful and rather good-looking. They usually wear
their hair loose, and no hat or bonnet on their heads. Their dress
is a satin skirt handsomely embroidered, and a waist of pina cloth,
having flowing sleeves. They wear a scarf of the finest quality, and
beautifully embroidered, about their neck and shoulders. An American
lady there told me that they often spend years on the embroidery of a
single garment, and that she and others of our ladies had gone into
raptures over that work, but could seldom secure a specimen. They are
very cleanly people--bathe a great deal, and keep their clothing
very clean; their houses also are kept clean, neat, and tidy. The
women sew, spin, weave, and gather thatch to keep the hut in repair.
They also catch fish for the family to eat, and are skilful at that
business. They carry burdens on their heads, and that makes them
erect and graceful. A good many of both Spaniards and Chinamen have
married Filipino women, and the children, called Mestizoes, make good
citizens, seeming to inherit the patient industry of the Chinese
father and the gentle disposition and dignified self-possession of the
Filipino mother. But now I think I have done my share of talking for
the present, and must leave the rest of you to do yours while I see if
all is going right with our vessel," added Max, rising and leaving the
group as he spoke.

"Uncle Harold, do you know the captain they call 'Fighting Bob'?" asked
Ned.

"Slightly," returned his uncle, "and a brave, noble man he is--a naval
officer to be proud of; perfectly fearless and cool in battle, kind
and helpful to conquered foes. He was commander of the _Iowa_, to which
the Spanish ship _Vizcaya_ surrendered. Her captain, in a speech in
Spain, had said that he would tow back the _Iowa_ to his king; but he
was not able to do so. The _Iowa_ drove shell after shell into his
vessel, till she was a mass of flames, and struck her flag.

"Then 'Fighting Bob' sent out his boats to rescue the prisoners on the
ship and in the water, and took back to the _Iowa_ several officers
and two hundred and forty men, her captain, Eulate, among them. It is
said to have been a horrible scene--so many dead and wounded men, and
Captain Eulate, limping, and with his head bound up. He saluted as he
stepped upon the deck of the _Iowa_, and so did Captain Evans.

"'You are Captain Evans? This is the _Iowa_?' asked Captain Eulate.
'Yes,' said Captain Evans, and took Eulate's hand in both of his,
shaking it warmly. Eulate stepped back, unbuckled his sword, kissed it,
and with the most elegant grace, handed it, hilt forward, to Captain
Evans. But he refused to take it, turning the palm of his hand outward
and waving it back, at the same time shaking his head--a very emphatic
refusal.

"The Spaniards, officers and men, looked on in astonishment. Captain
Eulate pressed Captain Evans' hand, and the crew gave Eulate three
cheers, for he had fought well, and only gave up when his ship was in
flames and sinking.

"Just then a terrific explosion was heard on the _Vizcaya_, which was
only a short distance off, and a solid column of smoke went up nearly
four thousand feet, it is said, taking the form of a gigantic mushroom.
At that Captain Eulate turned around, pointing with one hand to his
ruined ship, with the other toward his officers and men, '_Veeski!
Veeski!_' he cried at the top of his voice, while tears rolled down his
cheeks. His men sprang toward him, and many of them kissed his hand. He
said in Spanish, 'My brave marines!' and looked away."

"That was a very interesting story, uncle," said Elsie, as Dr.
Travilla paused. "I hope there's more of it."

"Oh, yes, please go on, Uncle Harold," said Ned. "Our ships took all
the Spanish ones, didn't they?"

"Yes; the _Maria Teresa_ was now a wreck also, and the _Iowa_ went to
the relief of her drowning and burning men. Admiral Cervera was taken
prisoner and brought on board the _Iowa_. When he stepped aboard, with
his staff, Captain Evans stood with uncovered head, and the marine
guard presented arms. Captain Eulate stepped toward him, touched
his sword with his hand and pressed it to his breast, crying out in
Spanish, pointing toward Captain Evans, evidently extolling his bravery
and generosity. The admiral made a courtly bow to Captain Evans, and
shook hands with him. The rest of the Spanish officers kissed the hand
of the Spanish admiral four times, and embraced and kissed Captain
Eulate. The men of the crew, too, would now and then see a comrade whom
they had supposed dead, and they would fall to embracing and kissing."

"Did Captain Evans thank God for his victory, as Captain Philip did,
uncle?" asked Elsie.

"No; but when some one blamed him for not having done so, he said
that while preparations were being made for it he found that he was
surrounded by boats carrying dying and wounded prisoners, and others of
the crew of the _Vizcaya_, to the number of two hundred and fifty. 'To
leave these men to suffer for want of food and clothing, while I called
my men aft to offer prayers, was not my idea of either Christianity or
religion,' he wrote in reply. 'I preferred to clothe the naked, feed
the hungry, and succor the sick, and I am strongly of the opinion that
Almighty God has not put a black mark against me on account of it. I
do not know whether I shall stand with Captain Philip among the first
chosen in the hereafter, but I have this to say in conclusion, that
every drop of blood in my body on the afternoon of July 3d, was singing
thanks and praise to Almighty God for the victory we had won.'"

"They call Captain Evans 'Fighting Bob,' don't they, uncle?" asked Ned.

"Yes; but it is said that he does not like it, and insists that he is
no more of a fighter than very many of his brother officers. But it is
really used as an honor to one whom his countrymen admire. But probably
he will do no more fighting, as, by his own request, he has been
detached from the command of the _Iowa_, and made a member of the Board
of Inspection and Survey--a change he was entitled to, having already
served more than his term of sea duty."

"Oh, uncle!" said Elsie, in a tone of entreaty, "can't you tell us
something more about Captain Philip? I do like him so, because of his
being such a good Christian man."

"He is that," said Dr. Travilla emphatically, "and one of the bravest
and most modest of men. When asked for his photograph he replied that
he had never had one taken; and on being urgently invited to be present
at a reception to Lieutenant Hobson, given in New York, he shook his
head, saying the trial would be too much for him. But I dare say
his real reason was a fear that his presence might deprive the young
officer of some of the attention and honor due to him."

"Have you ever seen him, uncle?" asked Elsie.

"Yes, once, for a few minutes, and I have heard him described as
mild-mannered, full of fun, with gray mustache, a kindly face, and mild
blue eyes, and it is said that he is fond of his men as they are of
him. He said to some one, 'I have a stout ship and a crew of Americans.
So had the other captains. That was why we won.' He fairly earned his
promotion, first to the rank of commodore, then to that of admiral.

"Now you two have taken in a good deal of information; don't you think
it might be well for you to take some exercise in running about the
deck?" concluded Uncle Harold, in a kindly tone, to which Elsie and Ned
responded with a cheerful, "Yes, sir! Thank you for the stories," then
ran away to carry out his suggestions, Grace calling after them to be
very careful not to go into any dangerous place.

"We won't," Ned called back. "We want to live to go to that double
wedding."

"Yes, Ned," said Elsie, in a much lower tone, "and we want to buy some
handsome presents for the brides. I spoke to mamma about that, and she
said she and papa and grandma would give us our turn at the business of
shopping; maybe day after to-morrow, for they expect to come back to
the _Dolphin_ to-morrow evening, and if the weather is suitable we can
go into the city directly after breakfast the next morning."

"Oh, good!" cried Ned. "Won't it be fun? I hope papa has plenty
of money for us to spend, so that we can get something very
handsome--jewelry, perhaps. That will be the most suitable and
acceptable, I suppose."

"Probably," returned Elsie. "Grandma, papa, and mamma will be the ones
to decide."

"Of course," said her brother; "but they'll let us have some say about
it too."

Max and Chester were at the same moment standing together at some
little distance in a friendly discussion of a similar topic--what gifts
they should procure for their brides.

"Jewelry of some sort would, I suppose, be considered the most
appropriate," remarked Chester half inquiringly.

"That is my idea," returned Max. "I believe the majority of ladies can
hardly have too much of it--though I have never noticed Eva cared very
much about it. I think, however, that Lu does; I know that some years
ago she had a strong desire for more than father deemed best for her."

"Tastes differ," sagely remarked Chester, "and I wish to give her
whatever she would prefer."

"Certainly," said Max; "that is right and kind, and just my feeling in
regard to the gift to Eva."

"Well," said Chester, "fortunately we do not need to decide the
question until we see what the jewellers and other merchants have to
offer."

"Shall we go together to make our selections?" asked Max.

"I should like to do so, if it suits you; and to have your father
along--Cousins Elsie and Violet also, if they feel inclined to go."

"Yes, indeed!" said Max; "for they both have excellent taste and
judgment. I don't know any one whose opinion on the subject I should
consider more valuable."

"Nor do I," responded Chester. "We are very fortunate in our lady
friends, and I may well add in gentlemen also, Max--your father in
especial."

"Thank you," returned Max, with a smile of gratification; "I think
there is not a more perfect man and gentleman anywhere to be found; but
that may be because I am his son."

"Oh, no! not altogether, at any rate," said Chester; "for you are by no
means alone in your favorable opinion."

"No, I flatter myself that I am not. Ah! do you see how earnestly
Harold and Grace are talking together? I shouldn't wonder if they are
upon the very same subject we have just been discussing."

"Quite likely. It seems to be the most important subject for older and
younger of our party at present."

"Yes. By the way, Chester, we are hurrying matters so that we can
hardly hope or expect to have very many of our Southern relatives and
friends to witness the ceremony."

"No, I suppose we can't. But we might invite them to visit us in our
own house as soon after we get there as they please," laughed Chester.

"True enough!" exclaimed Max, looking highly pleased at the thought,
"and how delightful it would be to entertain them there."

"So I think, and you don't know how I have wanted a home for that, as
well as for my own private enjoyment."

"I have had some very severe attacks of homesickness since I left my
father's house for the Naval Academy, so that I think I can understand
your feelings," Max said, with a smile. "And I expect to be somewhat
envious of you and Lu some months hence, when I have to leave wife and
home to go--perhaps to the other side of the world."

"Yes, Max, when I think of that I am sorry for you, and for ourselves
that we must be so often deprived of your pleasant society."

They were steaming along within sight of the shore, and just at that
moment the children came running to ask Max some question about what
could be seen there. He listened and replied very kindly, Chester now
and then taking part in the talk.

The day and evening passed pleasantly to all on board; the children
retired at their accustomed early hour, Grace helping Elsie in
preparing for her couch, lest the dear little sister should miss Mamma
too sorely, and wet her pillow with tears. Ned considered himself
almost a man now, and quite fit to do without any attention in that
line. "I do miss Mamma," Elsie said, as she laid herself down in the
berth, "but it is very nice to share this stateroom with you for once,
Gracie dear."

"And I am very glad to have you do so," replied Grace; "for I shall
not miss Lu half so much with you in her place."

"It's nice and kind in you to say that," returned Elsie, with a loving
look and smile. "But don't feel as if you must come to bed as early as
I do, but go back and enjoy Brother Max, Uncle Harold, and Chester a
little longer, for I am sure they want you."

"Well, then I'll kiss you good-night, you darling little sister, and go
back to them for perhaps another hour," Grace said, accompanying her
words with a tender caress.

She found the gentlemen still on deck, where she had left them, and
they gave her no reason to doubt that her society was welcome to them.

An hour was spent in cheerful chat, and some singing of appropriate
songs and hymns, then they bade good-night, and all retired to their
staterooms, Max having first attended to all his duties as captain of
the vessel.

The night passed quietly, and the next morning all woke rested and
refreshed, ready to enjoy their breakfast, and after that the walks
and talks upon deck, varied by resting in steamer chairs while chatting
and gazing out upon the water and the land, out of sight of which
they seldom were. The weather was all that could be desired, and they
rejoiced in that fact for both themselves and their friends, the
shoppers.

The latter came on board soon after the yacht had come to anchor again
in New York harbor. Their bright, cheerful faces told at once of
success with what had been undertaken and of satisfaction with their
purchases, and their tongues speedily repeated the pleasant story
of beautiful silks, satins, laces and other trimmings, for in the
family circle they did not care to make a secret of their needful, or
desirable, preparations for the approaching ceremony.

All passed the night on the vessel, Violet remarking that one night at
the best of hotels was quite enough for her; she felt so much more at
home on their own delightful yacht. But shortly after breakfast the
children were taken into the city to select their bridal gifts, their
father and mother going along with them. Grace, in compliance with a
suggestion from her father, was quite willing to entrust the selection
of her gifts to him and Mamma, shopping being always wearisome work for
her.

Grandma Elsie, Evelyn, and Lucilla remained on the vessel, with Grace,
to take a good rest, while the young men went in search of their gifts
for the brides that were to be.

"How many dresses did you have fitted?" asked Grace.

"Two apiece," replied her sister; "our wedding gowns and one other for
each of us. The others were expressed home at once, to be made up by
our own dressmakers, who, as you know, have our measures, so that they
may be ready to wear by the time we return, or very soon after."

"A very good plan, I think," said Grace. "Eva, have you heard from your
uncle and aunt in reply to your note the other day?"

"Yes," Evelyn replied, with a smile, "and I am happy to say that they
highly approve of our plans and purposes--not bidding me beware of the
truth of the old saying, 'Marry in haste and repent at leisure,' but
promising to have everything in readiness for us and our ceremony.
Isn't it good of them?"

"Very nice and kind, I think," said Grace. "How favorably everything
seems to go with you! I am very glad for you both."

"Thank you," said Eva. "We might make a triple wedding of it if your
father would only consent."

"Oh, no! I don't wish it. Father is right, I know; he always is; and I
don't want to leave him yet for anybody."

"And you are entirely right in that, my dear," said Grandma Elsie. "I
can see that, although I should dearly love to gain possession of my
new little daughter at once."

"It is very nice and kind in you, Grandma Elsie, to be so ready to
claim me for your own," Grace returned, happy tears shining in her eyes.

"Ah, I fear your father might see that in a different light," returned
Grandma Elsie, with one of her sweet smiles. "I think he would prefer
to keep you all his own, and I cannot blame him. Now, girls," turning
to the others, "suppose we make out a list of the relatives and friends
who should be invited to your wedding, so that that matter can be
promptly attended to."

The girls gave a ready assent and the list was presently prepared.

"Now I have been thinking," Eva said, as they finished, "that as
October is so delightful a month, even up here on the Hudson, we might
as well take a little more time for our preparations, spending it at
Crag Cottage; and that would make it possible for our friends to attend
the ceremony, should they choose to come. You could spare that much
more time from your home, couldn't you, Grandma Elsie?"

"Easily; and I think it a very good idea. If anything like the entire
number of our friends should come, you would not have sleeping
accommodations for nearly all of them, and the hotels in the
neighborhood are, I think, closed, or will be by that time; but a noon
wedding would enable guests to come in the morning and leave before
night."

"Oh, that's a capital idea, Grandma Elsie!" exclaimed Lucilla. "Don't
you think so, Eva?"

"I do, and think every one else will," returned Evelyn joyously. "Then
our wedding gifts can be shown at the cottage, packed, and sent home
afterward in time to get there before we do--as we are to take a trip
to Niagara Falls before going home."

When the shoppers returned and were told of this plan, they one and all
highly approved; so it was decided upon, and the necessary preparations
were promptly made.

The children were in high spirits, delighted with the purchases they
had made; the older people seemed equally satisfied with theirs, though
their report was given in quieter fashion. Some of the smaller gifts
the purchasers brought with them, but the others were to be sent first
to Crag Cottage, and after the wedding from there to the brides'
homes. After some little discussion of the plan, an immediate return to
Crag Cottage was decided upon, and presently the yacht was steaming up
the river.




CHAPTER XVI.


It was a pleasant, happy party that gathered round the breakfast table
at Crag Cottage the next morning, and a bountiful and excellent meal
which they found spread before them.

Mrs. Elsie Leland--acting mistress of the house for the present--was
highly pleased with the new arrangements planned for the double wedding.

"The extension of the time allotted for the preparations would make it
much easier to carry them out," she said, "while invited guests would
have more time for the carrying out of theirs; though I doubt if many
of them would think it paid to take so long and expensive a journey
even to see that interesting sight--a double wedding."

"I dare say not," said her husband. "Chester, do you expect your
brother and sisters to be here?"

"Hardly; the time being so short and the journey so long. And Frank,
I hear, has found a ladylove down there--which will be likely to
keep him away. Each of my sisters, as you probably know, has a young
child,--Maud, indeed, has two, Sidney one,--and they would probably
want neither to bring them along nor leave them behind."

"No, I suppose they will hardly want to journey so far for a short
visit, and will think it too late in the season for a long one,"
remarked Grandma Elsie.

"Yes; I fear that will keep Uncle Horace and Aunt Rose from joining us,
though they are no farther away than Philadelphia," said Chester.

"And, as Grandpa sometimes says, they are now not so young as they once
were," said Mrs. Leland. "We would be delighted to have them with us,
but can scarcely hope for it."

"No," said Violet, "and most of our relatives and friends, having had
their summer outings, returned home, and settled down again, can
hardly be expected to start out on so long a journey for so short a bit
of entertainment."

"Especially as there are a number of somebodies getting married every
day," laughed Lucilla.

"Yes," said Harold, with a smile, "it is a very common occurrence."

The two weeks passed quickly and happily away, the older ones attending
to necessary preparations, the younger filling up much of the time
with pleasant little excursions up and down the river in the yacht, or
walks, rides, and drives on land.

The wedding presents began to come in. The captain's principal gift
they knew was their joint home on his estate, Woodburn, but there were
a number of minor ones--in the way of silver for their tables, Sevres
china, and napery, cut-glass and bric-a-brac. The gifts of Elsie and
Ned consisted of similar articles. Gracie's gift, chosen by her father
and "Mamma Vi," was a gold bracelet for each, ornamented with precious
stones. Each lover had visited Tiffany's and bought for his bride a
very handsome ornament called a sunburst--a star of diamonds to be worn
as locket or brooch. They were presented on the morning of the wedding,
and the girls were delighted with them, as they were with Harold's
gift--a very beautiful opal ring to each.

It was nearing ten o'clock the night before the wedding, and Captain
Raymond was taking his usual stroll back and forth upon the porch
before retiring, when Lucilla came to him for the usual bit of
good-night chat so pleasant to them both. He put his arm about her
and held her close to his heart, as he had so often done before. For
a moment neither spoke, then she said sobbingly: "Oh, father, my dear
father, this is the last time! How can I bear it! oh, how can I bear
it! how can I leave you, even for Chester, whom I do love dearly."

"No, dear child," he said in tones tremulous with emotion, "it need
not be the last time. We shall be near enough to see and embrace each
other very often while God spares our lives; and we will not love each
other less because we are not living all the time under the same roof."

"No, papa, no, indeed! Oh, I could never bear it if it wasn't for
knowing that! You have been such a good, kind, wise, and loving father
to me. Oh, I wish I had always been the good, obedient biddable child I
ought to have been."

"Yes, daughter dear, I know it; I know you do; while I often wish I had
been more patient and gentle--less stern with you. But let us forgive
and forget, and each try in the future to be all to the other that
could be desired. My own dear, dear child! 'The Lord bless thee: the
Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord
lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.'"

"Thank you, my dear, dear father," she said. "That is such a sweet
blessing, and I do so love to hear it from your lips. Oh, I can never
be thankful enough that I have a Christian father!"

"Nor I for the good hope that my dear eldest daughter is a true
servant, with me, of the same blessed Master. Now let us say
good-night, for it is time you were preparing for your rest."

Most of the invited guests except a few who would arrive in the morning
had come, but, by sending the young gentlemen and lads to sleep in the
yacht, room had been made for all.

The ceremony took place the next day at high noon--the brides, the
gifts, the house bedecked with flowers, all looking very lovely. A
grand wedding breakfast followed, then bridal dresses were exchanged
for travelling suits, handsome and becoming, and the newly married
couples, accompanied by Grace and Harold, went aboard the _Dolphin_,
which carried them to the city, where they would take the cars for
Niagara. Harold and Grace saw them on the train, waved them good-bye as
it started, then returned on the yacht to Crag Cottage.

A few days later the _Dolphin_ was again speeding southward, carrying
her owner and his family--including Mrs. Travilla and her son Harold,
also the Lelands, to their homes. They had a delightful voyage, and
arrived at their destination in fine health and spirits. But that was
not the last trip made by the yacht for that season; within a fortnight
she was again steaming up the Hudson, and in the harbor of the city
where the bridal party had left her they found her lying at anchor one
day, when the train bearing them on their return from the west came
rushing into the station.

"Oh, it really seems something like getting home!" Lucilla exclaimed as
she stepped upon the deck. "But father did not come!" she added, with
a slight sigh of disappointment, glancing about in the vain hope of
catching sight of the manly form and face she loved so well.

"No, Mrs. Dinsmore, but you'll be sure to get sight of the captain when
you reach the other end of the voyage," said Mr. Bailey, temporary
skipper, coming forward with a bow and smile.

"And the voyage will be but a short one if the weather continues good,"
remarked Max, offering a hand to Bailey in cordial greeting, then
introducing his bride.

"Yes," said Bailey, taking in his the hand she offered, and looking
at her with admiring eyes, "I used to know her pretty well as Miss
Leland. I wish you both a great deal of happiness and prosperity. And
you and your bride the same, Mr. Dinsmore," shaking hands with Chester
in his turn. "I think, ladies and gentlemen, you will find everything
shipshape in the saloon and staterooms; the captain was very particular
about all that."

"Yes," said Evelyn, "and now that we are here on the dear old yacht I
feel that the discomforts of travel by rail are happily gotten rid of;
everything is so clean, quiet, and homelike here."

"I think it is delightful," said Lucilla; "only I am disappointed that
father did not come."

"No doubt it was having too many other things to attend to that
prevented him," said Max. "And doubtless he will meet us at the wharf
when we land."

The weather was all that could be desired, the yacht in fine condition,
and in due time they anchored in the harbor of their own city, and
presently landed, to find a number of the dear ones waiting for them.
Captain Raymond was there with his entire family, and Lucilla had
scarcely stepped ashore ere she found herself in his arms, his kiss of
fatherly love upon her lips.

"How glad I am to have you here again, my darling," he said in tender
tones. "I hope you have enjoyed your trip, and come back to me feeling
well and strong?"

"Oh, yes, father dear, yes indeed! and so, so glad to be with you
again! I could never, never live without my father."

"That is pretty much as I feel about my eldest daughter," he returned
with a smile, and repeating his caresses.

Then Eva must take her turn, and the son and son-in-law each received
a cordial grasp and shake of the hand. Then joyous greetings were
exchanged with the Lelands, Violet, Elsie, and Ned. The Woodburn and
Fairview carriages were there, and nearby stood another--a two-seated,
very handsome vehicle, with a pair of fine, spirited-looking grays
attached. Greetings over, the captain led the way to the equipage, and
turning with a kind, fatherly smile toward the bridal party, "Here,
my children," he said, "is a gift from your father to be held and
used--enjoyed, too, I trust--by the four of you in common."

"Father, I'm afraid you are doing too much for us!" exclaimed Max, with
emotion.

"A grand good gift, sir, for which I heartily thank you," said Chester
warmly.

"Dear father, don't ruin yourself by heaping so many, many gifts upon
us," cried Lucilla, turning, and putting her hand in his, while Evelyn
said, with starting tears "that it was really too much."

"No, I am perfectly able to afford it, my dears, and shall be very
glad if it adds to your enjoyment of your new home," said the generous
giver. "Get in now, drive over to your new home, and see if everything
about house and grounds has been arranged to suit your taste."

They obeyed, and found the carriage, as they afterward said, the
easiest, most comfortable one they had ever ridden in, and the horses
the finest of thoroughbreds.

"These are grand fellows, Max; I'll warrant your father has spent no
trifle on their purchase," remarked Chester as they sped onward with
easy, graceful motion.

"Just what I think," said Max. "No more generous man than he ever
lived."

"I only hope he won't ruin himself by heaping expensive gifts and
favors upon us," said Evelyn.

"I hope not, indeed!" sighed Lucilla, with a slight tremble in her
tones.

"Don't be anxious and troubled about it, sister mine," said Max very
kindly. "I happen to know that father has abundant means. And being so
generous of nature it is a delight to him to give--especially to his
wife and children."

"What a dear, good father he is! It is just a delight to me that I may
call him that now," said Evelyn.

Their carriage reached its destination some minutes ahead of the
captain's, and they immediately alighted and gazed about them with
wondering and delighted eyes--so many improvements had been made since
last they saw the place, trees and flowers, lovely and fragrant, having
been transplanted from other places to adorn this. They wandered here
and there, expressing in looks and joyous exclamations admiration,
gratitude, and delight.

They had hardly made acquaintance with all the beauties of the place
when the other carriage drove up and the rest of the family joined
them. Then, as the captain afterward said, they well-nigh overwhelmed
him with the extravagant outpouring of their admiration, gratitude, and
delight.

"I am very glad that you are all so well pleased," he said, in
return. "My wife and I have greatly enjoyed this labor of love,--the
overseeing and directing of these improvements,--and that they find
such favor with you all more than repays us. But, come, let us go
inside and see how well you are satisfied with things there."

He led the way as he spoke, and they found themselves in a wide hall
with a broad and easy stairway leading to the rooms above, and on
either side, on that floor, large, elegantly furnished rooms,--parlors,
libraries, dining rooms, a set for each little family,--beautiful lace
curtains at the windows, handsome paintings handsomely framed, on the
walls, many of them presents from Grandma Elsie and others of the Ion
family and Violet's relatives on the neighboring estates, and other
gifts and adornments too numerous to mention.

The young folks had decided to call their place Sunnyside, and so
lovely was it that the name seemed very appropriate. The upper rooms
were found scarcely less attractive in themselves or their furnishings
than the lower ones. A grand dinner was in course of preparation in
Lucilla's kitchen, and presently all sat down to it, served in her
dining-room. After that the whole party went over to Woodburn, no one
of them feeling satisfied without a peep at it--the dear old home all
loved so well.


THE END.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:

Obvious printer errors have been corrected. Otherwise, the author's
original spelling, punctuation and hyphenation have been left intact.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Elsie's Young Folks in Peace and War, by
Martha Finley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELSIE'S YOUNG FOLKS IN PEACE ***

***** This file should be named 46188.txt or 46188.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/1/8/46188/

Produced by David Edwards, Chris Whitehead and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
