The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Voice from Jerusalem, by Orson Hyde

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Voice from Jerusalem
       A Sketch of the Travels and Ministry of Elder Orson Hyde

Author: Orson Hyde

Release Date: July 7, 2014 [EBook #46208]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VOICE FROM JERUSALEM ***




Produced by the Mormon Texts Project. See
http://mormontextsproject.org/ for a complete list of
Mormon texts available on Project Gutenberg, to help
proofread similar books, or to report typos. Special thanks
to Renah Holmes and Samuel Shreeve for proofreading.








A VOICE FROM JERUSALEM,

OR A

SKETCH

OF THE

TRAVELS AND MINISTRY

OF

ELDER ORSON HYDE,

Missionary of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints,

TO

GERMANY, CONSTANTINOPLE, AND JERUSALEM,

CONTAINING A

DESCRIPTION OF MOUNT ZION, THE POOL OF SILOAM, AND OTHER ANCIENT PLACES,

AND SOME ACCOUNT OF THE

MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE EAST, AS ILLUSTRATIVE OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS,
WITH A SKETCH OF SEVERAL INTERVIEWS AND CONVERSATIONS WITH JEWS'
MISSIONARIES, ETC., WITH A VARIETY OF INFORMATION ON THE PRESENT STATE
OF THAT AND OTHER COUNTRIES WITH REGARD TO

COMING EVENTS AND THE RESTORATION OP ISRAEL.

* * * *

COMPILED FROM HIS LATE

LETTERS AND DOCUMENTS,

_The last of which bears date at Bavaria, on this Danube, Jan._ 18,
1842.

* * * *

LIVERPOOL:

PUBLISHED BY P. P. PRATT

STAR OFFICE, 36, CHAPEL STREET.

* * * *

PRINTED BY JAMES AND WOODBURN, 14, HANOVER STREET.



INTRODUCTION.

The circumstances which gave rise to this mission of Elder Hyde are
quite peculiar and extraordinary; and in an American publication are
thus described by himself: "Something near eight years ago, Joseph
Smith, a prophet and servant of the Most High God, did predict upon my
head, that I should yet go to the city of Jerusalem, and be a watchman
unto the house of Israel, and perform a work there which would greatly
facilitate the gathering together of that people: the particulars of
which it is not necessary to mention here.

"Year after year has passed away since that period, and my labours in
the ministry have been confined to the Gentiles on both sides of the
Atlantic.

"In the early part of March last (1840), I retired to my bed one
evening as usual, and while contemplating and enquiring out, in my own
mind, the field of my ministerial labours for the then coming season,
the vision of the Lord, like clouds of light, burst upon my view. The
cities of London, Amsterdam, Constantinople, and Jerusalem all appeared
in succession before me, and the Spirit said unto me, 'Here are many of
the children of Abraham whom I will gather to the land that I gave to
their fathers, and here also is the field of your labours.'

"A strict observance of the movements of the Jews, and a careful
examination of their faith relative to their expected Messiah--the
setting up of his kingdom among them, and the overthrow of the present
kingdoms and governments of the Gentiles, will serve to open the eyes
of many of the uncircumcised, when faithfully laid before them, that
the great day of the Lord comes not upon them unawares as a thief.

"Take, therefore, proper credentials from my people, your brethren,
and also from the governor of your state, with the seal of authority
thereon, and go ye forth to the cities which have been shown unto you,
and declare these words unto Judah, and say: 'Blow ye the trumpet in
the land: cry, gather together; and say, assemble yourselves, and let
us go into the defenced cities. Let the standard be reared towards
Zion. Retire! stay not; for I will bring evil from the north and a
great destruction. The lion is come up from his thicket, and the
destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way, he is gone forth from his
place to make thy land desolate, and thy cities shall be laid waste
without inhabitant. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her
that her warfare is accomplished--that her iniquity is pardoned, for
she hath received at the Lord's hand double for all her sins. Let your
warning voice be heard among the Gentiles as you pass, and call ye upon
them in my name for aid and for assistance. With you it mattereth not
whether it be little or much; but to me it belongeth to shew favour
unto them who show favour unto you. Murmur not, therefore, neither be
ye sorrowful that the people are slow to hear your petition; but do as
has been told you. All things shall work together for your good if you
are humble and keep my commandments; for it must needs be that all men
be left without excuse, that a righteous retribution may be awarded to
all.'

"Many other things were shown and told me in the vision which will be
made public at the proper time and places. The vision continued open
for a number of hours, that I did not close my eyes in sleep."

In obedience to the foregoing, Elder Hyde proceeded to lay the
circumstances before the authorities of the church, and before the
governor of the state of Illinois, who gave their hearty sanction to
the mission, and from whom he obtained the following documents:

    _Letter of commendation from the Conference at Nauvoo, to Elders
    Orson Hyde and John E. Page, appointing and confirming their
    appointment to the work whereunto they have been called._

    "To all people unto whom these presents shall come, GREETING.

    Be it known that we, the constituted authorities of the Church of
    Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, assembled in Conference, at
    Nauvoo, Hancock county, and State of Illinois, on this sixth day
    of April, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and
    forty, consider an important event at hand--an event involving the
    interest and fate of the Gentile nations throughout the world.
    From the signs of the times, and from declarations contained in
    the oracles of God, we are forced to come to this conclusion. The
    Jewish nation have been scattered abroad among the Gentiles for a
    long period; and, in our estimation, the time of the commencement
    of their return to the "holy land" has already arrived.

    As this scattered and persecuted people are set among the Gentiles
    as a sign unto them of the second coming of the Messiah, and also,
    of the overthrow of the present kingdoms and governments of the
    earth by the potency of his Almighty arm, in scattering famine and
    pestilence like the frosts and snows of winter, and in sending
    the sword, with nation against nation to bathe it in each others
    blood; it his highly important, in our opinion, that the present
    views and movements of the Jewish people be sought after, and laid
    before the American people for their consideration, their profit
    and their learning; feeling it to be our duty to employ the most
    efficient means in our power to save the children of men from the
    "abomination that maketh desolate," we have, by the counsel of
    the Holy Spirit, appointed Elders Orson Hyde and John E. Page,
    the bearers of these presents, faithful and worthy ministers of
    Jesus Christ, to be our agents and representatives in foreign
    lands, to visit the cities of London, Amsterdam, Constantinople and
    Jerusalem, and also other places which they may deem expedient;
    to converse with the priests, rulers, and elders of the Jews, and
    obtain from them all the information possible; and communicate the
    same to some principal papers for publication, that it may have a
    general circulation throughout the United States.

    As Messrs. Hyde and Page have willingly and cheerfully accepted
    the appointment to become our servants and the servants of the
    public in distant and foreign countries for Christ's sake, we do
    confidently recommend them to all religious and christian people,
    and to ladies and gentlemen making no profession, as worthy
    members of society, possessing much zeal to promote the happiness
    of mankind; fully believing that they will be forward to render
    them all the pecuniary aid they need, to accomplish this laborious
    and hazardous mission, for the general good of the human family.
    Ministers of every denomination upon whom these gentlemen shall
    call, are requested to hold up their hands, and aid them by their
    influence, with an assurance that such as do this shall have the
    prayers and blessings of a "poor and an afflicted people," who have
    tested the depths of their sincerity, and love for their religion,
    by the sacrifice of their blood upon a land, shadowed by the
    stripes and stars of political and religious liberty.

    Given under our hands at the time and place before mentioned."

    (Signed) JOSEPH SMITH, JR., CHAIRMAN. ROBERT B. THOMPSON, Clerk.

    * * * *

    From the Governor of Illinois.

    QUINCY, ILLINOIS, April 30th, 1840.

    Having been informed that the Revd's. Orson Hyde and John E.
    Page, elders in the church denominated Later Day Saints, are
    about to depart on their mission to Europe--and having heard
    the former gentleman preach--and having been made acquainted to
    some extent with the characters of both, it affords me pleasure
    to say, that I was much pleased with the sermon delivered by
    Mr. Hyde; and the reputation of both Gentlemen for talents and
    christian-like deportment, so far as I have been made acquainted,
    are unexceptionable; and as such, believe them to be entitled to
    the respect and kind treatment of all.

    (Signed) THOMAS CARLIN, Governor of Illinois.

    * * * *

    UNITED STATES OF NORTH AMERICA, State of Illinois, } ss:

    I, Alexander P. Field, Secretary of State, of the State of
    Illinois, one of the United States of North America, and keeper of
    the great seal of said State, do hereby certify that Thomas Carlin,
    who took and signed the foregoing certificate, is now, and was at
    the time of signing the same, Governor of the State aforesaid,
    duly elected and qualified to office, with full power by the
    laws of this State to issue certificates as aforesaid; that said
    certificate is in due form of law, and that full faith and credit
    are due his official attestations.

    In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and the great
    seal of State, at the city of Springfield, this twenty-second
    day of May, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred
    and forty, and of the independence of the United States, the
    sixty-fourth.

    (Signed.) A. P. FIELD, Secretary of State."



A SKETCH

OF THE

TRAVELS AND MINISTRY

OF

ELDER ORSON HYDE.

* * * *



LETTER I.

_Trieste, January_ 1, 1842.

DEAR BRETHREN OF THE TWELVE,

As the blushing orb of light from his eastern temple sends forth,
this morning, over Alpine heights, his streaming columns of golden
brightness to greet the earth with a happy new year, welcome its
arrival, and crown it with a celestial radience, I might be justly
charged with ingratitude towards a gracious and merciful Providence,
and a want of generosity and reciprocal kindness towards my brethren,
did I neglect to acknowledge the kind aid and protection which heaven
has granted me in answer to your faith and prayers. Permit me,
therefore, to commence my letter by wishing you all _"a happy new
year;"_ and through you, allow me to extend the same wish to all the
saints, both in England and America; but _particularly to my wife and
dear little children._

I am happy to improve the opportunity, which this hour affords, of
writing to you, and that happiness is increased by a firm conviction,
that a letter from your unworthy brother, in the Lord, will be received
by you with a friendship and cordiality corresponding to that which now
animate my bosom.

Since it has pleased the Lord to grant unto me health and
prosperity--to protect me from the dangers of the climates--from the
plague and pestilence that have carried death and mourning on their
wing, and return me again in safety to a land of civilised life, these
things demand my highest gratitude, as well as demonstrations of praise
and thanksgiving, to His exalted name.

As a member, therefore, of your honourable quorum, bearing, in common
with you, the responsibility under which HEAVEN has laid us, to spread
the word of life among the perishing nations of the earth, allow me to
say, that, on the 21st of October last, "my natural eyes, for the first
time, beheld" Jerusalem; and as I gazed upon it and its environs, the
mountains and hills by which it is surrounded, and considered, that
this is the stage upon which so many scenes of wonders have been acted,
where prophets were stoned, and the Saviour of sinners slain, a storm
of commingled emotions suddenly arose in my breast, the force of which
was only spent in a profuse shower of tears.

I entered the city at the west gate, and called on Mr. Whiting, one
of the American missionaries at that place, to whom I had a letter of
introduction from Monsieur Muratt, our consular agent at Jaffa. Mr. W.
said, that in consequence of the unsettled state of his family, (having
just removed to the house which he then occupied,) he was sorry to
say it would not be convenient for him to invite me to share his
hospitality; but very kindly went with me to the Latin Convent, which
is a sort of hotel or home for strangers, and there engaged for me
my board and lodging at a reasonable compensation, and said that he
would keep a little watch to see that I was well taken care of. This
expression of kindness did not escape my notice.

After I had been there an hour or two, Mr. Sherman, another American
missionary, accompanied by a Mr. Gager, from America, who, I think, was
a licentiate from the Presbyterian or Congregational Church, called on
me, and after some considerable conversation upon the state of affairs
in general, in America, I introduced to them the subject of my mission
to that place; and observed, that I had undertaken to do a good work in
the name of the Lord, and had come there for a righteous purpose, and
wished their co-operation and friendly aid. They assured me that they
should be happy to render me any assistance in their power to do good.
I thanked them for their kindness, and observed, that as I had had
little or no rest since I left Beyrout, I felt worn down with fatigue
and a want of sleep, as well as being almost overcome by the excessive
heat, and that I also wished to arrange some documents which I had,
and then I should be happy to enjoy the privilege of an interview with
them, and with Mr. Whiting at the same time. They said they would
indulge me in my request at almost any time.

I had sent a lengthy communication to the Jews in Constantinople, in
the French language, but had reserved a copy of it in the German. As
this document set forth, clearly and plainly, the object of my mission
there, I translated it into English in order that I might lay the facts
before them in as clear a point of light as possible.

Accordingly, after wearied nature had sufficiently reposed under
sleep's balmy and refreshing shade, I called on Mr. Whiting, according
to previous arrangements, and Messrs. Sherman and Gager soon came
in. After the usual salutations were passed, and all quietly seated,
I expressed to them my gratitude for that opportunity of bearing
testimony to the glorious reality, that the Lord was about to visit his
people, and also my gratitude to HIM whose hand had been stretched out
for my safety and protection, and also to bear me onward to the place
where mercy, with all her celestial charms, was embodied in the person
of his own Son.

I then took the liberty of reading the document containing the object
of my mission there, and were it not for its length I would here insert
it. After it was read, all sat in private meditation until Mr. Gager
interrupted the silence by asking wherein the doctrines of our church
differed from the doctrines of the established orthodox churches. I
replied as follows: "There are so many different kinds of orthodox
doctrines, all differing one from the other, that it might be difficult
to determine which one to be the standard by which ours should be
tried; but, said I, with your permission, I will set forth and explain
to you the principles of our faith, and then you can determine for
yourselves wherein they differ from others." So, beginning at the
Ministration of the Angel of the Lord, I expounded unto them many
things concerning the rise of the church, its organization and
ordinances, and form and order of its government, after which Mr.
Sherman spake as follows:

"Now, we are here trying to do all the good we can, and have been
for some length of time; and what more would you have us do, or what
more can we do?" I replied after the following: "It appears to me,
even allowing your cause to be just and right, that your time is
spent here to little or no purpose; not, however, that I would be
understood as charging you with idleness or inattention; but the strong
and deep-rooted prejudices which reign in the breasts of the people
here against you, that they will not even allow you to educate their
children, when you propose to do it gratuitously, must render your
labours extremely limited; and, further, the genius of your policy does
not admit of your making that exertion which the Saviour of the world
required his servants to make in former days. You receive a salary from
a home institution, and by that institution you are directed to remain
here whether the people will hear you or not; whereas the Saviour
taught his disciples to depart, and shake the dust from their feet,
against that house, city, or people, that would not hear them, and not
spend their labour for that which did not profit."

To this, Mr. Gager replied, "Although the fruits of our labours do not
immediately appear, we ought not to be discouraged. We may labour, and
other men may enter into our labours. The husbandman, after he hath
sowed his seed, waiteth patiently until it hath received the former and
latter rains; and, as the days of miracles are past, we cannot expect
men to act now under the immediate direction of the Saviour as they
then did." I might have here observed, that it would be a great tax
upon the patience of the husbandman, if it did not quite exhaust it, to
sow his seed year after year, and reap no fruits of his labour. But--

I replied, that miracles had truly ceased; but, said I, why have
they ceased? Mr. Gager said, because they were not necessary. I made
answer, that Jesus formerly said to the people, "according to thy faith
be it done unto thee;" and said I, I presume he is of the same mind
still; but the people have no faith in the power of God, therefore no
miraculous favours are shown them; and because the religious world
have lost sight of their high privileges, the horizon of their minds
beclouded, and faith driven from their hearts by the vain and foolish
traditions of uninspired men, the Lord hath sent an holy Angel from
the Temple of Light, bearing to the earth truth's unfaded laurels,
and has boldly asserted the rights and privileges of all who would
seek the face and favour of the MOST HIGH. But against this heavenly
message, streaming from the bosom of a compassionate God, with the
purest love and good-will to a fallen race, and beaming in the face of
men with a celestial radiance, is arranged the cold-hearted prejudices
of an unbelieving world. Well did the Saviour ask this question, "When
the son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?" With this
testimony have I come to Jerusalem; and in the name of my master, who
here bore our sins, in his own body, on the tree, I warn all men, so
far as I have opportunity, to beware how they lift their hands or their
voices against it, for, by the voice of the Lord from Heaven, am I made
a witness of the eternal reality of what I have declared.

Mr. Whiting then asked if we acknowledged any to be christians except
those who embraced our doctrines and joined our church? To this I
replied in the following manner: "We believe there are many in all
the different churches, with many who are externally attached to no
church, who serve the Lord according to the best light and knowledge
they have, and this service is unquestionably acceptable in his sight;
and those who have died in this condition have no doubt gone to receive
the reward of their labours in the mansions of rest. But should He be
pleased to send more light and truth into the world, or revive those
principles of truth, which have been made to yield their sovereignty to
the opinions of men, and they refuse to receive them, or walk in them,
their service would cease to be acceptable to the Lord, and with no
degree of propriety could we acknowledge them true christians; and we
do know, and are sure, that the Lord has caused more light to shine,
and that he will hold none guiltless who refuse to walk in it after the
means of obtaining it are brought to their knowledge and placed within
their reach." These were hard sayings. They observed, that they could
not say that these things were not as I had said; but to them they
appeared incredibly strange.

I then requested that some of them would do me the favour of an
introduction to some of the principal Jews in the place: but this
request was greeted with a number of _hems_, which commonly mean no
more than to allay a little irritation, or tickling in the throat;
but on this occasion, from the peculiarity of their tone and cadence,
I judged they wished to be a little metaphorical, and so used the
term figuratively to mean the following: "We have our scruples about
complying with your request, lest it might detract from our influence
and popularity." They observed that Mr. Johns, the English Consul,
might be the most proper man to grant me the desired favour. I replied,
that I knew as little of Mr. Johns as I did of any Jew in Jerusalem,
but that I would not insist upon my request being granted. Mr. Whiting
then remarked, that he should have no particular objections to do it,
but that it could not be well attended to until a day or two hence.
This reminded me of a circumstance in England, where duty once led
me to call upon a clergyman to do me a little favour, but he said he
could not grant it, because I had not come recommended by any one
with whom he was acquainted. I replied, that I was very sorry to be
so unfortunate on that occasion, as to be recommended by none but my
master, who was the Saviour of the world. The two are not exactly
similar, yet the former reminded me of the latter. I thanked Mr. W.,
however, for his kindness, and our interview closed. The fact is, God
has one system of etiquette, and reciprocity and this sign-seeking
generation has another. The former is hospitality and kindness to the
stranger; but the latter is--be very cautious and particular that
you render him no assistance, neither show him favour unless he come
recommended by our party, or by some others who are honourable and
orthodox, like ourselves. But no man is justifiable in the eye of
humanity, in the eye of the gospel, or in that eye that never sleeps,
in rejecting the reasonable petition of a stranger, though he do
not come clothed with letters from the chief priests, scribes, and
elders of the people; and it is what no gentleman will do, unless his
frankness and liberality have become blasted by the chilling winds of a
sectarian atmosphere.

With what feelings of commingled pity and contempt does every Latter
Day Saint, whose mind has thoroughly canvassed the principles of our
faith, and in whose heart dwells that "unction from the Holy One,"
look upon that want of generosity and frankness, which he is often
compelled to witness, when he knows that in his own bosom, independent
of a boasting spirit, or any desire of vain glory, are jewels of light,
truth, and knowledge, as far superior in lustre to any thing which they
possess, as the purest diamond is to the common pebble of the rivulet!

I concluded, however, that I would try to discharge my duty before God,
without subjecting any one to the humble mortification of giving me
an introduction. For myself, I feel not very jealous of my popularity
where the cause of truth requires me to hazard it, and am not so very
particular. If my name be only recorded in heaven, on the list of the
sanctified, it will abundantly compensate me for the sacrifice which
duty calls me to make of it among men. Let them, therefore, look upon
me as they may, a deceiver or a deceived, a wise man or a fool, I feel
very thankful to the Lord for what mine eyes have seen, mine ears
have heard, and, more than all, for what my soul has experienced; and
it is my constant prayer to an over-ruling Providence, that his free
grace may be amply sufficient to bear me triumphantly through life's
conflicting scenes, that my poor heart may swell the notes of praise
and thanksgiving for ever and ever to HIM who died to save me and wash
me from my sins, in his own most precious blood.

Summoning up, therefore, what little address I had, I procured a
valet d'place, or lackey, and proceeded to the house of Mr. Simons, a
very respectable Jew, who, with some of his family, had lately been
converted and joined the English Church. I entered their dwelling. They
had just sat down to enjoy a dish of coffee; but immediately arose
from the table to meet me. I spake to them in German, and asked them
if they spoke English; they immediately replied "Yes," which was a
very agreeable sound to my ear. They asked me, in German, if I spoke
English. I replied, "Ya, Mein Herr." I then introduced myself to them,
and, with a little apology, it passed off as well as though I had been
introduced by the Pacha. With that glow of warmth and familiarity,
which is a peculiar trait in the German character, they would have
me sit down and take a dish with them; and as I began to relate some
things relative to my mission, the smiles of joy which sat upon their
countenances, bespoke hearts not altogether indifferent. There are two
ministers of the Church of England there. One was confined to his bed
by sickness, and the other, a German, and a Jew by birth, soon came
in. After an introduction, I took the liberty to lay open to him some
of our principles, and gave him a copy of the communication to the
Jews in Constantinople to read. After he had read it, he said that my
motives were undoubtedly very good, but questioned the propriety of my
undertaking, from the fact that I claimed God had sent me. If, indeed,
I had gone to Jerusalem under the direction of some missionary board,
or society, and left God out of the question altogether, I should have
been received as a celestial messenger. How truly did our Saviour
speak, when he said, "I am come in my father's name, and ye receive
me not; but if another were to come in his own name, him ye would
receive." I replied, however, that so far as I could know my own heart,
my motives were most certainly good; yet, said I, no better than the
cause which has brought me here. But he, like all others who worship a
God "without body or parts," said that miracles, visions, and prophecy
had ceased.

The course which the popular clergy pursue at this time in relation to
the Divine economy, looks to me as though they would say; "O Lord! we
will worship thee with all our hearts, serve thee with all our souls
and be very pious and holy. We will even gather Israel, convert the
heathen, and bring in the millennium, if you will only let us alone
that we may do it in our own way, and according to our own will. But
if you speak from heaven to interfere with our plans, or cause any to
see visions or dream dreams or prophecy whereby we are disturbed or
interrupted in our worship, we will exert all our strength and skill
to deny what you say, and charge it home upon the devil or some wild
fantastic spirit, as being its author."

That which was looked upon by the ancient saints, at among the greatest
favours and blessings, viz., Revelation from God and communion with him
by dreams and by visions, is now looked upon by the religious world
as the height of presumption and folly. The ancient saints considered
their condition most deplorable when Jehovah would not speak to them;
but the most orthodox religionists of this age deem it quite heterodox
to even admit the probability that he ever will speak again. O, my
soul! language fails to paint the absurdity and abomination of such
heaven-opposing, and truth-excluding dogmas; and were it possible
for those bright seraphs that surround the throne above, and bask
in the sunbeams of immortality, to weep over the inconsistency and
irrationality of mortals, the earth must be bedewed with celestial
tears. My humble advice to all such is, that they repent and cast far
from them these wicked traditions, and be baptized into the new and
everlasting covenant, lest the Lord speak to them in his wrath, and vex
them in his sore displeasure.

After some considerable conversation upon the priesthood and the
renewal of the covenant, I called upon him to repent and be baptized
for the remission of his sins, that he might receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost. What! said he, _I_ be baptized! Yes, said I, _you_
be baptized. Why, said he, I have been baptized already! I replied
something after the following: "You have, probably, been sprinkled,
but that has no more to do with baptism than any other ordinance of
man's device; and even if you had been immersed, you would not have
bettered your condition, for your priesthood is without power. If,
indeed, the catholic church had power to give you an ordination, and
by that ordination confer the priesthood upon you, they certainly
had power to nullify that act, and take the priesthood from you; and
this power they exercised when you dissented from their communion, by
excluding you from their church. But if the catholic church possessed
not the priesthood, of course your claims to it are as groundless as
the airy phantoms of heathen mythology: so view the question on which
side you may, there is no possible chance of admitting the validity of
your claims to it. Be it known, therefore, that ordinances performed
under the administration of such a priesthood, though they may even be
correct in form, will be found destitute of the seal of that authority
by which heaven will recognise his own in the day when every man's work
shall be tried: though a priesthood may be clothed with the wealth
and honours of a great and powerful nation, and command the respect
and veneration of multitudes whose eyes are blinded by the thick veil
of popular opinion, and whose powers of reflection and deep thought
are confused and lost in the general cry of "great is Diana of the
Ephesians," yet all this does not impart to it the divine sanction,
or animate it with the spirit of life and power from the bosom of the
living God; and there is a period in future time, when, in the smoking
ruins of Babel's pride and glory, it must fall and retire to the shades
of forgetfulness, to the grief and mortification of its unfortunate
votaries.

In consequence of his great volubility, I was under the disagreeable
necessity of tuning my voice to a pretty high key, and of spacing short
between words; determining that neither his greatness nor learning
should shield him from the shafts of a faithful testimony: but there
is more hope of those Jews receiving the fullness of the gospel, whose
minds have never been poisoned by the bane of modern sectarianism,
which closes the mouth of deity, and shuts up in heaven all the angels,
visions, and prophecyings.

Mrs. Whiting told me that there had been four Jewish people in
Jerusalem converted and baptized by the English minister, and four
only; and that a part of the ground for an English church had been
purchased there.

It was by political power and influence that the Jewish nation was
broken down, and her subjects dispersed abroad; and I will here hazard
the opinion, that by political power and influence, they will be
gathered and built up; and, further, that England is destined, in the
wisdom and economy of heaven, to stretch forth the arm of political
power, and advance in the front ranks of this glorious enterprise.
The Lord once raised up a Cyrus to restore the Jews, but that was not
evidence that he owned the religion of the Persians. This opinion I
submit, however, to your superior wisdom to correct, if you shall find
it wrong.

There is an increasing anxiety in Europe for the restoration of that
people; and this anxiety is not confined to the pale of any religious
community, but it has found its way to the courts of kings. Special
ambassadors have been sent, and consuls and consular-agents have been
appointed. The rigorous policy which has hitherto characterised the
course of other nations towards them, now begins to be softened by the
oil of friendship, and modified by the balm of humanity. The sufferings
and privations under which they have groaned for so many centuries,
have at length touched the mainsprings of Gentile power and sympathy;
and may the God of their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, fan the
flame by celestial breezes, until Israel's banner, sanctified by a
Saviour's blood, shall float on the walls of Old Jerusalem, and the
mountains and valleys of Judea reverberate with their songs of praise
and thanksgiving to the Lamb that was slain!

The imperial consul of Austria, at Galatz, near the mouth of the
Danube, to whom I had a letter of introduction from his cousin in
Vienna, told me, that, in consequence of so many of their Jewish
subjects being inclined of late to remove to Syria and Palestine, his
government had established a general consulate at Beyrout for their
protection. There are many Jews who care nothing about Jerusalem,
and have no regard for God. Their money is all the god they worship;
yet there are many of the most pious and devout among them, who look
towards Jerusalem as the tender and affectionate mother looks upon the
home where she left her lovely little babe.

You will discover by this letter, and more particularly by the one
written from Alexandria, to Elder Pratt in Manchester, England, that,
through the goodness of the Lord, I have been enabled to accomplish
that which was told me prophetically, several years ago, by Brother
Joseph Smith.

Though the blustering snow-storm has thrown the gorgeous folds of his
crimson mantle over the mountain tops, which half encircle us on our
north and east as we lie here in quarantine, yet their sides towards
the base, beautifully terraced and thickly set with vines and olives,
though not in their summer dress, present a widely-extended scene of
rural beauty and loveliness. All the irregularities and deformities of
nature (if, indeed, there are any,) are completely lost in the distant
view, though we gaze through the ship's powerful magnifier; so, when
the eye of imagination surveys the saints far in the west, their faults
and foibles are lost in the distance, (if, indeed, any they have,)
and nothing but their virtues appear, which render the society very
inviting and extremely desirable. The simple unrestrained language of
my heart is--I want to see my brethren, for in their bosoms, I am sure,
is a corresponding echo which,--

  Like the harp, when the zephyr is sighing
  To the breath of that zephyr, in music replying,
  Friendship can tremble with feelings as true.

I have just been upon deck to witness the king of day retiring in his
robes of state to the western portions of his kingdoms, to proclaim
there, in _propria persona_, the advent of 1842, after opening and
lighting up the glory of the new year in the east. As his golden disk
was sinking behind the western rim of the deep blue waters of the
Adriatic, and throwing back, in rich profusion, his soft and glowing
beam upon the clear blue sky, with a radiance and splendour peculiar
to none but him, thought I, oh, that thou couldest take a thought or
good wish from me and bear it on the pathway of one of thy golden beams
to my dear little family, which perhaps at this moment is pouring
his noon-day splendour obliquely upon the home where they dwell. But
another thought succeeded--I will not be a Parsee. There is a Being
whose throne is high, and whose glorious image shines forth in the
mirror of all his works to feast the mental eye and heal the wounded
heart, "His ear is not heavy that he cannot hear, neither is his arm
shortened that he cannot save;" to HIM, therefore, will I send a
thought on the wing of my evening devotion, and breathe an aspiration
that his favour may gladden and cheer the cot where dwell all my
earthly hopes and earthly riches: therefore, tarry not for me thou
glorious orb of light, but speed thy course onward in the circuit of
the heavens, to dye the sheen of other climes, and to roll in the hour
when the dead, small and great, shall stand before God.

Jerusalem at this time contains about twenty thousand inhabitants;
about seven thousand are Jews, and the remainder mostly Turks and
Arabs. It is enclosed by a strong wall from five to ten feet thick. On
those sides which are most accessible, and consequently most exposed
to an attack, the wall is thickest, and well mounted with cannon; it
is from twelve to thirty feet in height. The city is situated at the
south-eastern extremity of an inclined plane, with the valley of Kedron
on the east, and the valleys of Hinnom and Gihon on the south and west,
all converging to a point in the valley of Jehosaphat, south-east of
the city: from the eastern gate of the city to the top of Mount Olivet,
as you pass through the valley of Kedron, is just about one English
mile. On the top of this mount you have a fair view of the Dead Sea and
river Jordan, which are about fifteen miles in the distance. As I stood
upon this almost sacred spot and gazed upon the surrounding scenery,
and contemplated the history of the past in connection with the
prophetic future, I was lost in wonder and admiration, and felt almost
ready to ask myself--Is it a reality that I am here gazing upon this
scene of wonders? or, am I carried away in the fanciful reveries of a
night vision? Is that city which I now look down upon really Jerusalem,
whose sins and iniquities swelled the Saviour's heart with grief, and
drew so many tears from his pitying eye? Is that small enclosure in the
valley of Kedron, where the boughs of those lonely olives are waving
their green foliage so gracefully in the soft and gentle breeze, really
the garden of Gethsemane, where powers infernal poured the flood of
hell's dark gloom around the princely head of the immortal Redeemer?
Oh, yes! The fact that I entered the garden and plucked a branch from
an olive, and now have that branch to look upon, demonstrates that all
was real. There, there is the place where the Son of the Virgin bore
our sins and carried our sorrows--there the angels gazed and shuddered
at the sight, waiting for the order to fly to his rescue; but no such
order was given. The decree had passed in heaven, and could not be
revoked, that he must suffer, that he must bleed, and that he must die.
What bosom so cold, what feelings so languid, or what heart so unmoved
that can withhold the humble tribute of a tear over this forlorn
condition of the Man of Sorrows?

From this place I went to the tombs of the prophets in the valley of
Jehosaphat, and on my way around the city, I entered the pool of Siloam
and freely washed in its soft and healing fountain. I found plenty
of water there for baptizing, besides a surplus quantity sent off in
a limpid stream as a grateful tribute to the thirsty plants of the
gardens in the valley. The pool of Bethsda, which had five porches,
yet remains in the city, but in a dilapidated state, there being
plenty of water to meet the demands of the city of a better quality,
and more convenient--this vast reservoir is consequently neglected.
This pool was unquestionably as free and accessible to all the people
of Jerusalem as the Thames is to the Cockneys, or the Mississippi to
the people of Nauvoo; and from its vast dimensions, it would certainly
contain water enough to immerse all Jerusalem in in a day: so the
argument against the doctrine of immersion, on the ground that there
was not water enough in Jerusalem to immerse three thousand persons in
in one day, is founded in an over anxiety to establish the traditions
of men to the subversion of a gospel ordinance; and it will be borne in
mind also, that the day of Penticost was in the month of May, just at
the close of the rainy season, when all the pools and fountains in and
about the city were flush with water.

What were anciently called Mount Zion and Mount Calvary, are both
within the present walls of the city. We should not call them mountains
in America, or hardly hills; but gentle elevations or rises of land.
The area of what was called Mount Zion, I should not think contained
more than one acre of ground; at least as I stood upon it and
contemplated what the prophets had said of Zion in the last days, and
what should be done in her, I could no more bring my mind to believe
that the magnet of truth in them which guided their words, pointed to
this place, any more than I could believe that a camel can go through
the eye of a needle, or a rich man enter into the kingdom of God.
But on the land of Joseph, far in the west, where the spread eagle
of America floats in the breeze and shadows the land--where those
broad rivers and streams roll the waters of the western world to the
fathomless abyss of the ocean--where those wide-spreading prairies
(fields of the wood) and extensive forests adorn the land with such
an agreeable variety, shall Zion rear her stately temples and stretch
forth the curtains of her habitation. The record of Mormon chimes in
so beautifully with the scriptures to establish this position, that an
honest and faithful examination of the subject is all that is required
to expel every doubt from the heart.

The customs and manners of the people of the east are so similar to
what they were in the days of our Saviour, that almost everything which
the traveller beholds is a standing illustration of some portion of
scripture: for example, I saw two women grinding wheat at a little
hand-mill, consisting of two small stones with a little rude tackling
about it, the whole of which one man might take in his arms and carry
almost any where at pleasure. One would turn the top stone until her
strength was exhausted, and then the other would take her place, and
so alternately keep the little grinder in operation. It appears that
our Lord foresaw the perpetuity of this custom, even to the time of his
second coming; for he said, "Two women shall be grinding at the mill;
one shall be taken and the other left; and for aught I know, these two
I saw were the identical ones. I also saw the people take a kind of
coarse grass and mix it with some kind of earth or peat that had been
wet and reduced to the consistency of common mortar, and then lay it
out in flattened cakes to dry for fuel. I then, for the first time
in my life, saw the propriety of our Saviour's allusion, "If God so
clothe the grass of the field, which to-day is, and tomorrow is cast
into the oven, &c." I might swell this letter to a volume upon these
subjects, but I forbear for the present. One may read of the customs of
the East, but it is not like seeing them. To read of a good dinner may
brighten up a man's ideas about eating, especially if he be a little
hungry; but to sit down at the luxurious board and eat is far more
satisfactory. The two cases are not exactly parallel, yet the latter
serves to illustrate the former.

As I walked about the environs of the town, my spirit struggled within
me in earnest prayer to the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that he
would not only revolutionize this country, but renovate and make it
glorious. My heart would lavish its blessings upon it in the greatest
prodigality in view of what is to come hereafter. After returning to
the city, I found my feet and legs completely coated with dust; for the
whole face of the country was like an ash bed in consequence of the
great length of the dry season. I then thought how very convenient it
must have been for the ancient disciples to fulfil one injunction of
the Saviour, "shake off the dust of your feet."

Syria at present is in a very unsettled state. The Drewzes and
Catholics are fighting almost constantly. They sometimes kill hundreds
and hundreds of a day. In some sections it is not unfrequent that the
traveller meets some dozen or twenty men by the way-side without heads,
in a day. In a letter from Bavaria, I stated that hostilities had
recommenced between the Turks and Egyptians; I took the statement from
a German paper, but it was a mistake. The hostilities were between the
lesser tribes in Syria. The American missionaries at Beyrout and Mount
Lebanon have received official notice through Commodore Porter, our
minister at Constantinople, from the Grand Sultan, that hereafter they
can have no redress by law for any violence, outrage, or cruelty, that
may be practiced upon them by the people; and advises them to leave
the country. This course is approved of by Commodore Porter. I read
the correspondence between him and Mr. Chassan, our consul at Beyrout;
but all is going on in the providence of God. Syria and Palestine must
ferment and ferment, work and work, until they work into the hands of
Abraham's children to whom they rightly belong; and may the God of
their fathers bless the hand that aids their cause.

I must now begin to think of coming to a close. I have nearly three
weeks yet to remain in quarantine. The time seems long; yet I endeavour
not to let it run to waste. When our ship shall have obtained her
prattique, I shall proceed, if the Lord will, directly to Germany over
the Alps, and try to light up a fire there. Will you give me your
prayers that God may bless my exertions, and that I may be enabled to
conduct myself with that dignity and propriety in all things which
become a man of God, and which the purity and virtue of the cause I
advocate, so justly merits; and further, that in my great weakness
celestial strength may appear.

My kind respects to the presidency of the church, and a happy new year
to all absent and enquiring friends.

With the most kind and tender feelings towards you, and with a heart
that will burst with blessings on your heads when your faces I behold,
allow your _unworthy_ brother in Christ to close by the following lines
which he offers you as a farewell token until Providence shall permit
us again to meet:

  Where the sun leaves his last golden ray,
    Far over the sea's swelling tide,
  Will friends, dear and true, for me pray,
    That I in the Lord may abide?
  Though distance and time do us part,
    And scenes new and strange roll between,
  Your memory is dear to my heart,
    And friendship's bright star gleams the same.

  In the west, let its ray pour a light
    On the circle of Zion's true sons,
  To greet them with joy in the sight
    Of Him who has said we are one.
  To share in the spoils of my love,
    Her daughters, though last, are not least;
  For surely, 'twas blest from above
    Which graced the end of the feast.

ORSON HYDE.

* * * *

DEAR BROTHER PRATT,

In consequence of the great distance to Nauvoo, and the uncertainty of
this letter reaching our brethren there, should I address it to them,
I have thought proper to address it to you, with this request, that
you will publish it by itself in pamphlet form, as soon as possible,
and send a copy to each one of the twelve, three to the presidency of
the church, and one to my wife. I wrote her a lengthy letter from this
place, and sent it by an American ship bound directly to New York, and
should have sent this along with it if it had been ready. I wish you,
also, to send five copies to my brother, Abijah Hyde, Oxford, Newhaven
County, and State of Connecticut, that he may send one to each of my
other brothers, and one also to each of my sisters, and that I wish
them and their families to consider themselves embraced within the
circle of every good wish expressed in it.

The size of the edition I leave with you to determine. You know that I,
like yourself and every other Latter Day Saint preacher, have no salary
except the voluntary contributions of the people where we labour; and
having been absent from my family nearly two years, my arm and my
purse have been too short to render them much assistance. I wish you,
therefore, to forward a sufficient number of copies to each branch
of the church any where this side of the Atlantic, that all who wish
for a copy may have one; and whatever any brother, sister, or friend,
shall be disposed to give in return, for the benefit of my wife and
children, will be most gratefully received by them, and no less so by
me. It can be handed to the agent to whom you shall send the copies,
and he can forward it to you through the post, or otherwise as you
shall direct, which will enable you to pay the printer; and the balance
(should there be any) I will advise you in due time how to convey it
to my family. But should you discover any impropriety in the plan, or
should it be inconsistent for you to carry it into execution, you are
at liberty to use the document as your better wisdom may direct you,
only send it in some form to Nauvoo as soon as possible. Perhaps I feel
too anxious about my family, but where the heart has only few objects
to share its sympathies, upon those few objects the sun of affection
shines with warmer and more brilliant ray. My family is my earthly
all; and of late my feelings concerning them are very peculiar. It is
nearly a year since I have heard anything of them, and being confined
here in quarantine, perhaps I have become childish. My kind respects to
yourself and family, to brothers Snow and Adams, and to all the Saints
in England; may God bless you all: pray for me. I am your brother in
Christ,

ORSON HYDE.

P.S. In justice to the American missionaries at Jerusalem, I must
say, however, particularly of Mr. Whiting, with whom I became most
acquainted, that as men, their conduct towards me was both courteous
and civil; and when I left Mr. W.'s house I could not withhold my
blessing from himself and family--his interesting wife and lovely
little girls, who all speak fluently the English and Arabic. A kind
word or action towards a stranger in a strange land is not soon
forgotten. May the Lord bless them and their families with his
salvation, through the knowledge of the truth, was my desire then, and
is my prayer still.

Note.--Expecting a letter or letters from you to be lodged in Bavaria
for me, I have addressed a note there requesting them (if any) to be
forwarded to me at this place; but as my note went on shore in the
bustle without the postage being paid, and having to pass through
different kingdoms, I do not expect it will be forwarded. I hope,
however, to get news from you and the church when I get there myself. I
hope also to hear something from my wife. I feel that a word from her
would be more precious than gold; yet I am afraid to hear lest she may
be in trouble, or some of her friends dead--a father or mother perhaps,
or brother or sister. Yet I try to comfort myself with the thought that
my long absence is the cause of all my bad feelings. The Lord knows,
and I pray that he may bind up every broken heart. Fare-thee-well; thy
brother in the Lord,

O. H.

* * * *



LETTER II.

_Trieste, January_ 17, 1842.

DEAR BRETHREN AND SISTERS AT NAUVOO,

I have just written a lengthy letter to the Twelve, and sent it by way
of Elder Pratt, in England. In that, and in a former one written to
him from Alexandria in Egypt, is contained an account of my mission to
Jerusalem. I feel, however, as though I wished to write a few lines
more on this the last day of my confinement on ship board, where
I have spent the last fifty-six days: six days in the harbour of
Alexandria--twenty-two days on our passage--and twenty-eight here in
quarantine. To-morrow, if the Lord will, the the jubilant song, with
its thrice welcome melody, will greet the ears of a poor captive exile,
the prison doors give way, and he be permitted once more to breathe the
air of freedom in a land where he is not annoyed by the sight of the
star and crescent, the turban and the covered face--all of which are an
abomination in my sight.

The thoughts which I record will, no doubt, be scattering, and like
"the gleaning of grapes when the vintage is done;" or like a few
indolent belated stragglers going to the place of worship on a Sabbath
morning after the more conscientious and faithful have broken the
silence which hovered around the place of their devotion, and greeted
the morning with their prayers and joyful acclamations of praise to the
Lord their God.

It is now rapidly advancing to the close of two _long_ years since I
had the pleasure of mingling my voice with yours in ascribing honour
and thanksgiving to that Being whose arm alone has been my support, and
whose kind angel has swept the misty vapours far away which dispondency
would feign cast over the star of hope, and nearly one year since I
have heard ought direct from you. While in Bavaria, I saw a statement
in a German paper that Brother Joseph had been apprehended and confined
in prison. I knew not but that it might be so; yet I was inclined
to set it down among the numerous deaths which he has suffered, the
imprisonments which he has endured, and the various runaways of which
he has been guilty, according to the flood of newspaper slang which has
been poured forth upon a deceived public: but as time allows nothing
to remain stationary, you may judge of my anxiety to hear from you,
particularly when the happiness or misery of my own dear wife and
little children is identified with your own.

I sometimes fancy myself in your midst, in my hours of silent
meditation, gazing upon a large concourse of saints. I see many, _very_
many strange faces that I never saw before; while others with whom I
was familiarly acquainted, I do not see. Being anxious to know where
they are, I inquire after them; but am told, with a sigh that contains
no fiction, that time--that cruel and unfeeling destroyer of the human
race, has borne them on his untiring wing to a long and sleepy mansion,
to await the hour when the voice of the Archangel and the trumpet of
God shall bid their sleeping dust arise, and come forth to receive the
reward of their labours. O, ye precious souls! your debt is paid, and I
cannot but embalm your memory with a tear as these lines slip from my
pen.

There, for instance, sits a brother looking steadily upon his little
daughter. His melancholy mien bespeaks a heart wadeing deep in sorrow:
he puts his handkerchief to his face and bursts into tears. I ask the
cause of that; and am told, that that brother has lately lost his wife;
and as he looked upon the young and tender flower, and recognised in
her the kind and affectionate features of the companion of his youth
who now sleeps in the arms of death, he immediately contrasted all her
virtues with every unkind word that he might have given her, and every
ungenerous action; and the thought that his children are bereft of a
mother, and his own bosom of its dearest friend, swells his heart to a
burst of grief; and every unkind word which he might have given her in
the warmth of the moment, now rushes upon his memory, pierces his soul,
and adds an additional pang to the flood of grief which overwhelms
him. "Husbands," whoever you are, "love your wives, and be not bitter
against them." The delicacy of their sex, the vivid perceptibility
of their mind, and the soft and engaging virtues of their heart,
which weave themselves into the rugged recesses of man's masculine
temperament and constitute him a fit member of society, render them
entitled to the warmest affections of your heart, and to the generous
protection of your arm.

In another part sits a sister clad in deep mourning, with a number
of little children about her. The solemnity which sits upon the
countenance, and the sad melancholy which lingers in her eyes, declare
that her mourning is not all on the outside. She looks upon the little
ones and beholds in them the generous and manly features of their sire,
but his place his vacant: And pray, where is he? Oh! as the sturdy oak
of the forest is laid low by the shaft from heaven, so has their dear
father fallen by an arrow from the bow of a strong archer, and these
young and tender branches which have sprung forth from his roots, only
are left to perpetuate his name. None but God knows the anguish of that
sister's heart, as she hides her face, and pours forth her grief in
flowing streams of tearful eloquence. But stay, my hand, open not those
wounds afresh when thou hast no balm to bind them up: but may the Lord,
whose province it is to comfort all that mourn, and to bind up the
broken-hearted, soothe the sorrows of those afflicted ones, and pour
the oil of consolation into their grieved and wounded spirit.

When, oh! when shall human grief and woe come to a final end? Thank
kind heaven, there is a time when these must cease. In the times of
the restitution of all things, when the son of the virgin shall have
disarmed death of his power and triumphed over every foe of man; then
shall the tree of life spread wide its branches, bloom in eternal
spring, and exhale his rich and life-giving odours to the breeze,
carrying life, health, and joy upon its balmy wing to every department
of God's creation. "Behold we bring you glad tidings of great joy
which shall be unto all people."

I have not performed this long journey without encountering _some few_
hardships, but I will not mention them; suffice it to say, that I am
well at present. The past is over and gone, and I leave the future with
my master. You certainly have an interest in my prayers day and night,
and I hope you will send up a good wish occasionally for me; yes, even
for me. I need it. My heart is full, and I can write no more upon these
matters.

Let me now tell you something about a thunderstorm at sea. I have
crossed the Atlantic three times--once the German and Black seas, and
all about the Levante, besides sailing much on the American waters;
but never, no, never before did I witness nature in such a rage on the
deep, as once on this last voyage off the island of Candia, about the
7th of December. The sun sat behind the rising bulwarks of a dark and
gloomy cloud as though he would not look upon the scene that awaited
us: this said to the experienced tar, "there is danger on the deep."
About six o'clock in the evening, the breath of the monster reached us:
all hands aloft furling sails. The sky became suddenly black--the sea
began to roll in upon our weather-beam and lash the hull of our ship,
tossing her from surge to surge with as much ease as a giant would
sport with an infant. The scene became grand. Our vessel stood on her
course--wind on her larboard quarter, and under fore and close-reefed
maintopsail only; while thunders loud and long uttered their voices
from on high, and rolled through the vaulted canopy as if clothed with
the official mandate from Jehovah for the sea to give up its dead. The
lightnings issued from the womb of darkness in fiery streams of blazing
vengeance to light up the terror of the storm. A feeling of solemnity
and awe rolled across my bosom as I gazed upon the troubled deep,
raging in the wildness and fury of a tempest. The spray of the clipped
surge was frequently whirled on the wing of the eddying currents like
mighty cascades upon our deck, while the rain descended like torrents
from the mountains. Abroad on the deep, the crested billows rolled
high their fleecy heads, and threw up thin sheets of foam in great
majesty, coruscating in the lightning's glare; and for a few minutes
it really appeared to me that the elements had engaged in a pitched
battle--the crown of sovereignty to be awarded to the victor. The winds
howled through our almost naked shrouds like a thousand winged spirits
waiting to chaunt our requiem; but under the providential care of HIM
who governs the winds and the waves, and who formed the ocean from his
palm, our gallant barque bore us safely out the gale. Then said I--

  "God speed thee, good ship, on thy pathway of foam,
  The sea is thy country, the billow thy home."

When the light of the next morning had dawned upon us, I arose and went
out upon deck, and found our lady of the deep attired in full dress,
bearing us over the bosom of the gently rolling billow, apparently as
careless and unconcerned as though nothing had happened; and, safely
has she brought us into port, so I will sing--

  Now on Europe's shores we're landed,
    Far away from ocean's roar;
  Where howling winds and rolling surges,
    Disturb our anxious hearts no more.

  Still is every note of tempest,
    Calmly sleeps the peerless wave;
  An emblem of our friends departed,
    Whose dust reposes in the grave.

  Thanks to Him who holds the billow,
    And rides aloft on fleecy clouds;
  Let heaven, earth, and seas adore him,
    With all the vast unnumber'd crowds.

  Worthy! worthy is the Saviour!
    Who, for sinners, once was slain;
  Swell! oh, swell! the joyful anthem,
    All ye wretched sons of men.

  Come unto this bleeding fountain,
    Meek and lowly you must be;
  Bear the cross and wash in Jordan,
    Then from guilt he'll set you free.

My poetic organ is not largely developed, so for the correctness of the
measure and rhyme of these few lines I will not be responsible.

When in Bavaria I wrote brother Joseph a long letter; it was sometime
in August last. I hope he received it, for I think it would do him
good--at least it was written with that intention; and I sent one to my
wife at about the same time: the answers I hope to receive when I get
to Bavaria again.

Fare you well; I love you all, I pray for you all, and by the grace of
God, I always shall. I am your brother, far away, and yet near,

ORSON HYDE.

* * * *

_Regenshurgh, January_ 30, 1842.

TO BROTHER PRATT ALONE,

Sir,--I have thought proper to send this letter to you also, for the
same reasons as are assigned in the other. You will therefore publish
them both together, if you shall think proper to do any thing with
them. The whole was written in Trieste, except these last lines.
Not having a convenient opportunity to send them from that place, I
brought them with me here to Regensburgh. I now have the pleasure of
acknowledging the receipt of your two letters, and one from my wife and
brother Joseph, dated 14th November last. I was thrice glad to hear
from you all: I laughed and cried altogether. I have no room here to
reply, but you may hear from me again by and by.

Dear Brother,--I have not forgotten looking at you through the
crevices of a prison, neither have I forgotten what my thoughts were
at that time; but if I had had the strength of a Sampson, then was
the time that I would have used it for your deliverance. I need not
be particular to explain my own situation at that time; "but God be
thanked that I am where I am." If enemies are strong and many, nail
your flag to the spanker gaff, keep close to the wind, and if your
metal is not heavy enough, the artillery of heaven will play upon them.

ORSON HYDE.

* * * *



LETTER III. [A]

[Footnote A: This letter and the following are of much earlier date
than the two preceding, and have either wholly or in part appeared
previously in the _Millennial Star_.]

_Alexandria, Nov._ 22, 1841.

DEAR BROTHER PRATT,

A few minutes now offer for me to write, and I improve them in writing
to you.

I have only time to say that I have seen Jerusalem precisely according
to the vision which I had. I saw no one with me in the vision; and
although Elder Page was appointed to accompany me there, yet I found
myself there alone.

The Lord knows that I have had a hard time, and suffered much, but I
have great reason to thank him that I enjoy good health at present, and
have a prospect before me of soon going to a civilized country, where I
shall see no more turbans or camels. The heat is most oppressive, and
has been all through Syria.

I have not time to tell you how many days I have been at sea, without
food, or how many snails I have eaten; but if I had had plenty of them,
I should have done very well. All this is contained in a former letter
to you, written from Jaffa.

I have been at Cairo, on the Nile, because I could not get a passage
direct. Syria is in a dreadful state--a war of extermination is going
on between the Drewzes and Catholics. At the time I was at Beyrout, a
battle was fought in the mountains of Lebanon, near that place, and
about 800 killed. Robberies, thefts, and murders, are daily being
committed. It is no uncommon thing to find persons in the street
without heads. An English officer in going from St. Jean d'Acre to
Beyrout, found ten persons murdered in the street, and was himself
taken prisoner, but was rescued by the timely interference of the
Pacha. The particulars of all these things are contained in a former
letter.

An American traveller, named Gager, a licensed minister of the
Congregational or Presbyterian Church, left Jerusalem in company with
me. He was very unwell with the jaundice when we left, and at Damietta
we had to perform six days' quarantine before we ascended the Nile. On
our passage up he was taken very ill with a fever, and became helpless.
I waited and tended upon him as well as our circumstances would allow;
and when we landed at Bulack, I got four men to take him to the
American consul's, in Cairo, on a litter; I also took all his baggage
there, and assisted in putting him upon a good bed--employed a good
faithful Arabian nurse, and the English doctor. After the physician
had examined him, he told me that he was very low with a typhus fever,
and that it would be doubtful whether he recovered. Under these
circumstances I left him to obtain a passage to this place. After I had
gone on board a boat, and was just about pushing off, a letter came
from the doctor, stating that poor Mr. Gager died in about two hours
after I left him. He told me before we arrived at Cairo, that he was 27
years of age, and his friends lived in Norwich, Connecticut, near New
London, I think. There are many particulars concerning his death which
would be interesting to his friends, but I have no time to write them
now.

On Sunday morning, October 24th, a good while before day, I arose from
sleep, and went out of the city as soon as the gates were opened,
crossed the brook Cedron, and went upon the Mount of Olives, and there,
in solemn silence, with pen, ink, and paper, just as I saw in the
vision, offered up the following prayer to him who lives for ever and
ever:

"O Thou! who art from everlasting to everlasting, eternally and
unchangeably the same, even the God who rules in the heavens above,
and controls the destinies of men on the earth, wilt Thou condescend,
through thine infinite goodness and royal favour, to listen to the
prayer of thy servant which he this day offers up unto thee in the name
of thy holy child Jesus, upon this land where the Sun of Righteousness
sat in blood, and thine _Anointed One_ expired.

"Be pleased, O Lord, to forgive all the follies, weaknesses, vanities,
and sins of thy servant, and strengthen him to resist all future
temptations. Give him prudence and discernment that he may avoid the
evil, and a heart to choose the good; give him fortitude to bear up
under trying and adverse circumstances, and grace to endure all things
for thy name's sake, until the end shall come, when all the saints
shall rest in peace.

"Now, O Lord! thy servant has been obedient to the heavenly vision
which thou gavest him in his native land; and under the shadow of thine
outstretched arm, he has safely arrived in this place to dedicate
and consecrate this land unto Thee, for the gathering together of
Judah's scattered remnants, according to the predictions of the holy
prophets--for the building up of Jerusalem again after it has been
trodden down by the Gentiles so long, and for rearing a temple in
honour of thy name. Everlasting thanks be ascribed unto thee, Father!
Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast preserved thy servant from
the dangers of the seas, and from the plague and pestilence which have
caused the land to mourn. The violence of man has also been restrained,
and thy providential care by night and by day has been exercised over
thine unworthy servant. Accept, therefore, O Lord, the tribute of a
grateful heart for all past favours, and be pleased to continue thy
kindness and mercy towards a needy worm of the dust.

"O Thou, who didst covenant with Abraham, thy friend, and who didst
renew that covenant with Isaac, and confirm the same with Jacob with an
oath, that thou wouldst not only give them this land for an everlasting
inheritance, but that thou wouldst also remember their seed for ever.
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, have long since closed their eyes in death,
and made the grave their mansion. Their children are scattered and
dispersed abroad among the nations of the Gentiles like sheep that have
no shepherd, and are still looking forward for the fulfilment of those
promises which thou didst make concerning them; and even this land,
which once poured forth nature's richest bounty, and flowed, as it
were, with milk and honey, has, to a certain extent, been smitten with
barrenness and sterility since it drank from murderous hands the blood
of Him who never sinned.

"Grant, therefore, O Lord, in the name of thy well-beloved Son, Jesus
Christ, to remove the barrenness and sterility of this land, and let
springs of living water break forth to water its thirsty soil. Let the
vine and the olive produce in their strength, and the fig tree bloom
and flourish. Let the land become abundantly fruitful when possessed by
its rightful heirs; let it again flow with plenty to feed the returning
prodigals who come home with a spirit of grace and supplication; upon
it let the clouds distil virtue and richness, and let the fields smile
with plenty. Let the flocks and the herds greatly increase and multiply
upon the mountains and the hills; and let thy great kindness conquer
and subdue the unbelief of thy people. Do thou take from them their
stony heart, and give them a heart of flesh; and may the sun of thy
favour dispel the cold mists of darkness which have beclouded their
atmosphere. Incline them to gather in upon this land according to thy
word. Let them come like clouds and like doves to their windows. Let
the large ships of the nations bring them from the distant isles;
and let kings become their nursing fathers, and queens with motherly
fondness, wipe the tear of sorrow from their eye.

"Thou, O Lord, did once move upon the heart of Cyrus to shew favour
unto Jerusalem and her children. Do thou now also be pleased to inspire
the hearts of kings and the powers of the earth to look with a friendly
eye towards this place, and with a desire to see thy righteous purposes
executed in relation thereto. Let them know that it is thy good
pleasure to restore the kingdom unto Israel--raise up Jerusalem as its
capital, and constitute her people a distinct nation and government,
with David thy servant, even a descendant from the loins of ancient
David, to be their king.

"Let that nation or that people who shall take an active part in behalf
of Abraham's children, and in the raising up of Jerusalem, find favour
in thy sight. Let not their enemies prevail against them, neither
let pestilence or famine overcome them, but let the glory of Israel
overshadow them, and the power of the highest protect them; while that
nation or kingdom that will not serve thee in this glorious work must
perish, according to thy word--'Yea, those nations shall be utterly
wasted.'

"Though thy servant is now far from his home, and from the land bedewed
with his earliest tear, yet he remembers, O Lord, his friends who are
there, and family, whom for thy sake he has left. Though poverty and
privation be our earthly lot, yet ah! do Thou richly endow us with an
inheritance where moth and rust do not corrupt, and where thieves do
not break through and steal.

"The hands that have fed, clothed, or shown favour unto the family of
thy servant in his absence, or that shall hereafter do so, let them
not lose their reward, but let a special blessing rest upon them, and
in thy kingdom let them have an inheritance when thou shalt come to be
glorified in this society.

"Do Thou also look with favour upon all those through whose liberality
I have been enabled to come to this island; and in the day when thou
shalt reward all people according to their works, let these also not be
past by or forgotten, but in time let them be in readiness to enjoy the
glory of those mansions which Jesus has gone to prepare. Particularly
do thou bless the stranger in Philadelphia, whom I never saw, but who
sent me gold, with a request that I should pray for him in Jerusalem.
Now, O Lord, let blessings come upon him from an unexpected quarter,
and let his basket be filled, and his storehouse abound with plenty,
and let not the good things of the earth be his only portion, but let
him be found among those to whom it shall be said, 'Thou hast been
faithful over a few things, and I will make thee ruler over many.'

"O my father in heaven! I now ask thee in the name of Jesus to remember
Zion, with all her stakes, and with all her assemblies. She has been
grievously afflicted and smitten; she has mourned; she has wept; her
enemies have triumphed, and have said, 'Ah, where is thy God?' Her
priests and prophets have groaned in chains and fetters within the
gloomy walls of prisons, while many were slain, and now sleep in the
arms of death. How long, O Lord, shall iniquity triumph, and sin go
unpunished?

"Do Thou arise in the majesty of thy strength, and make bare thine arm
in behalf of thy people. Redress their wrongs, and turn their sorrow
into joy. Pour the spirit of light and knowledge, grace and wisdom,
into the hearts of her prophets, and clothe her priests with salvation.
Let light and knowledge march forth through the empire of darkness, and
may the honest in heart flow to their standard, and join in the march
to go forth to meet the Bridegroom.

"Let a peculiar blessing rest upon the presidency of thy church, for
at them are the arrows of the enemy directed. Be thou to them a sun
and shield, their strong tower and hiding-place; and in the time of
distress or danger be thou near to deliver. Also the quorum of the
twelve, do thou be pleased to stand by, for thou knowest the obstacles
which we have to encounter, the temptations to which we are exposed,
and the privations which we must suffer. Give us, therefore, strength
according to our day, and help us to bear a faithful testimony of Jesus
and his gospel, and to finish with fidelity and honour the work which
thou hast given us to do, and then give us a place in thy glorious
kingdom. And let this blessing rest upon every faithful officer and
member in thy church. And all the glory and honour will we ascribe unto
God and the Lamb for ever and ever. Amen."

* * * *

On the top of Mount Olives I erected a pile of stones as a witness
according to the ancient custom. On what was anciently called Mount
Zion, where the temple stood, I erected another, and used the rod
according to the prediction upon my head.

I have found many Jews who listened with intense interest. The idea
of the Jews being restored to Palestine is gaining ground in Europe
almost every day. Jerusalem is strongly fortified with many cannon
upon its walls. The wall is ten feet thick on the sides that would be
most exposed, and four or five feet where the descent from the wall is
almost perpendicular. The number of inhabitants within the walls is
about twenty thousand. About seven thousand of this number are Jews,
the balance being mostly Turks and Armenians. Many of the Jews who are
old go to this place to die, and many are coming from Europe into this
Eastern world. The great wheel is unquestionably in motion, and the
word of the Almighty has declared that it shall roll.

I have not time to write particulars now, but suffice it to say, that
my mission has been quite as prosperous as I could expect.

I am now about to go on board a fine ship for Trieste, and from thence
I intend to proceed to Regensburgh, and there publish our faith in the
German language. There are those who are ready and willing to assist me.

I send you this letter by Captain Withers, an English gentleman, who
goes direct to England on board the Oriental steamer. He has come with
me from Jerusalem. If I had money sufficient I should be almost tempted
to take passage on board of her to England, but this I cannot do.

On receipt of this, I wish you to write to me immediately, and direct
to Regensburgh, on the Danube, Beyern, or Bavaria. If you know anything
of my family, tell me.

My best respects to yourself and family, to brothers Adams and Snow,
and to all the saints in England.

May grace, mercy, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ, rest upon you all from this time, henceforth, and for
ever. Amen.

Your brother in Christ,

ORSON HYDE.

P.S. Mr. Gager died on the 15th instant, at four o'clock in the
afternoon.

* * * *



LETTER IV.

_Jaffa, October_ 20, 1841

DEAR BROTHER PRATT,

Yesterday I arrived in this place from Beyrout, and just as I was
about to start from the American consul's in this place to Jerusalem,
at a most enormous price, a company of English gentlemen rode in
from Jerusalem with many servants all armed, and they were to
return immediately to Jerusalem, and I can go for little or nothing
comparatively speaking.

I have only time to say a few words; but through the favour of heaven
I am well and in good spirits, and expect, in a day or two, to see
Jerusalem.

My journey has been long and tedious, and consequently expensive. If I
get back to England with money enough to buy my dinner, I shall think
myself well off.

The country is in a terrible state. While I was at Beyrout, a terrible
battle was fought in Mount Lebanon, about six hours' walk from Beyrout,
between the Drewzes and Catholics. It was said that about four hundred
were killed on each side. An English officer, returning from St. Jean
d'Acre to Beyrout, was taken by the Drewzes, and would have been killed
had not the Pacha come to his rescue.

He said that he found ten human bodies in the street on his way
without heads. Thefts, murders, and robberies are taking place almost
continually. The American missionaries in Beyrout and Mount Lebanon
have had notice from the Grand Sultan, through our minister at
Constantinople, Commodore Porter, to leave the country, and a prospect
that all the missionaries in Syria will have to leave. This is only
conjecture, however. But in this, if it do take place, I can see
plainly the hand of Providence. The fact is, this land belongs to the
Jews; and the present fermentation thereof shows to me that it is fast
working back into the hands of its rightful heirs. God will, in due
time, drive out the Canaanites, so that no more a Canaanite shall be
found in the land, or in the house of the Lord.

I find that almost an universal anxiety prevails respecting the return
of the Jews. The waters are troubled because the Angel has descended.
My heart leaps for joy at the prospect of seeing that land, and there
fulfilling my mission.

When we left Smyrna for Beyrout, we only took in stores for one week,
thinking that would surely be sufficient, as the voyage is usually made
in four days; but we were nineteen days on the passage. A number of
days I eat snails gathered from the rocks, but the greatest difficulty
was, I could not get enough of them. I was so weak and exhausted that I
could not go on shore after the slight exertion of drawing on my boots.
But that is past; I am now strong and well, and have plenty to eat. I
now have nothing but land pirates, in the shape of Arabs, to encounter.
An Englishman seems like a brother, let his religion be what it may.
Yet I am very partial to the fulness of the gospel; for in it I have
great joy.

The servants are now waiting for me, and I must gird on my arms and be
off. Yet one thing I will notice, which is this: On my passage from
Beyrout to this place, the night before last, at one o'clock, as I was
meditating on the deck of the vessel, as she was beating down against
a sultry schroke wind, a very bright glittering sword appeared in the
heavens, about two yards in length, with a beautiful hilt, as plain and
complete as any cut you ever saw. And, what is still more remarkable,
an arm, with a perfect hand, stretched itself out and took hold on the
hilt of the sword. The appearance really made my hair rise, and the
flesh, as it were, to crawl on my bones. The Arabs made a wonderful
outcry at the sight; O, Allah, Allah, Allah![A] was their exclamation
all over the vessel.

[Footnote A: Lord, Lord, Lord!]

I mention this because you know there is a commandment to me which
says, "Unto you it shall be given to know the signs of the times, and
the sign of the coming of the son of man."

May the Lord bless you all in England and in America. And I pray that
he will bless my wife, and my dear little children; God knows that I
want to see them--yea, and all the saints.

I have many particulars that I would like to write, but time will
not allow at this time. You will hear from me again by the first
opportunity, if the Arabs don't kill me. There is no post here; letters
are sent by private conveyance, through friends, &c. God bless you and
the cause of Zion is my last prayer.

My love to brothers Snow and Adams, and all the brothers and sisters in
the communion: pray for me.

Yours, in great haste,

ORSON HYDE.

* * * *



THE GATHERING OF ISRAEL.

BY MRS. TINSLEY.

_(From the Monthly Chronicle for April.)_

    A sound hath pass'd through the nations, heard
    By the heart alone, when its depths are stirr'd;
    Mightier than that of storm-lifted seas,
    Than the tempest's rush amid forrest trees;
    Mightier than sorrow's earth-born cry,
    Than the shout of kings to victory;
    And still, where its tale hath gone,
      A voice to the breeze is cast,
    "On to Jerusalem, brothers, on!
      We have gain'd our home at last!

    "Lift up thine head, O Israel! yet
    From the depths of the darkness round thee set;
    Rejoice, for the chosen of the Lord
    Have listened once more to His living word;
    Calling them forth from the nations around,
    To the hallow'd rest of their father's ground:
    And still, as the goal is won,
      Let the thrilling shout be past,
    On to Jerusalem, brothers, on!
      We have gain'd our home at last!

    "Was the scoffer strong in the days of old,
    Fenced by his idols of dust-won gold,
    Mocking their hope, while his footsteps trod
    With the prophet-gather'd hosts of God?
    Heed him not now in the times that be,
    For ours is no common destiny;
    But, with true armour, won
      From the stores of the mighty past,
    On to Jerusalem, boldly on!
      We have gain'd our home at last!

    "Did the desert of old yield its gushing wave,
    For the pilgrim-fathers their thirst to lave?
    Did the vision of God before them stand,
    Guiding their steps to the promis'd land?
    And shall we, their children, all forget
    That this mighty arm is our refuge yet?
    No! by the hope whereon
      We have lean'd through the stormy past!
    On to Jerusalem, brothers, on!
      We have gain'd our home at last!

    "There flow the waters that flow'd of yore,
    Washing no trace from the hallow'd shore;
    There rise the hills where our fathers bow'd
    When the voice of God shook the riven cloud;
    And the boughs of the stately cedar thrill
    With that holy breath, for it stirs them still:
    And we, are we call'd upon
      By a voice to the desert cast?
    On to Jerusalem, Israel, on!
      We have gain'd our home at last!"

* * * *

_Liverpool: James and Woodburn, Printers, 14, Hanover Street._



Transcriber's Note

Some obvious printer's errors (e.g. 'injuction' for 'injunction') have
been corrected as seemed reasonable. Some unusual spellings (e.g.
'radience,' 'Bethsda') and inconsistent quotation marks in
the original have been maintained.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Voice from Jerusalem, by Orson Hyde

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A VOICE FROM JERUSALEM ***

***** This file should be named 46208.txt or 46208.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/2/0/46208/

Produced by the Mormon Texts Project. See
http://mormontextsproject.org/ for a complete list of
Mormon texts available on Project Gutenberg, to help
proofread similar books, or to report typos. Special thanks
to Renah Holmes and Samuel Shreeve for proofreading.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
