The Project Gutenberg EBook of Redmanship in Kentucky for Fifty Great Suns, by 
Frank L. Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Redmanship in Kentucky for Fifty Great Suns

Author: Frank L. Smith

Release Date: July 14, 2014 [EBook #46275]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REDMANSHIP IN KENTUCKY ***




Produced by David Garcia and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Kentuckiana Digital Library)





[Transcriber's Note:

Italicized text delimited by underscores.

Bold text delimited by equal signs.]




  Redmanship in Kentucky

  FOR

  Fifty Great Suns

  BY PAST SACHEM
  FRANK L. SMITH
  GREAT CHIEF OF RECORDS

  LEXINGTON
  PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR
  G. S. D. 418

[Illustration: publisher's logo]

  TO

  MIANTONOMO TRIBE No. 1
  IMPROVED O. R. M.

  THE MOTHER TRIBE OF THE
  GREAT COUNCIL

  THIS BOOK IS

  DEDICATED

  IN F. F. & C.




CONTENTS


                                                             Page
  CHAPTER I. The Fore-History, 1765-1833.                       9

  CHAPTER II. The Establishment of the Improved Order
  of Red Men, 1833-1847.                                       13

  CHAPTER III. The Establishment of the Improved Order
  of Red Men in Kentucky by the Great Council of the
  United States, 1852.                                         15

  CHAPTER IV. The Great Council of Kentucky, 1854-1884.        16

  CHAPTER V. Kentucky Under the Jurisdiction of the
  Great Council of Ohio, 1884-1894.                            48

  CHAPTER VI. Kentucky Under a Deputy Great Incohonee
  and the Establishment of Tribes by the Great Council
  of the United States, 1894.                                  50

  CHAPTER VII. Establishment of the Great Council of
  Kentucky and Its Record from 1895 to 1908.                   53

  CHAPTER VIII. Brief Review of the Institution of Each
  Tribe in Kentucky, with the Significance of Its Name
  Where Possible.                                             126

  CHAPTER IX. Roster of the Old Great Council of
  Kentucky.                                                   155

  CHAPTER X. Roster of the Present Great Council of
  Kentucky.                                                   160

  CHAPTER XI. Biographies of Past Great Sachems of
  Kentucky.                                                   169

  CHAPTER XII. Roster of Chiefs of the Old Great Council.     203

  CHAPTER XIII. Roster of Chiefs of the Present Great
  Council.                                                    205




PREFACE


I trust that no apology is necessary for the making of this book.
It is merely a record of facts which if not soon presented in this
tangible form might easily be blotted out forever.

As it is intended as a history and record of Redmanship in Kentucky
only, I have made but brief mention of those intensely interesting
events leading up to the establishment of the Great Council of the
United States. They will be found recorded in the Official History of
the Order in detail, and the reader is referred to its pages for the
most complete information.

The records of Redmanship in Kentucky have been diligently searched,
a careful digest made of them, and I believe the information herein
contained may be regarded as authentic.

I am indebted to many brothers for kindly assistance in the
compilation of these pages, and I wish to thank them one and all for
the many courtesies shown me.

  Fraternally, in F. F. & C.,

  FRANK L. SMITH.

Lexington, Kentucky, 1st Snow Moon, G. S. D. 418.




STYLE OF DATING


Prior to the year A. D. 1865, the Jewish style namely, the Year of
the World, was observed by Red Men in dating their documents. At
the Council held in G. S. 5626, this system was discontinued and G.
S. D. (Great Sun of Discovery) was adopted, the year of 1492 being
considered G. S. D. 1. For convenience it was determined that the
Great Sun should commence on the first of the Cold Moon, to conform to
the common era.




CHAPTER I.

THE FORE-HISTORY (1765-1833).


The history of the Improved Order of Red Men is so interwoven with the
history of the struggles of the American Colonies for independence that
to record the one is to repeat the other in a great measure.

The first settlers upon this continent were imbued with the spirit
of freedom, and to gain this object left their mother country.
The American shores became the asylum of the oppressed of all
nationalities. They were not, however, thus easily to escape the
hand of British tyranny. The British Government soon learned that
the American colonists were a thrifty, prosperous people, strong and
skilled in the arts and sciences and were rapidly gaining wealth. The
temptation to tax these people for the maintenance of its government
and army was too strong upon the mother country, and severe taxes were
imposed; but the right of representation in the British Parliament was
denied them.

This usurpation of power created the greatest dissatisfaction among
the colonists, who repeatedly memorialized the English Government for
relief, and for redress for their many wrongs, but without avail.

As early as 1765, it was the custom of the citizens of the city of
Boston and vicinity to assemble and discuss the aggravating situation.
Their favorite place of meeting was under the famous Liberty Tree,
which stood at what is now the corner of Essex and Washington streets.
These citizens had perfected a permanent organization, bound together
by signed pledges to appose by all legitimate means the enforcement
of the obnoxious "Stamp Act." It is not known that at that time they
had any particular name for their organization, but Col. Barre, in a
speech in the House of Commons, February 7, 1765, referred to American
colonists in opposition to the stamp act as the "Sons of Liberty," and
this name seems to have been applied to them from that time.

On the 13th of May, 1766, the news of the repeal of the stamp act was
received in Boston and was celebrated under the Liberty Tree and on
the Commons with great rejoicing.

The repeal of the stamp act, however, did not satisfy the patriots.
While the excessive taxation that had been so oppressive and
burdensome had been removed, the English Government still held to
their right to tax the colonists, and did so tax them, though in a
lighter degree.

The Sons of Liberty called a meeting on the afternoon of the 13th of
May, 1767, at Faneuil Hall and prepared a petition to the Governor for
the removal of a British warship from Boston harbor which was there for
the purpose of enforcing the taxation laws.

A meeting was held March 6th, in Faneuil Hall, with nearly three
thousand members present, Samuel Adams presiding, to protest against
the presence of British soldiers in the city, the result of their
presence being riot and bloodshed.

November 3, 1773, a meeting of the Sons of Liberty was called under
the Liberty Tree to protest against the landing of certain ships
supposed to be laden with taxable tea. Notice of the meeting was
posted, and it bore at the bottom this legend: "Show me the man that
dare take this down."

There is also a record of a meeting of the Sons of Liberty in the old
tavern in Providence, R. I., at about the same time, November 3, 1773.

On the 16th of December, 1773, occurred the famous "Boston Tea Party,"
given under the auspices of the Sons of Liberty of Boston and Vicinity.

On March 1, 1776, the Sons of Liberty held their first meeting in
Baltimore. Wm. Paca, a signer of the Declaration of Independence, was
the secretary. In Savannah, Ga., the first meeting was held July 14,
1774, when they concurred in the action of their Northern brethren. In
1765, the first meetings were held in South Carolina, and in New York
meetings were held about concurrent with those in Massachusetts.

When first organized the Sons of Liberty had no thought of
Independence, but were loyal to the British crown, though protesting
against "taxation without representation."

Their motto was "FREEDOM," however, and as that could not be obtained
under British rule, as a last resort they determined to be free and
independent.

It is unnecessary to here record the many deeds of heroism performed by
the Sons of Liberty, the "Liberty Boys," the "Minute Men" and the
members thereof. They will be found emblazoned upon every page of the
history of the American Revolution.

In many localities the Sons of Liberty adopted the title of "Sons of
Saint Tamina," or "Saint Tamina Society," and set apart the first day of
May as their anniversary.

We quote from the Official History of the Great Council of the United
States, page 158, as follows:

"In this year, 1771, and for many years later, there existed in the town
of Annapolis a society called the 'Saint Tamina Society,' who set apart
the first day of May in memory of Saint Tamina, their patron saint,
whose history is now lost in fable and uncertainty. It was usual, on the
morning of this day, for the members of this society to erect in some
public location in the city 'a May-pole,' and to decorate it in a most
tasteful manner with wild flowers, gathered from the adjacent woods, and
forming themselves in a ring around it, hand in hand, perform the
'war-dance' with many other customs which they had seen exhibited by the
'Children of the Forest.' It was also usual, on this day, for such of
the citizens as chose to enter into the amusements, to wear a piece of
buck-tail in their hats, or in some conspicuous part of their dress.
General invitations were given out, and a large company usually
assembled during the course of the evening, and whilst engaged in the
midst of a dance, the company would be interrupted by the sudden
intrusion of a number of the Saint Tamina Society, habited like Indians,
who, rushing violently into the room, singing war songs and giving the
'whoop,' commenced dancing in the style of that people. After this
ceremony, they made a collection of money, and retired evidently well
pleased with their reception and entertainment."

At a later date the day for celebration was changed from the first day
of May to the 12th, which is now observed as "St. Tamminy's Day."

After the close of the Revolutionary War, the object for which they had
banded themselves together having been accomplished, the Sons of
Liberty, or Saint Tamina Societies, became less prominent in public
affairs, and it was the differences of opinion among the citizens as to
the permanent form the government should take that brought them again to
the front as a political organization with the addition to their motto
of "FRIENDSHIP."

The Saint Tamina Societies, or Societies of St. Tammany, as they were
variously called, became quite powerful in the political affairs of the
young nation and were organized in all parts of the country from the
close of the Revolutionary War up to as late as 1820.

The only record we find of this Society in Kentucky is in Ranck's
History of Lexington, from which we quote the following:

"A St. Tammany Society was instituted in Lexington about this time,
1811, and continued to exist up to 1820. The 'Wigwam' was in the second
story of a building which stood on the corner of Main and Broadway. The
sons of St. Tammany often paraded through the streets disguised as
Indians, and magnificent in red paint, feathers, bows, tomahawks, and
war clubs. It was one of the most noted Democratic organizations in the
West. Thomas T. Barr, Richard Chinn, and others successively filled the
office of 'Sachem.' We give verbatim one of the Society's orders, viz.:

St. Tammany's Day.--The Sons of St. Tammany, or Brethren of the
Columbian Order, will assemble at the council fire of their great wigwam
on Tuesday, the 12th of the month of Flowers, at the rising of the sun,
to celebrate the anniversary of their patron saint.

A dinner will be provided at Bro. John Fowler's garden, to which the
brethren will march in procession, where a long talk will be delivered
by one of the order.

An adjourned meeting of the Society will be held on tomorrow evening,
at the going down of the sun. By order of the Grand Sachem. N. S.
PORTER, Sec.

8th of the month of Flowers, [1]Year of Discovery, 326."

During the second war with Great Britain, Fort Mifflin, on the Delaware
River, near Philadelphia, was garrisoned for a time by a military
company composed of the sons of the leading citizens of Philadelphia. At
Fort Mifflin, and among these volunteers originated the "Society of Red
Men," about the year 1813. Their motto was "Freedom and Friendship," and
they were a natural outgrowth from and sequence to the St. Tammany
Societies.

The records of the Society of Red Men are abundant and the Great Council
of the United States in its Official History of the Order traces its
growth and decline in detail as well as its customs and ceremonies. It
flourished until about the year 1828, when it began to decline, and in
1832 was about extinct. The elements of conviviality, which seems to
have been inseparable from all fraternal organizations of that period,
finally produced such a degeneration in the Society as to disgust the
better element, and cause the reorganization in its present form, and
the incorporation of the word "Improved" in its title.

[1] It will be observed that the present style of dating was used
nearly one hundred years ago, though subsequently changed to the Jewish
method.




CHAPTER II.

THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE IMPROVED ORDER OF RED MEN (1833-1847).


In a pamphlet prepared by Bro. John F. Weishampel, Sr., containing a
long talk delivered by him on Saint Tammany's Day, May 12, 1837, in the
city of Baltimore, Md., he says:

"For some length of time prior to organizing the present Improved Order
of Red Men, there existed in Baltimore, Md., a lodge, or society, called
Red Men. They had their wigwam, or place of meeting, in the garret of a
tavern. They met once a week, paid their dues, and initiated new members
if any were on hand. After the business was over, the rest of the
evening was spent in singing, telling yarns, making speeches, and
convivial enjoyment, in which the decanter largely figured. The object
of the society appeared to be only convivial entertainment. Several
gentlemen who had been induced to join the lodge, but who did not favor
such a course, withdrew as soon as they discovered the nature and object
of the society, and it soon afterwards broke up."

Among those who had become members of the Red Men, though ignorant of
its pernicious customs, were Geo. A. Peter and William T. Jones, as well
as a number whose names it is unnecessary to record, yet admiring the
beauties of its aboriginal ceremonies, determined to revive the society
upon a basis of sobriety, virtue and mutual assistance in time of need.

Several preliminary meetings were held, at which plans, rules and
regulations for its government were discussed and adopted, and the Tribe
was duly organized under the title of Logan Tribe, No. 1, Order of
Improved Red Men, having for their motto, "FREEDOM, FRIENDSHIP AND
CHARITY."

The presiding chief was styled the Sachem, and the others graded as
Sagamores, Prophet, Chief of Records, Keeper of Wampum, Guards of the
Forest and Wigwam, Sanaps, Warriors and Braves. They also later prefixed
the word "Worthy" to the titles of the chiefs.

Dates were computed according to the Jewish method, using the year of
the world, or, as it was called, the "Grand Sun of the world." A year
was a "grand sun," and continued to be so styled until 1868, when it was
changed to "great sun."

A calendar or table of nomenclature was established, practically the
same as that now in use. The chiefs of the Tribes were elected every
three moons, which continued to be the custom for many "grand suns."

After Logan Tribe had been in existence for about one great sun, and
there had also been instituted Metamora Tribe, No. 2, it was deemed
advisable to apply to the Maryland Legislature for a charter, so that
the Tribe could be recognized as an important body. Brother John F.
Weishampel, Sr., was appointed to draw up the petition, and in so doing
prepared the papers in the name of the "Improved Order of Red Men," thus
transposing the original title, "Order of Improved Red Men." None of
members seemed to notice the alteration in the name and it therefore
remained so.

Soon after the organization of Metamora Tribe, No. 2, it was deemed best
to form a higher body, and therefore on the 20th sun of Flower Moon, G.
S. 5595, the Grand Council of Maryland was organized.

Pocahontas Tribe, No. 3, was instituted three great suns later, and the
Order was now firmly established and seemed on the high road to success
and prosperity.

In September, 1841, a new Tribe was instituted under the name of
Metamora Tribe, No. 4, the old Tribe, Metamora, No. 2, having forfeited
its charter and become defunct. Metamora, No. 4, did not last long for a
difficulty arose between the Tribe and the Great Council of Maryland,
and the membership withdrew and formed the nucleus of the organization
known as the Independent Order of Red Men, composed entirely of Germans.

Several additional Tribes were established by the Great Council of
Maryland, and on November 4, 1845, there having previously been
established three Tribes in the District of Columbia, the Great Council
of Maryland granted a charter to the Great Council of the District of
Columbia, and it was established on that day.

From this time on the Order spread, until there were Tribes in several
Reservations, and on the 1st sleep of the 5th seven suns of Cold Moon,
5607, which in the common era corresponds to Monday, January 30, 1847,
was instituted and organized the Great Council of the United States,
which was and is recognized as the Supreme Body of the Improved Order of
Red Men.




CHAPTER III.

THE ESTABLISHMENT OF REDMANSHIP IN KENTUCKY BY THE GREAT COUNCIL OF THE
UNITED STATES, 1852.


We have but the briefest record of the introduction of Redmanship into
the Reservation of Kentucky.

Worthy Great Incohonee Wm. Tucker, in his long talk to the Great Council
of the United States in 5613 (1852), referred to the organization of
Chickasaw Tribe, No. 1, of Newport, Kentucky, and Black Hawk Tribe, No.
2, of Covington. The date of the introduction of the Order into Kentucky
was the 29th of Hot Moon, G. S. 5612, (June 29, 1852). The first Prophet
of Black Hawk Tribe, No. 2, was A. J. Francis, afterwards sixteenth
Great Incohonee of the G. C. U. S.

There were also established the following Tribes, though we have no
record of the exact date of their institution:

Pocahontas Tribe, No. 3, of Newport, G. S. 5613.

Kentucky, No. 4, of Louisville, G. S. 5614.




CHAPTER IV.

THE GREAT COUNCIL OF KENTUCKY, 1854-1884.


Pursuant to a notice given, the Past Sachems of Chicasaw Tribe, No. 1,
of Newport, Blackhawk Tribe, No. 2, of Covington, and Pocahontas Tribe,
No. 3, of Newport, of the Improved Order of Red Men, assembled in
Newport on the 9th of Sturgeon Moon, G. S. 5614, for the purpose of
organizing a Great Council in the Reservation of Kentucky.

The following named Past Sachems were present:

From Chicasaw Tribe, No. 1--Geo. W. Ford, P. A. C. Kemper, J. H. Barlow,
G. D. Allen, Wm. Ostler, D. H. B. Coffin and C. J. Murdock.

From Black Hawk Tribe, No. 2--V. Schinkle, E. Reese, Uriah Schinkle, and
A. J. Francis.

From Pocahontas Tribe, No. 3--Geo. W. Schmidt.

It is worthy of note that of the foregoing, [2]Geo. W. Ford afterwards
became the 9th Great Incohonee of the Great Council of the United
States, and [3]A. J. Francis the 16th.

The Great Council Fire was kindled in due form by the Worthy Great
Incohonee George A. Peter, and the following named chiefs were elected
or appointed and raised up:

  George W. Ford                Most Worthy Great Sachem
  E. Reese             Most Worthy Great Senior Sagamore
  Uriah Schinkle       Most Worthy Great Junior Sagamore
  P. A. C. Kemper              Most Worthy Great Prophet
  A. J. Francis       Most Worthy Great Chief of Records
  V. Schinkle         Most Worthy Great Keeper of Wampum
  D. H. B. Coffin                           Great Sannap
  Wm. Ostler                       Great Guard of Wigwam
  G. W. Schmidt                    Great Guard of Forest

It was ordered that Kentucky Tribe, No. 4, be notified of the
institution of this Great Council and that it is now under its
jurisdiction.

Kentucky Tribe was located in Louisville and it is probable that it did
not join in the call for the institution of the Great Council.

It was agreed that the annual sessions of the Great Council be held in
the hunting grounds of Newport, and the quarterly sessions in such place
as a majority of the members present may determine from time to time.

Various committees were appointed, including one on Constitution and
Laws, and the council fire was quenched, to be rekindled on the 19th
sleep of Sturgeon Moon, on which date the Great Council met pursuant to
adjournment, and the council fire was kindled with due solemnity.

No important business was transacted at this council other than the
adoption of a code of Rules and By-Laws, and the council fire was
quenched to be rekindled on the 26th sleep of Sturgeon Moon.

At this adjourned council Representatives to the Great Council of the
United States were elected as follows: E. Reese, G. W. Ford, and U.
Schinkle, and the council fire was quenched to be rekindled on the 2nd
sleep of Traveling Moon, but did not meet until the 16th sun, when the
council fire was kindled and routine business transacted.

At this session it was ordered that all Tribes in the jurisdiction be
requested to surrender the charters they had received from the G. C. U.
S., and apply to the Great Council of Kentucky for charters.

The next session was held in Covington, on the 15th of Cold Moon, 5615,
when several Past Sachems presented credentials and were admitted.

A petition was received from pale faces residing in Alexandria praying
for the institution of Choctaw Tribe, No. 5, in those hunting grounds,
and a dispensation was granted to kindle the council fire.

The next session was held in the hunting grounds of Louisville, on the
16th sun of Plant Moon, 5615.

Worthy Great Sachem Geo. W. Ford stated that he had been appointed Vice
Great Incohonee for the Southern States, and was soon to visit New
Orleans for the purpose of instituting a Tribe there.

It was decided that a Brother elected Prophet of a Tribe at its
institution was entitled to the honors of a Past Sachem without passing
through the chairs.

The council fire was then quenched in due form.

[2] "The Great Council of Kentucky was instituted at Newport on the 9th
sleep of Sturgeon Moon, G. S. 5614, (August 9, 1854). Great Sachem
George W. Ford, elected at this time, afterwards became the ninth Great
Incohonee of the G. C. U. S."--Records G. C. U. S., 5614.


[3] "Among those admitted for the first time was Past Great Sachem
A. J. Francis, who afterwards became Great Incohonee of the G. C. U.
S."--Records G. C. U. S., 5617.


=1855.=

SECOND GRAND SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council fire was kindled in ample form at Newport on the 16th
sun of Buck Moon, G. S. 5615.

Past Sachems and representatives were admitted from Chickasaw Tribe, No.
1; Black Hawk Tribe, No. 2; Pocahontas Tribe, No. 3; Kentucky Tribe, No.
4; Choctaw Tribe, No. 5, and Tecumseh Tribe, No. 6, of Louisville. The
records fail to show the date of the institution of this Tribe, but it
must have been during the Great Sun 5614-5615, and was authorized to
work in the German language.

Great Chiefs for the ensuing Great Sun were elected and raised up as
follows:

  Elias Reese, of No. 2                          Worthy Great Sachem
  S. I. B Badgley, of No. 4             Worthy Great Senior Sagamore
  Chas. Amann, of No. 3                 Worthy Great Junior Sagamore
  J. B. Monder, of No. 1                        Worthy Great Prophet
  A. J. Francis, of No. 2              Worthy Great Chief of Records
  V. Schinkle, of No. 2                Worthy Great Keeper of Wampum
  G. W. Ford, Great Representative to G. C. U. S. for two great suns
  Bros. Brown and Coffin, for one great sun each.

Great Sachem Geo. W. Ford read the first long talk, an able and
comprehensive document. He said: "The Grand Sun just past is the
first of this Great Body. It has been one of great trial. The Great
Manitou's face has been under a cloud, our corn patches have been
barren and our vines brought forth no fruit; yet has not the faith of
the Red Man faltered. The cloud is being lifted, our hearts are made
glad, the corn and vine promise much, our squaws and pappooses shall
not go hungry, and the wampum belt shall again be full. During the
past Grand Sun two more Tribes have been added to our number--Choctaw
Tribe, No. 5, at Alexandria, and Tecumseh Tribe, No. 6, at Louisville.
In the absence of written law I have been governed by this alone,
our motto, "Freedom, Friendship, and Charity. Freedom of thought in
discussion; Friendship in our intercourse with the brotherhood, and
Charity towards our brothers' faults, frailties and the foibles of
human nature." Speaking as he was to Past Sachems only, the following
was not only timely then, but is still pertinent and should be heeded:
"We would earnestly recommend that you attend regularly the councils
of your respective Tribes, for to you it is natural to look for
countenance and advice. It is a too common failing that when a brother
has attained the highest post of honor for him to become remiss in
his duties to his Tribe, for it is his duty to attend the kindling of
his council fire upon every occasion, when health and private duties
permit. It is essentially the province of all past officers to guide
their respective Tribes in the right path, that they go not astray and
follow the path of the evil spirit. Let this advice sink deeply into
your hearts and penetrate fruitfully your understanding."

The following was adopted:

"Resolved: That this Great Council instruct its Representatives to the
G. C. U. S. to call the attention of that body to the subject of
establishing a chief's degree to be conferred upon the squaws of Red
Men."

The Great Council fire was quenched, to be rekindled in the hunting
grounds of Alexandria, on the 15th sun of Traveling Moon, G. S. 5616.

On the above date the council fire was rekindled. Since the quenching of
the last council fire the Great Council of the United States had
convened, and Past Great Sachem Geo. W. Ford had been elected Great
Incohonee of that body, and he presided at this session of the Great
Council of Kentucky.

Several Past Sachems presented credentials and were admitted, routine
business was transacted and the council fire was quenched, to be
rekindled in the hunting grounds of Covington, on the 21st sun of Cold
Moon, G. S. 5616, on which date the Great Council reconvened, but
transacted no important business other than a resolution to fine all
Great Chiefs for non-attendance, and the council fire was quenched, to
be rekindled in the hunting grounds of Louisville, on the 14th sun of
Plant Moon, 5616.

At this adjourned session much business of only local interest, however,
was transacted.

A resolution was adopted to kindle the Great Council fire semi-annually
instead of quarterly, once in Louisville and once in Newport or
Covington.

The council fire was then quenched.


=1856.=

THIRD GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The council fire was kindled with due solemnities in the hunting grounds
of Newport, on the 21st sun of Buck Moon, G. S. 5616.

Representatives were present from Chickasaw Tribe, No. 1; Black Hawk
Tribe, No. 2; Pocahontas Tribe, No. 3, and Tecumseh Tribe, No. 6.

Great Sachem Elias Reese presented his long talk, regretting that he had
not been able to institute any new Tribes, but reported the Order in a
very healthy condition.

The election of Great Chiefs for the Grand Sun ensuing resulted as
follows:

  A. J. Francis                            M. W. Great Sachem
  John Hughes                     M. W. Great Senior Sagamore
  John Amann                      M. W. Great Junior Sagamore
  Wm. Schmidt                             M. W. Great Prophet
  Peter Ruhl                     M. W. Great Chief of Records
  Vincent Schinkle                     M. W. Keeper of Wampum
  Elias Reese             Great Representative to G. C. U. S.

The finance committee reported total receipts for the Grand Sun,
$374.40; expenses, $324.50; balance in the wampum belt, $49.90.

No business was transacted at this session worthy of being recorded on
these pages, and after the Past Great Sachem had instructed the brethren
in the secret work the Great Council fire was quenched, to be rekindled
in the hunting grounds of Louisville, on the 13th sun of Cold Moon, G.
S. 5617.

On the above date the Great Council reconvened, and representatives were
admitted from Kentucky Tribe, No. 4; Tecumseh, No. 6, and Delaware, No.
7.

The Great Sachem reported that he had granted a dispensation for a new
Tribe at Louisville, to be known as Delaware Tribe, No. 7, and that its
first council fire had been kindled on the 2nd sun, Traveling Moon, G.
S. 5617.

Reports were received in correct form from all Tribes except Chickasaw
Tribe, No. 1, and Choctaw, No. 5, and as no further mention is made of
No. 5 in subsequent records, it is probable that it was at this time
defunct.

Past Great Sachem Elias Reese, Great Representative to G. C. U. S.,
made a lengthy report, stating at that time there were nine States
having Great Councils, viz.: Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia, District
of Columbia, New Jersey, Ohio, Kentucky, Delaware, and New York,
and that hereafter the Great Council of the United States would be a
representative body, exclusively. He also reported that P. G. I. Geo. W.
Ford had been appointed Vice Great Incohonee for Louisiana, Tennessee
and Texas.

A committee was appointed to have the Great Council of Kentucky
incorporated.

The council fire was then quenched.


=1857.=

FOURTH GRAND SUN COUNCIL.

The council fire was kindled in the wigwam of Black Hawk Tribe, No. 2,
Covington, on the 13th of Buck Moon, G. S. 5617.

Representatives were admitted from Tribes Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 7.

The long talks of the Great Chiefs were not copied in the proceedings,
therefore no excerpts can be made from them.

A committee of three was appointed to draft a constitution for the
government of Tribes under the jurisdiction of this Great Council.
Previous to this time each Tribe had prepared its own constitution as
well as by-laws, subject, however, to approval by the Great Council.

Chiefs for the ensuing Grand Sun were elected and raised up as follows:

  John Hughes                              M. W. Great Sachem
  Gregory B. Kiteley              M. W. Great Senior Sagamore
  John B. Davies                  M. W. Great Junior Sagamore
  W. D. Turner                            M. W. Great Prophet
  Peter Ruhl                     M. W. Great Chief of Records
  A. J. Francis                  M. W. Great Keeper of Wampum
  A. J. Francis                 Representative to G. C. U. S.

After transacting the usual routine business, the council fire was
quenched, to be rekindled in the wigwam of Kentucky Tribe, No. 4,
hunting grounds of Louisville, on the 11th of Cold Moon, G. S. 5618.

The Great Council reconvened, pursuant to adjournment, with all Great
Chiefs present.

Representatives were admitted from Tribes Nos. 2, 4, 6 and 7.

No business was transacted other than the payment of current bills and
acting upon a new code of by-laws for the Great Council, and the council
fire was quenched in due form.


=1858.=

FIFTH GRAND SUN COUNCIL.

The council fire was kindled in the hunting grounds of Newport, on the
12th of Buck Moon, G. S. 5618, all Great Chiefs being present.

Representatives were present from Tribes Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 6.

Past Sachems were present from Kentucky Tribe, No. 4, and Delaware, No.
7, but without credentials as representatives, and they were refused
admission, whereupon they gave notice of an appeal to the G. C. U. S.

Great Sachem John Hughes, in his long talk, stated that the Order was in
good condition and that efforts were being made to establish Tribes in
Frankfort and Lexington. He complimented the Louisville brethren for
their zeal. Among his rulings was one that a paleface being admitted
under lawful age, by mistake, should remain a member of the Tribe which
had adopted him.

Reports of the G. C. of R. and G. K. of W. showed the Great Council to
be in debt to the Great Keeper of Wampum for 7 fathoms 1 foot and 9
inches.

The election for Great Chiefs for the ensuing Grand Sun resulted as
follows:

  John B. Davies                           M. W. Great Sachem
  A. C. Harig                     M. W. Great Senior Sagamore
  Jacob Schenk                    M. W. Great Junior Sagamore
  C. Rice                                 M. W. Great Prophet
  Jas. N. Tyrack                 M. W. Great Chief of Records
  A. J. Francis                  M. W. Great Keeper of Wampum

Bros. Ruhl, Harig and Tyrack were elected Great Representatives to the
G. C. U. S., and were instructed that if they desired to attend that
Grand Body at their own expense they would be furnished with
credentials.

After passing an order to borrow 50 fathoms from Tecumseh Tribe, No. 6,
the Great Council fire was quenched, to be rekindled in the hunting
grounds of Louisville, on the 12th of Cold Moon, G. S. 5619.

At the semi-grand sun session, Great Sachem John B. Davies was not
present, owing to afflictions in his family, and Past Great Sachem A. J.
Francis occupied his stump.

Representatives were present from Tribes Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7.

It was announced that Chickasaw Tribe, No. 1, of Newport, had become
defunct and its members were desirous of uniting with some other Tribe,
taking with them the property of former Chickasaw Tribe in lieu of
admission fee, and requested of the Great Council permission so to do.
Acting Great Sachem ruled the request out of order, on the ground that
the property of defunct Chickasaw Tribe did not belong to the members,
but to the Great Council.

It was ordered that no Tribe shall be entitled to the pass-word, nor
shall its chiefs be raised up until its reports and percentage have been
placed in the hands of its Deputy Great Sachem.

The constitution was amended so as to provide for annual sessions only,
to alternate between the cities of Louisville and Covington.

After levying an assessment of ten fathoms upon each Tribe under its
jurisdiction, the council fire was quenched.


=1859.=

SIXTH GRAND SUN COUNCIL.

The Grand Sun Council fire was kindled in the wigwam of Black Hawk
Tribe, No. 2, hunting grounds of Covington, on the 11th of Buck Moon, G.
S. 5619, Great Sachem John B. Davies presiding.

Representatives were admitted from Tribes Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 6.

The Great Sachem, in a very brief talk, reported that Black Hawk,
Pocahontas, Kentucky, Tecumseh, and Delaware Tribes were in a nourishing
condition, a spirit of emulation pervading their wigwams.

Great Chief of Records J. N. Tyrack presented a very complete report,
from which the following is gleaned: Amount in Great Council wampum
belt, 142 fathoms; number of working Tribes, 6; members in good
standing, 267; withdrawn by card, 9; adopted, 52; admitted by card, 3;
rejected, 3; expulsions and suspensions, 40; deaths, 3; widows and
orphans, 14; amount paid for relief of brothers, $258.50; for relief of
widows and orphans, $53.75.

Election for Great Chiefs resulted as follows:

  A. C. Herig                                M. W. Great Sachem
  Jacob Schenk                      M. W. Great Senior Sagamore
  W. H. Patton                      M. W. Great Junior Sagamore
  John B. Haltimus                          M. W. Great Prophet
  Jas. N. Tyrack                   M. W. Great Chief of Records
  A. J. Francis                    M. W. Great Keeper of Wampum
  Bros. Tyrack, Davis and Herig  Representatives to G. C. U. S.

Trustees--Bros. Kiteley, Davis and Haltimus.

A constitution for the government of all Tribes in this reservation was
adopted.

The Great Keeper of Wampum reported that all bills and claims had been
paid and that there was a balance in the wampum belt of 18 inches.

The council fire was then quenched with due solemnity.


=1860.=

SEVENTH GRAND SUN COUNCIL.

The Most Worthy Great Council of Kentucky kindled its seventh Grand Sun
Council fire in the wigwam of Delaware Tribe, No. 7, hunting ground of
Louisville, on the 9th sun of Buck Moon, G. S. 5620, Great Sachem A. C.
Herig on his stump.

Representatives were admitted from Black Hawk Tribe, No. 2; Pocahontas,
No. 3; Kentucky, No. 4; Tecumseh, No. 6, and Delaware, No. 7.

The Great Sachem's long talk reviewed the progress of the Order for the
Grand Sun. He regretted that he had been unable to institute any new
Tribes, and called the attention of the Great Council to the fact that
there were in the possession of the Great Chief of Records the effects
of defunct Tribes Chickasaw, No. 1, and Choctaw, No. 5, and urged that
some action be taken to dispose of the same.

The election resulted as follows:

  Chas. Amann                              M. W. Great Sachem
  C. Rice                         M. W. Great Senior Sagamore
  John B. Haltimus                M. W. Great Junior Sagamore
  Richard W. Elsey                        M. W. Great Prophet
  Jas. N. Tyrack                 M. W. Great Chief of Records
  W. D. Turner                   M. W. Great Keeper of Wampum

John Hughes, Chas. Amann, and Martin Borntraeger, Great Representatives
to G. C. U. S.

The Great Chief of Records reported as follows: Amount on hand in wampum
belt, 140 fathoms; number of working tribes, 5; adoptions, 37;
rejections, 1; suspensions, 57; admitted by card, 7; withdrawn by card,
4; expulsions, 3; deceased, 4; members, 299; Past Sachems, 113; Tribes
defunct, Chickasaw, No. 1.

Bros. Kiteley, Fresher and Strube were elected Great Trustees.

The council fire was then quenched.

Bro. Jas. N. Tyrack, Great Chief of Records, having resigned his
chieftaincy, a special council was called to meet in the wigwam of
Pocahontas Tribe, No. 3, at Newport, on the 18th of Worm Moon, G. S.
5621, at which Past Sachem Bernard Strube was elected and raised up to
the stump of Great Chief of Records.


=1861.=

EIGHTH GRAND SUN COUNCIL.

The eighth Grand Sun Council fire of the Most Worthy Great Council of
Kentucky was kindled in the hunting grounds of Newport, on the 9th of
Buck Moon, G. S. 5621, M. W. Great Sachem Chas. Amann presiding.

Past Sachems from Tribes Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7 were in attendance.

In his long talk the Great Sachem said: "As all earthly joys are tinged
with sorrow, these hunting grounds of our fathers are now clamorous with
the wild and frantic war whoop. The pleasure of this meeting is alloyed
with pain. Oh, how different is the scene presented from that of one
Grand Sun ago. Everything then was bright and prosperous, and bid fair
to be the golden harvest of ages. The fruits of the earth were abundant
and our forest replete with game. * * * I cannot report that all the
Tribes in this jurisdiction are in healthy condition, or that the most
friendly relations exist around their council fires. There have been
some grievances and misunderstandings between Tribes and our former
Great Chief of Records which caused that Great Chief to resign. I
visited all Tribes during my chieftaincy."

The Great Chief of Records, B. Strobe, reported as follows: Amount in
wampum belt, 138 fathoms; number of working Tribes, 5; adoptions, 9;
suspensions, 15; expulsions, 3; withdrawn by card, 4; admitted by card,
2; deceased, 4; number of members, 303; paid for relief of brothers,
$341; for widows and orphans, $89.

The election for Great Chiefs resulted as follows:

  W. D. Turner                             M. W. Great Sachem
  J. B. Haltimus                  M. W. Great Senior Sagamore
  Isaac Sulton                    M. W. Great Junior Sagamore
  Chas. Hebel                             M. W. Great Prophet
  Bernard Strube                 M. W. Great Chief of Records
  A. J. Francis                  M. W. Great Keeper of Wampum

A. J. Francis, E. Merkley and St. A. Gray, Representatives to G. C. U.
S.

J. B. Heltimus, Chas. Hebel and Bro. Weichert, Trustees.

The Great Council passed upon several appeal cases, ordered current
bills paid, and the council fire was quenched.


=1862.=

NINTH GRAND SUN COUNCIL.

The council fire was kindled in the wigwam of Kentucky Tribe. No. 4,
hunting grounds of Louisville, at the 9th run, rising of the 14th sun
of Buck Moon, G. S. 5633, with Great Sachem W. D. Turner on his stump.

Past Sachems were admitted from Black Hawk Tribe, No. 2; Kentucky, No.
4; Tecumseh, No. 6, and Delaware, No. 7.

The following extract from the Great Sachem's long talk reveals the
condition of the Order at this time: "The events of the past year, so
fatal to the political and financial prosperity of the country, has
not been without its influence upon the prosperity of our Order. It
has prevented a great number of our chiefs from attending the meetings
of this Great Council, also from attending their respective Tribes.
* * * It is, however, our duty by all means in our power, to make every
exertion to maintain the Order and to keep constantly in view of our
respective Tribes the beautiful motto of our Order, and the necessity
of being united."

The following is from the report of the Great Chief of Records:

Number of working Tribes, 5; members, 259; deceased, 3; rejected, 1;
suspended, 23; expulsions, 2: withdrawn by card, 3; paid for relief of
brothers, $227.50; paid for relief of widows and orphans, $99.00.

The Great Keeper of Wampum reported 86 fathoms in the wampum belt.

The election resulted as follows:

  Gregory B. Kiteley                       M. W. Great Sachem
  M. Borntraeger                  M. W. Great Senior Sagamore
  W. T. Clark                     M. W. Great Junior Sagamore
  F. Frische                              M. W. Great Prophet
  Bernard Strube                 M. W. Great Chief of Records
  A. J. Francis                  M. W. Great Keeper of Wampum

E. Reese, M. Borntraeger, and R. McCracken, Representatives to G. C. U.
S.

Bros. Turner, Frische and Clark, Trustees.

After passing bills and a resolution not to pay mileage for the ensuing
two Grand Suns, the council fire was quenched.


=1863.=

TENTH GRAND SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council assembled and the council fire was kindled in the
wigwam of Black Hawk Tribe, No. 2, hunting grounds of Covington, on the
17th sun of Sturgeon Moon, G. S. 5623, Great Sachem G. B. Kiteley
presiding.

Past Sachems were admitted from Tribes Nos. 2, 4 and 6.

The Great Sachem said: "I am sorry that we were not able to meet at the
appointed time, according to law, but owing to the declaring of martial
law in Louisville, and the stoppage of all travel, it was utterly
impossible for the brothers from any of the Tribes in Louisville to come
here; hence the necessity of postponing the meeting until the present
time. I instituted in Kentucky and Delaware Tribes a degree council, and
would suggest the propriety of its being done by all the Tribes, as by
so doing the brothers will get to know the unwritten work of the Order
much better than they do at present. It affords me much pleasure to
state that the Tribes are in much more flourishing condition than they
have been for some time past."

The Great Chief of Records reported:

Number of working Tribes, 5; adoptions, 21; rejections, 1; suspensions,
22; expulsions, 1; admitted by card, 3; deceased, 3; whole number of
members, 245; paid for relief of brothers, $158; for relief of widows
and orphans, $61.25.

Past Great Sachem A. J. Francis, in a feeling and appropriate manner,
announced the death of Past Great Chief of Records, Jas. N. Tyrack, who
died on July 16, 1862, in the city of Nashville, Tenn. Appropriate
resolutions were passed.

The election resulted as follows:

  M. Borntraeger                           M. W. Great Sachem
  B. B. Wilder                    M. W. Great Senior Sagamore
  R. B. McCracken                 M. W. Great Junior Sagamore
  A. Schneider                            M. W. Great Prophet
  Bernard Strube                 M. W. Great Chief of Records
  A. J. Francis                  M. W. Great Keeper of Wampum

A. J. Francis, W. D. Turner and E. Merkley, Great Representatives
of G. C. U. S.

Past Great Incohonee Geo. S. Peters and the Great Chiefs of the Great
Council of Ohio being present, they were invited to raise up the Great
Chiefs-elect, which they did.

After routine business the Great Council fire was quenched.


=1864.=

ELEVENTH GRAND SUN COUNCIL.

The eleventh Grand Sun Council of the Right Worthy Great Council of
Kentucky, Imp'd O. R. M., was kindled in the wigwam of Kentucky Tribe,
No. 4, hunting grounds of Louisville, at the 10th run, rising of the
11th sun of Buck Moon, G. S. 5624, Great Sachem Borntraeger presiding,
and all the elective Great Chiefs being present.

Past Sachems were admitted from Tribes Nos. 4, 6 and 7.

The Great Sachem said: "Though it has not been our good fortune to add
another to the number of Tribes already established in this State, I am
happy to state that the initiations in some of the Tribes have been
right numerous, and the receipts of wampum quite large. I hope that the
bloody strife now raging in this our beautiful land may soon be ended
and that the Great Spirit may spare you all for many a meeting of this
Great Council."

The following is gleaned from the report of the Great Chief of Records:

Number of working Tribes, 5; initiations, 33; rejections, 7;
suspensions, 11; expulsions, 1; withdrawn by card, 3; deceased, 4; whole
number of members, 260; paid for relief of brothers, 499 fathoms; for
widows and orphans, 132 fathoms; amount in the Great Council wampum
belt, $220.66.

The election of Chiefs resulted as follows:

  B. B. Wilder                                Worthy Great Sachem
  R. B. McCracken                    Worthy Great Senior Sagamore
  A. Schneider                       Worthy Great Junior Sagamore
  G. B. Kiteley                              Worthy Great Prophet
  W. Bridgemann                     Worthy Great Chief of Records
  A. J. Francis                     Worthy Great Keeper of Wampum
  B. B. McCracken and Chas. Hebel  Representatives to G. C. U. S.

A communication was received from the Great Council of the United States
warning the Great Council not to print odes, diplomas, cards, or other
supplies, in violation of the laws of the Great Council of the United
States.

The Great Council at this session liquidated its debt to Black Hawk
Tribe, No. 2.

After passing a resolution instructing the Great Representatives to
invite the Great Council of the United States to kindle its next Great
Sun Council fire in the hunting grounds of Louisville, the council fire
was quenched with due solemnity.


=1865.=

TWELFTH GRAND SUN COUNCIL.

The twelfth Grand Sun Council fire of the Right Worthy Great Council of
Kentucky, Improved Order of Red Men, was kindled in the wigwam of
Pocahontas Tribe, No. 3, in the hunting grounds of Newport, on the 10th
sun of Buck Moon, G. S. 5625, Great Sachem B. B. Wilder presiding.

Past Sachems were admitted from Tribes 3, 4 and 6.

The Great Sachem said: "The Order has not advanced as much as we fondly
hoped it would when the administration was placed in our hands, yet,
considering the disturbed condition of the public mind and the
distracted affairs of our beloved country, which has alike kept the
loyal and disloyal citizens in a constant fever of excitement, we can
congratulate the Great Chiefs that the Order has not lost ground, but is
steadily and surely advancing, and by the will and assistance of the
Great Spirit of the Universe the civil strife and rebellion that has
been raging for more than four Grand Suns has at last come to a close
and we are once more to have the happiness and pleasure of peace."

The Great Chief of Records reported as follows:

Number of working Tribes, 5; initiations, 61; rejections, 6;
suspensions, 7; expulsions, 3; withdrawn by card, 1; deceased, 5;
reinstated, 16; whole number of members, 318; paid for relief of
brothers, $510.50; for relief of widows and orphans, $84.00.

The election for Great Chiefs for the ensuing Grand Sun resulted as
follows:

  Jacob Schenk                              Worthy Great Sachem
  R. B. McCracken                  Worthy Great Senior Sagamore
  George J. Fry                    Worthy Great Junior Sagamore
  B. B. Wilder                             Worthy Great Prophet
  Wm. Brigmann                    Worthy Great Chief of Records
  A. J. Francis                   Worthy Great Keeper of Wampum

A. J. Francis, R. B. McCracken and A. Reese, Great Representatives to
G. C. U. S.

Notice was received from the Great Council of the United States of
the proposed change in the mode of dating, to substitute Grand Sun
of Discovery, 1492, as the base, computing from that date as G.
S. D. 1, instead of the Jewish method then in use, and the Great
Representatives were instructed to vote against the proposed change.

The Great Chief of Records was instructed to devise and have printed a
new form of Tribal Reports.

In secret session, Past Great Incohonee A. J. Francis exemplified the
unwritten work.

It was resolved that the Representatives to the G. C. U. S.
be requested to offer a resolution in that body by which the
Representatives may in future be elected for two years instead of one.

Resolutions of respect were adopted on the death of Past Sachem John
B. Emig, of Tecumseh Tribe, No. 6, of Louisville.

The Great Council fire was then quenched in due form.


=1866.=

THIRTEENTH GRAND SUN COUNCIL.

The thirteenth Grand Sun Council fire of the Right Worthy Great Council
of Kentucky, Imp'd O. R. M., was kindled in the wigwam of Kentucky
Tribe, No. 4, hunting grounds of Louisville, at the 9th run, rising of
the 9th sun of Buck Moon, G. S. D. 375, Great Sachem Jacob Schenk
presiding, and all the elective Great Chiefs present.

Past Sachems were admitted from Tribes Nos. 4, 6 and 7.

The Great Sachem in his admirable long talk said: "The mingling together
of the honored brothers of the Order, the kind interchange of opinions
upon the various topics introduced for consideration, the animated yet
decorous discussion of various subjects, indicate too plainly for any
doubt that our beloved Order is not only firmly established, but that a
strong desire exists, not only to keep it in its present position, but
if possible to advance it to one yet more deserving of respect. The law
now is that no Tribe is entitled to the semi-annual pass-word, nor their
chiefs-elect to installation until their reports are placed in the hands
of the D. G. S. or the Great Chief of Records. I have been instructed by
the Great Council of the United States of the change in the mode of
dating, from Grand Sun 5626 to Grand Sun of Discovery 375. Also the law
of representations in the G. C. U. S. has been changed as follows: State
Great Councils shall have two Representatives for 500 members or less,
and one for every additional 500 or fraction exceeding 300, who are to
serve for two years, but at the first election one-half of the number
are to be elected for one year, so that their terms expire alternately.
Also the mode of taxation has been changed from a percentage basis to a
per capita tax of 5 inches."

From the report of the Great Chief of Records the following is gleaned:

Number of working Tribes, 5; initiations, 55; rejections, 7;
suspensions, 4; expulsions, 5; reinstatements, 6; deceased, 8; withdrawn
by card, 8; admitted by card, 2; whole number of members, 350; Past
Sachems, 97; Past Great Sachems, 10; paid for relief of brothers, $686;
for relief of widows and orphans, $116; total Tribal receipts, $2212.75.

The Great Keeper of Wampum reported $338.69 as balance in wampum belt.

The election for Great Chiefs resulted as follows:

  R. B. McCracken                          Worthy Great Sachem
  Geo. A. Fry                     Worthy Great Senior Sagamore
  Edw. Merkley                    Worthy Great Junior Sagamore
  Jacob Schenk                            Worthy Great Prophet
  Wm. Brigmann                   Worthy Great Chief of Records
  A. J. Francis                  Worthy Great Keeper of Wampum

Representatives to G. C. U. S.--For two years, Chas. Hebel; for one
year, A. J. Francis.

The constitution was amended so as to bring the Grand Sun Council fire
"on the second sun of the fourth seven suns of Buck Moon."

A charter was granted to Toronto Degree Council, No. 1, of Louisville,
which was instituted on the 8th of Flower Moon, G. S 5625.

A committee was appointed to draw up new constitutions for both Great
Council and for Tribes.

The council fire was then quenched in due form.


=1867.=

FOURTEENTH GRAND SUN COUNCIL.

The fourteenth Grand Sun Council fire of the Right Worthy Great Council
of Kentucky was kindled in the wigwam of Black Hawk Tribe, No. 2,
hunting grounds of Covington, at the rising of the 22nd sun of Buck
Moon, G. S. D. 376, Great Sachem R. B. McCracken presiding.

Past Sachems were admitted from Black Hawk Tribe, No. 2; Pocahontas, No.
3; Tecumseh, No. 6, and Seneca, No. 9.

The Great Sachem in his long talk said: "I have the pleasure of
informing you that two more Tribes have been added to our number. On the
15th sun of Sturgeon Moon I received a petition from a number of
palefaces residing in Lexington asking for a dispensation to establish a
Tribe in that city, and on the 29th of the same moon I visited Lexington
in company with Past Great Sachem Chas. Amann, Past Great Incohonee A.
J. Francis, and Great Sachem Chas. Reed, of Ohio, and established
Osceola Tribe, No. 8. The following Chiefs were elected and raised up:
James Crystal, Sachem; Thos. A. Hornsey, Sr. Sag.; B. P. Watkins, Jr.
Sag.; A. W. Trebien, C. of R.; V. N. Gardner, K. of W.; D. A. King,
Prophet.

On the 25th of Traveling Moon I received a petition from a number of
Past Sachems and a few other brothers for a dispensation to establish a
new Tribe in the city of Louisville, to be known as Seneca Tribe, No. 9.
I requested Past Great Sachem Chas. Amann to institute the Tribe, which
he did, and installed the following chiefs: P. S. Conrad Koch, Sachem;
P. S. Christ Mayflor, Sr. Sag.; P. S. Jacob Lezinski, Jr. Sag.; P. S.
Tebel, C. of R.; P. S. Ph. Leonhard, K. of W.; P. S. Isaac Lieber,
Prophet.

The regalia and implements of the defunct Chickasaw Tribe, No. 1, I
sold to the Tribe at Lexington."

Great Chief of Records Wm. Brigmann, not being present, sent his books
and a partial report, which did not contain the statistics to date.

The following named Great Chiefs were elected and raised up for the
ensuing Grand Sun:

  Andrew Schneider                      Worthy Great Sachem
  Joseph Havlin                Worthy Great Senior Sagamore
  John Wohlfardt               Worthy Great Junior Sagamore
  Thomas W. Giedeon                    Worthy Great Prophet
  Chas. Hebel                 Worthy Great Chief of Records
  A. J. Francis               Worthy Great Keeper of Wampum

Great Representatives to G. C. U. S.--Thos. W. Giedeon, two grand
suns; Charles Amann, one grand sun.

It appeared from the report of the finance committee that certain
wampum was in the hands of Great Chief of Records Brigmann not
reported by him, and a committee was appointed to investigate the
matter and get possession of the funds.

The death of Past Great Sachem A. C. Herig was announced and
appropriate resolutions of respect were adopted.

Toronto Degree Council, No. 1, of Louisville, having outlived its
usefulness, surrendered its dispensation to the Great Council and
ceased to exist.

Charters were granted to Osceola Tribe, No. 8, and Seneca Tribe, No. 9.

The council fire was then quenched.


=1868.=

FIFTEENTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The fifteenth Great Sun Council fire of the Great Council of Kentucky
was kindled in the wigwam of Osceola Tribe, No. 8, hunting grounds of
Lexington, at the first run, setting of the 27th sun of Buck Moon, G.
S. D. 377, Great Sachem Andrew Schneider presiding. All the elective
Great Chiefs were present.

Past Sachems were admitted from Tribes Nos. 2, 4, 7, 8 and 9.

The Great Sachem in his long talk said: "On the 12th sun, Plant Moon,
I received an application from several palefaces for a charter for
a new Tribe at Newport, to be known as Minnehaha Tribe, No. 10. The
Tribe was instituted on the 19th sun of Flower Moon, G. S. D. 377,
and I would recommend that a charter be granted. On the 16th sun of
Hunting Moon I received notice of the death of our beloved Past Great
Sachem R. B. McCracken. He died on the 29th of Beaver Moon. The Great
Spirit has taken him to his better forest and the Great Council has
lost a good member. I would recommend that a certain fund be placed at
the disposal of the Great Sachem so that he may be enabled to travel,
visit Tribes and attend properly to the business of the Order."

The Great Chief of Records reported as follows: Number of Tribes, 8;
members, 402; adopted, 64; rejected, 4; suspended, 13; expelled, 6;
reinstated, 3; admitted by card, 2; withdrawn by card, 11; deceased,
5; Past Great Sachems, 12; Past Sachems, 114; Tribes instituted past
great sun, 1.

A charter was granted Minnehaha Tribe, No. 10.

Suitable resolutions were adopted on the death of Past Great Sachem R.
B. McCracken.

An appropriation of 50 fathoms was made for the use of the Great Sachem.

A new constitution and code of by-laws was adopted for the Great
Council.

The election resulted as follows:

  Thomas W. Giedeon                           Great Sachem
  John Steinhauer                    Great Senior Sagamore
  James Crystal                      Great Junior Sagamore
  M. Betz                                    Great Prophet
  Ch. Hebel                         Great Chief of Records
  A. J. Francis                     Great Keeper of Wampum

Great Representative to G. C. U. S.--Chas. Hebel, two great suns.

The committee appointed to settle with former Great Chief of Records
Brigmann reported having settled by accepting a secured note.

The council fire was then quenched.


=1869.=

SIXTEENTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The sixteenth Great Sun Council fire was kindled in the wigwam of
Delaware and Seneca Tribes, in the hunting grounds of Louisville, on the
25th Buck Moon, G. S. D. 378, Great Sachem Thomas W. Giedeon and Great
Chief of Records Chas. Hebel being the only Great Chiefs present.

Representatives were admitted from Tribes Nos. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10.

The Great Sachem said: "During the past great sun I have granted
dispensations to open two new Tribes. One in Bowling Green, hailing as
Oswego Tribe, No. 11, on the 12th sun, Traveling Moon, G. S. D. 377.
Past Great Sachems G. B. Kiteley and W. D. Turner, of Louisville,
instituted the Tribe, to whom I am under many obligations for their kind
services; also to Past Sachem Lezinski, Bro. Thos. Carnet, of Bowling
Green, and Deputy Great Incohonee of Tennessee, in opening Matamora
Tribe, No. 12, at Hopkinsville, on the 19th sun of Cold Moon, G. S. D.
378, and I now ask that charters be granted to them." The Great Sachem
also made many valuable recommendations to the Great Council.

The Great Chief of Records reported: Number of Tribes, 10; members, 548;
adoptions, 139; rejections, 4; suspensions, 34; admitted by card, 3;
withdrawn, 7; deceased, 4; Past Great Sachems, 9; Tribes instituted, 2.

For the first time bonds were required of the Great Chief of Records and
the Great Keeper of Wampum.

The finance committee reported $356.74 in the hands of G. K. of W. A.
J. Francis, and $165.86 in the hands of G. C. of R. Charles Hebel.

The election resulted as follows:

  Edmund Merkley                              Great Sachem
  Fred Braum                         Great Senior Sagamore
  D. A. King                         Great Junior Sagamore
  Geo. W. Reese                              Great Prophet
  G. B. Kiteley                     Great Chief of Records
  W. D. Turner                      Great Keeper of Wampum
  G. B. Kiteley        Great Representative to G. C. U. S.

Trustees--Thos. Giedeon, G. W. Reese and J. B. Davis, who were
instructed to take steps to recover the wampum in the hands of former G.
K. of W. A. J. Francis.

The council fire was then quenched in due form.


=1870.=

SEVENTEENTH GRAND SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council fire was kindled in the wigwam of Pocahontas and
Minnehaha Tribes, hunting grounds of Newport, on the 25th sun of Buck
Moon, G. S. D. 379, Great Sachem Edmund Merkley presiding.

Representatives were present from the following Tribes, which was
probably the largest representation in the history of this Great
Council: Blackhawk, No. 2, Covington; Pocahontas, No. 3, Newport;
Kentucky, No. 4, Louisville; Tecumseh, No. 6, Louisville; Delaware, No.
7, Louisville; Osceola, No. 8, Lexington; Seneca, No. 9, Louisville;
Minnehaha, No. 10, Newport; Oswego, No. 11, Bowling Green; Matamora, No.
12, Hopkinsville; and Hiawatha, No. 13, Covington.

The Great Sachem said: "The Improved Order of Red Men has become
one of the most important among the benevolent institutions of the
age. I believe without exception the utmost harmony and brotherly
feeling prevails throughout the entire jurisdiction. I have granted
dispensations for two new Tribes--Hiawatha, No. 13, of Covington,
instituted on the 12th sun of Sturgeon Moon, G. S. D. 378, and Cherokee
Tribe, No. 14, at Paris, on the 8th sun of Hot Moon, G. S. D. 379, and I
would ask that charters be granted to both Tribes."

Great Chief of Records C. S. Betts, of Ohio, was a visitor and was
welcomed to a seat by the Great Sachem.

A constitution governing Tribes under the jurisdiction of the G. C. was
adopted, also uniform by-laws.

The election resulted as follows:

  John Steinhauer                             Great Sachem
  Geo. W. Reese                      Great Senior Sagamore
  Samuel Spaeth                      Great Junior Sagamore
  J. Lezinsky                                Great Prophet
  G. B. Kiteley                     Great Chief of Records
  W. D. Turner                      Great Keeper of Wampum
  Chas. Amann          Great Representative to G. C. U. S.

The Great Chief of Records reported as follows: Number of Tribes, 12;
members, 611; adopted, 171; rejected, 8; suspended, 24; expelled, 16;
admitted by card, 6; withdrawn, 14; deceased, 3; new Tribes, 2; Past
Great Sachems, 10; Past Sachems, 118.

It was decided that the first Prophet of a Tribe is entitled to the
honors of a Past Sachem.

It was agreed that former Great Keeper of Wampum A. J. Francis be given
until the 15th of Corn Moon to pay his indebtedness to this Great
Council.

The Great Prophet, at the request of the Great Sachem, said a prayer and
the council fire was quenched.


=1871.=

EIGHTEENTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council of Kentucky assembled in the wigwam of Oswego Tribe,
No. 11, at Bowling Green, on the 25th sun of Buck Moon, G. S. D. 380,
and the council fire was kindled in ample form at the 9th run, Great
Sachem John Steinhauer presiding.

Representatives were present from Tribes Nos. 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
and 13.

From the Great Sachem's long talk: "The Order of Improved Red Men, as
far as I can judge, is progressing, notwithstanding the desertion of
two Tribes in Louisville, namely, Tecumseh, No. 6, and Delaware, No. 7.
On the 16th sun of Cold Moon I visited Tecumseh, and on the 17th of the
same moon I visited Delaware, which Tribes afterwards deserted, and as
I understand joined the Independent Order. I received a communication
from Deputy Great Sachem Alex Knapp stating their reasons for doing
so, but it does not prove that they acted like honest men. I sent a
communication to the Great Incohonee of the United States asking how to
proceed, but I did not receive an answer. I now leave the matter in the
hands of the Great Council of Kentucky. On the 8th sun of Flower Moon
I granted a dispensation for a Tribe to be instituted at King's Lodge,
Calloway County, under the title of Minneola Tribe, No. 15. I deputized
John T. Irion, of West Tennessee, to institute, which he did on the 6th
sun, Hot Moon, G. S. D. 380, and raised up the following chiefs: W. M.
P. Pool, Sachem; H. B. Landon, Sr. Sagamore; W. H. Clarke, Jr. Sagamore;
J. C. Shelton, Prophet; S. F. Kirkeley, C. of R.; T. A. Hughes, Asst. C.
of R.; D. G. Reed, K. of W. I would recommend that a charter be granted
them."

The Great Chief of Records reported as follows: Tribes, 11; members,
550; adopted, 145; rejected, 7; suspended, 28; expelled, 17; admitted by
card, 18; withdrawn by card, 4; deceased, 9; new Tribes, 1; Past Great
Sachems, 6; Past Sachems, 85.

Various amendments to the constitution were offered and laid over one
great sun for action.

Election resulted as follows:

  Jacob Lezinski                       Great Sachem
  S. F. Schell                Great Senior Sagamore
  D. A. King                  Great Junior Sagamore
  W. H. Glore                         Great Prophet
  G. B. Kiteley              Great Chief of Records
  W. D. Turner               Great Keeper of Wampum
  G. B. Kiteley       Representative to G. C. U. S.

The committee on state of the Order recommended that legal action be
taken to recover the effects of Tecumseh Tribe, No. 6, and Delaware
Tribe, No. 7, of Louisville.

The Great Chief of Records read an application for a charter for a Tribe
in Maysville, and a charter was granted.

The Great Council went into committee of the whole and decided to
prosecute the two deserting Tribes to the full extent of the law.

The Francis case was brought up and Brothers Glore and Kannard were
appointed to assist the trustees in effecting a settlement.

The Great Prophet, at the request of the Great Sachem, repeated a prayer
and the Great Council fire was quenched.


=1872.=

NINETEENTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council assembled in the wigwam of Kentucky and Seneca Tribes,
hunting grounds of Louisville, and the council fire was kindled in ample
form at the 9th run, rising of the 23d sun of Buck Moon, G. S. D. 381,
Great Sachem Jacob Lezinski presiding, all the elective Great Chiefs
being present.

Representatives were present from Tribes Nos. 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13 and
16.

The Great Sachem said: "The Order in this jurisdiction is not making as
rapid strides as it would if the beauties of it were more fully known.
Some hunting grounds are extending their influence, while others are
languishing for the want of some fraternal care. I most respectfully
recommend to your earnest consideration the appointment of a suitable
chief, one who has time and ability to visit all the Tribes in this
reservation. It is impossible for any Great Chief without great
pecuniary loss on his part to give that attention to the visiting of
Tribes, which is almost absolutely necessary in what might be called the
infancy of our Order in this jurisdiction. I am satisfied if this system
of visiting was faithfully carried out it would increase our membership
threefold and the Tribes in general gain by it. I appointed Bro. Kiteley
a special deputy to institute Wyandotte Tribe, No. 16, at Maysville,
which he did on the 10th of Sturgeon Moon, 380, and raised up the
following chiefs: M. C. Russell, Sachem; E. A. Robinson, Sr. Sagamore;
J. H. Hall, Jr. Sagamore; A. Brillstein, Prophet; Thomas A. Davis, C. of
R.; A. B. Cochran, K. of W."

The Great Chief of Records reported that some mode should be adopted to
compel Tribes to be more prompt in making their reports.

The death of Past Great Sachem Charles Amann was reported and suitable
resolutions were passed.

The election resulted as follows:

  W. H. Glore                                   Great Sachem
  John Vogle                           Great Senior Sagamore
  J. J. Hillburb                       Great Junior Sagamore
  Thos. A. Hornsey                             Great Prophet
  G. B. Kiteley                       Great Chief of Records
  W. D. Turner                        Great Keeper of Wampum
  Isaac Leiber           Great Representative to G. C. U. S.

After an exemplification of the secret work and a prayer by the Great
Prophet the council fire was quenched.


=1873.=

TWENTIETH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council assembled in regular session in the wigwam of Hiawatha
Tribe, No. 13, hunting grounds of Covington, on the 22nd sun of Buck
Moon, G. S. D. 382, and the council fire was kindled in ample form at
the 9th run, rising of the sun, Great Sachem W. H. Glore presiding. All
the elective Great Chiefs were present.

Representatives were admitted from the following Tribes: Nos. 2, 3, 4,
8, 10, 11, 13 and 16.

The Great Sachem said: "Our Order has not been as progressive for the
past great sun as it might or ought to have been. We have not instituted
a new Tribe, and the brothers have to a certain degree been very
negligent, as well as myself, in the working and interest of the Order.
I would suggest that some active brother be appointed by this Great
Council, and make it his duty to visit every Tribe in the State at least
once in every four moons, to build them up and give the secret work as
laid down by the Great Council of the United States. At present Matamora
Tribe, No. 12, at Hopkinsville, is suspended, and has been for some time
back. I am sorry to say that Seneca Tribe, No. 9, at Louisville, has
suspended."

The committee appointed at the lest session to wait upon A. J. Francis,
late Great Keeper of Wampum, reported unable to make a settlement with
him, and asked that another committee be appointed, which was done.

Resolved: That the Great Chief of Records be instructed to summons
Brother A. J. Francis to appear before the Great Council at its next
session, 1874, and show cause why he should not make proper settlement
to this Great Council, or be expelled from all rights and privileges of
the Great Council of Kentucky.

The election resulted as follows:

  Thomas A. Hornsey                              Great Sachem
  C. H. Conn                            Great Senior Sagamore
  Thomas A. Davis                       Great Junior Sagamore
  E. H. Mottley                                 Great Prophet
  G. B. Kiteley                        Great Chief of Records
  W. D. Turner                         Great Keeper of Wampum

The Great Chief of Records reported as follows: Number of Tribes, 8;
members, 540; adoptions, 109; reinstated, 3; admitted by card, 1;
withdrawn by card, 10; expelled, 7; rejected, 8; deceased, 5; Past
Sachems, 94.

The council fire was then quenched.


=1874.=

TWENTY-FIRST GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council of Kentucky assembled in regular session in the wigwam
of Wyandotte Tribe, No. 16, on the 28th sun of Buck Moon, G. S. D. 383,
and the council fire was kindled in due form, Great Sachem Thos. A.
Hornsey presiding.

Representatives were admitted from the following Tribes: Nos. 2, 3, 4,
8, 10, 13 and 16.

The Great Sachem said: "Though we have been visited by pestilence since
we last met together in council, we should return heartfelt thanks to
the Great Spirit that so many of us are permitted to meet this sun
around our council fire. I visited every Tribe in our reservation and I
found them in good working condition, and my visitations have fully
persuaded me that the frequent visits of the Great Sachem of the State
to the various Tribes is of the very greatest importance. I deputized
Great Prophet E. H. Mottley to visit Hopkinsville in endeavor to
resuscitate Matamora Tribe, No. 12, but without success, and he took
into his keeping the charge books and jewels of the Tribe."

The committee on the A. J. Francis matter reported that they had
accepted his note for the amount, which would be due on the 20th of Corn
Moon, 383, and the Great Sachem was instructed to sue in case the note
was not paid.

A petition was received from various palefaces, colored citizens of
Newport, praying for a charter to establish a Tribe. The petition was
laid on the table.

The Great Chief of Records reported as follows: Number of Tribes, 8;
members, 480; adoptions, 57; reinstated, 2; admitted by card, 4;
withdrawn by card, 10; expelled, 28; suspended, 72; rejected, 4;
deceased, 8; Past Sachems, 8.

The number of expulsions reported, not only at this, but at other
councils, indicates that but little care was taken in the selection of
the material of which the Tribes were composed.

The finance committee reported that there was $132 in the hands of the
Great Chief of Records not accounted for, and the Great Keeper of Wampum
not being present, nor his books, an adjustment could not be reached.

The election resulted as follows:

  Thomas A. Davis                           Great Sachem
  J. T. Follett                    Great Senior Sagamore
  John P. Phister                  Great Junior Sagamore
  C. H. Conn                               Great Prophet
  E. H. Meyers                    Great Chief of Records
  W. G. Stone                     Great Keeper of Wampum

The council fire was then quenched.


=1875.=

TWENTY-SECOND GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council met in the wigwam of Minnehaha Tribe, No. 10, hunting
grounds of Newport, on the 27th sun of Buck Moon, G. S. D. 384, the
council fire being kindled in due form, Great Senior Sagamore J. F.
Follett presiding, the Great Sachem being absent.

Representatives were admitted from Tribes Nos. 2, 3, 4, 10 and 13.

The Great Senior Sagamore in his long talk said: "By the surrender of
the charter of Wyandotte Tribe, the Great Sachem, Thos. A. Davis, is an
absentee from our council today, and I am illy prepared to entertain you
with an account of the workings of our Order in the State during the
past great sun. I can confidently, though with regret, say that the
Order has retrograded to a considerable extent. Osceola Tribe, No. 8, of
Lexington, surrendered shortly after our last Great Council, and
Wyandotte Tribe, on the 8th sleep of Buck Moon, last past, and to the
best of my knowledge none of those in existence can boast of doing deeds
to add additional feathers in their crests. In the absence of facts
whereupon to base an opinion, I am unable to offer any suggestion,
except to recommend an effort individually to carry out the tenets of
our Order, especially in the wigwam, and when the lessons of Freedom,
Friendship and Charity shall have been thoroughly learned there, our
associations with the outer world will certainly be more pleasant, and
we can give our brothers in the forest as well as in the wigwam the warm
grasp of friendship and another knot to the cord that binds us as
brothers." The Great Senior Sagamore, continuing, called the attention
of the Great Council to laxity of Tribes and individuals in obeying the
laws, and recommended their revision. He cited several decisions made by
him and dispensations granted. "On the sleep of the 27th sun of Plant
Moon, G. S. D. 384, I granted a dispensation to Minnehaha Tribe to turn
out in procession to assist in laving of the corner stone of a new
market house in Newport. I did this at the earnest request of some of
the members of the Tribe, believing at the time that whenever the fact
of our existence was brought to the public notice it would be to the
good of the Order. I have since been cured of the delusion. Finally, let
it be borne in mind that the one thing needful in the Order and to
maintain our organization is to elect chiefs who can and will do their
duty, and see that the several Tribes of this jurisdiction maintain a
proper discipline, and that ignorance, coupled with incompetency, shall
not be the means of destroying our Order in the State of Kentucky. I
thank you for listening to an ill excuse for what should be the journal
of your Great Sachem."

The Great Chief of Records reported: "Cash in hands of Great Keeper of
Wampum, $233.19; number of Tribes, 6; members, 415; adoptions, 14;
suspensions, 57; expulsions, 26; reinstatements, 2; admitted by card,
5; deceased, 5; Past Great Sachems, 7; Past Sachems, 79."

The election resulted as follows:

  G. W. Reese                                 Great Sachem
  J. J. Hetch                        Great Senior Sagamore
  J. Reed                            Great Junior Sagamore
  O. Senisheimer                             Great Prophet
  E. H. Meyers                      Great Chief of Records
  W. G. Stone                       Great Keeper of Wampum
  Conrad Schmidt       Great Representative to G. C. U. S.

The Great Council fire was quenched in due form.

       *       *       *       *       *

An extra session was called in the wigwam of Minnehaha Tribe, No. 10, on
the 23d of Hunting Moon, G. S. D. 385, when charges were preferred
against Great Keeper of Wampum W. G. Stone for conduct unbecoming a
Great Chief. There is no records of a trial, and probably the charges
were not sustained, if there was one, for Bro. Stone was subsequently
twice elected Great Chief of Records.

The Great Chief of Records was instructed to notify Brother A. J.
Francis that he stood expelled from this Great Council, and that he also
notify Brother Francis' Tribe of the fact.

Thus ingloriously comes to end the career of a brilliant Red Man. He had
held every position of honor and trust that could have been conferred
upon him. A. J. Francis successively held the positions of Great Chief
of Records, Great Sachem, Great Incohonee of the G. C. U. S., Great
Representative to G. C. U. S. for many Great Suns, and Great Keeper of
Wampum of the Great Council of Kentucky for eleven Great Suns.


=1876.=

TWENTY-THIRD GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

We find no records of the session of this Great Sun, but from the
records of the ensuing Great Sun we learn that the following chiefs were
elected:

  C. H. Conn                               Great Sachem
  Geo. Knorr                      Great Senior Sagamore
  G. A. Dempf                     Great Junior Sagamore
  G. B. Kiteley                           Great Prophet
  W. G. Stone                    Great Chief of Records
  John Wolfhardt                 Great Keeper of Wampum


=1877.=

TWENTY-FOURTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council fire was kindled in the wigwam of Pocahontas Tribe,
No. 3, hunting grounds of Newport, on the 24th sun of Buck moon, G. S.
D. 386, Great Sachem C. H. Conn presiding.

Representatives were present from Tribes Nos. 3, 10 and 17.

The Great Sachem's Journal and the report of the Great Chief of Records
are missing and no business is recorded except the election, which
resulted as follows:

  George Brunk                                Great Sachem
  John N. Stauder                    Great Senior Sagamore
  James Vickers                      Great Junior Sagamore
  C. H. Conn                                 Great Prophet
  W. G. Stone                       Great Chief of Records
  John Wolfhardt                    Great Keeper of Wampum
  John Wolfhardt       Great Representative to G. C. U. S.

The Great Prophet said a prayer and the council fire was quenched.


=1878.=

TWENTY-FIFTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council assembled in the hunting grounds of Newport on the 22d
sun of Buck Moon, G. S. D. 387, and the council fire was kindled in due
form, Great Sachem Geo. Brunk presiding.

Representatives were present from Tribes Nos. 3, 10 and 17.

Past Great Sachem C. H. Conn was refused admission on the grounds that
he was not a member of any Tribe at that time.

The long talk of the Great Sachem is not given, nor is the report of the
Great Chief of Records.

The finance committee reported amount in the wampum belt at $61.31.

The election resulted as follows:

  John N. Stauder                         Great Sachem
  F. Bismark                     Great Senior Sagamore
  C. Maunder                     Great Junior Sagamore
  S. F. Schell                  Great Chief of Records
  John Wolfhardt                Great Keeper of Wampum
  Geo. Reese       Great Representative to G. C. U. S.

The Great Prophet said a prayer and the council fire was quenched.

       *       *       *       *       *

A special session was held on the 26th of the Corn Moon following for
the purpose of electing a Representative to the Great Council of the
United States, vice Geo. Reese, resigned, and the Great Sachem, John N.
Stauder, was elected.


=1879.=

TWENTY-SIXTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council assembled in Newport and the Great Council fire was
kindled in the wigwam of Minnehaha Tribe, on the 22d sun of Buck Moon,
G. S. D. 388, Great Sachem J. N. Stauder presiding.

Representatives were admitted from the three Newport Tribes, Nos. 3, 10
and 17.

The Great Chief of Records reported: Total number of Tribes, 3;
membership, 88; amount in the Great Council wampum belt, $48.51.

No business was transacted except the election of chiefs, which resulted
as follows:

  Charles Maunder                              Great Sachem
  F. Schorle                          Great Senior Sagamore
  V. Wentworth                        Great Junior Sagamore
  S. F. Schell                       Great Chief of Records
  John Wolfhardt                     Great Keeper of Wampum
  Geo. Brunk            Great Representative to G. C. U. S.

The Great Prophet said a prayer and the Great Council adjourned.


=1880.=

TWENTY-SEVENTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council assembled in the hunting grounds of Newport and the
council fire was kindled in the wigwam of Miami Tribe, No. 17, on the
22d sun of Buck Moon, G. S. D., Great Sachem Chas. Maunder presiding.

Representatives were present from Tribes Nos. 3, 10 and 17.

No business is recorded except the election, which resulted as follows:

  Val. Wendroth                                           Great Sachem
  Fred Must                                      Great Senior Sagamore
  John Lamb                                      Great Junior Sagamore
  Chas. Maunder                                          Great Prophet
  S. F. Schell                                  Great Chief of Records
  John Wolfhardt                                Great Keeper of Wampum
  J. J. Hetch, Michael Grau       Great Representatives to G. C. U. S.

The Great Council fire was then quenched.


=1881.=

TWENTY-EIGHTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council assembled in the wigwam of Miami Tribe, No. 17,
hunting grounds of Newport, and the council fire was kindled on the 22d
sun of Buck Moon, G. S. D. 390, Great Sachem Val. Wendroth presiding.

Representatives were present from Tribes Nos. 3, 10 and 17.

The Great Chief of Records reported: Number of Tribes, 3; Pocahontas,
No. 3, having 24 members; Minnehaha, No. 10, having 24 members, and
Miami, No. 17, having 37 members, a total membership of 85; amount in
Great Council wampum belt, $10.21.

The election resulted as follows:

  John Reed                                   Great Sachem
  John Roth                          Great Senior Sagamore
  Geo. Brunk                         Great Junior Sagamore
  Ch. Clintworth                             Great Prophet
  S. F. Schell                      Great Chief of Records
  John Wolfhardt                    Great Keeper of Wampum
  J. J. Hetch          Great Representative to G. C. U. S.

The Great Council fire was then quenched.

       *       *       *       *       *

A special session was held on the 17th of Plant Moon, G. S. D. 391, when
it was voted that a special committee be appointed to wait upon Blekly &
Hugle and to inform them that the Great Council demanded a new note from
A. J. Francis, with his wife as security.


=1882.=

TWENTY-NINTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council assembled in Newport on the 22d sun of Buck Moon, G.
S. D. 391, when Great Sachem John Reed announced that as there were
representatives present from but two Tribes, no business could be
transacted except to act upon credentials, and the Great Council
adjourned to meet on the 30th sun of Sturgeon Moon, G. S. D. 391, on
which date the Great Council met and the council fire was kindled in due
form, Great Sachem John Reed presiding.

The committee on state of the Order reported: "We find but two Tribes in
working order in this State and we hope the incoming Great Chiefs will
have better encouragement and show a better prospect in our future Great
Council than that in the past year."

The election resulted as follows:

  G. W. Reese                       Great Sachem
  John Roth                Great Senior Sagamore
  C. Switzer               Great Junior Sagamore
  S. F. Schell            Great Chief of Records
  J. Glick                Great Keeper of Wampum

The council fire was then quenched.


=1883.=

THIRTIETH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council assembled in the wigwam of Minnehaha Tribe, No. 10, on
the 22d sun of Buck Moon, G. S. D. 392, Great Sachem G. W. Reese
presiding.

Representatives were present from Tribes Nos. 10 and 17.

The per capita tax was ordered paid to the G. C. U. S., amounting to
$16.80, and each Tribe was assessed $15.00.

The election resulted as follows:

  G. W. Reese                       Great Sachem
  John Roth                Great Senior Sagamore
  G. H. Meyers             Great Junior Sagamore
  Geo. Christman                   Great Prophet
  S. F. Schell            Great Chief of Records
  J. Glick                Great Keeper of Wampum

The council fire was then quenched.


=1884.=

THIRTY-FIRST GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Great Council assembled in the wigwam of Minnehaha Tribe, No. 10, on
the 22d sun of Buck Moon, G. S. D. 393, and the council fire was kindled
in regular form, Great Sachem G. W. Reese presiding.

Representatives present--Minnehaha Tribe, No. 10, Wm. Maunders; Miami
Tribe, No. 17, Wm. Berger, A. Gross, J. Glick.

On motion Past Sachem S. F. Schell was made a Past Great Sachem of this
Great Council.

The Great Chief of Records reported: Number of Tribes, 2; Minnehaha
Tribe, No. 10, having 15 members, and Miami Tribe, No. 17, having 40, a
total of 55 members; number of Past Sachems, 9.

An order was drawn to pay the per capita tax due the Great Council of
the United States, amounting to $5.50.

Past Great Sachem Bets, of Ohio, being present, raised up the following
named Great Chiefs:

  G. W. Reese                                   Great Sachem
  John Roth                            Great Senior Sagamore
  Wm. Maunders                         Great Junior Sagamore
  Geo. Christman                               Great Prophet
  E. H. Meyers                        Great Chief of Records
  J. Glick                            Great Keeper of Wampum
  Samuel F. Schell       Great Representative to G. C. U. S.

No further business appearing before the Great Council, the council fire
was quenched in F., F. & Co.

Thus ends the record of the old Great Council of Kentucky.




CHAPTER V.

KENTUCKY UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF THE GREAT COUNCIL OF OHIO, 1884-1894.


We quote from the official history of the Great Council of the United
States:

"Kentucky--Chickasaw Tribe, No. 1, of Newport, and Black Hawk, No. 2, of
Covington, were both instituted in G. S. 5612, 1852. Pocahontas Tribe,
No. 3, of Newport, and Kentucky, No. 4, of Louisville, were instituted
in the following grand sun. The Great Council fire was lighted on the
9th of Sturgeon Moon, G. S. 5614, 1854. The Order in Kentucky flourished
for many great suns, but finally began to lose interest and membership,
and was not represented in the G. C. U. S. after G. S. D. 398. In G. S.
D. 395, but one Tribe was reported in the State--Miami, No. 17, of
Newport. The Great Council fire had long ceased to burn. In G. S. D. 397
Kentucky was placed under the jurisdiction of the Great Council of Ohio,
and the standing of its Tribes on the 30th of Hot Moon, G. S. D. 401, is
included in the statement given for that reservation. During its
existence as a Great Council, Kentucky furnished two Great Incohonees to
the G. C. U. S."

While under the jurisdiction of the Great Council of Ohio the following
Tribes were instituted in Kentucky:

Shawnee Tribe, No. 18, was instituted at Winchester in G. S. D. 396
(1887), by B. W. Kline, a German living in Cincinnati, and holding a
minor chieftaincy in the Great Council of Ohio. He visited Winchester on
business, and being an enthusiastic Red Man, immediately set about the
organization of a Tribe. In less than two days he had secured a list of
petitioners, and in a couple of seven suns he returned and instituted
Shawnee Tribe, No. 18, under the jurisdiction of the Great Council of
Ohio. C. E. Lyddane was the first Sachem, who ten years later was Great
Chief of Records for five great suns, and now ranks as a Past Great
Sachem. After the Tribe was organized it received no further attention
from the Great Council of Ohio, was never visited by any of its Great
Chiefs, and was never represented in its Great Council. Red Men were
very scarce and a visitor was a rare occurrence. However, Shawnee grew
and flourished and for several great suns held regular meetings. A loft
of Haymakers was instituted and sometimes the fun was so fast and
furious that the police threatened to interfere. The Tribe finally died
of pure neglect and loneliness. It had considerable amount of wampum in
its belt, which was parceled out to the members in good standing. The
love of Redmanship did not die in the breast of its members, however,
and when in G. S. D. 403 Miantonomo Tribe, No. 1, was organized at
Lexington, among its charter members were several of those who had
belonged to old Shawnee, No. 18, and it was very little trouble a few
seven suns later to kindle the council fire of Onequa, No. 2, amid the
ashes of the old Tribe. Some of the members of old Shawnee have lapsed
from the Order, some have passed to the Eternal Hunting Grounds, while
others are still found around the council fire and are training a new
generation in Freedom, Friendship and Charity.

Osceola, No. 19, at Ashland, on the 26th of Buck Moon, G. S. D. 399,
with 15 charter members, Harry C. McKay being then Great Sachem. This
Tribe is still in existence, and is one of the strongest in the
reservation.

Mohawk, No. 20, at Louisville, on 1st Hot Moon, G. S. D. 400. At the
institution of this Tribe it was hoped that Redmanship would be once
more revived in Kentucky and would flourish, but the anticipation of its
founders were not realized, as it lived but a short time and was never
prosperous.




CHAPTER VI.

KENTUCKY UNDER A DEPUTY GREAT INCOHONEE, AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF TRIBES
BY THE GREAT COUNCIL OF THE UNITED STATES, 1894.


In the summer of G. S. D. 403, there came to the hunting grounds of
Lexington J. B. Mendenhall, holding a commission as Deputy for Great
Incohonee Andrew H. Paton. Mendenhall held a withdrawal card from
Ninegret Tribe, No. 21, of New London, Conn. Where he received his
honors as a Past Sachem is not known, as it is certain he was not known
as a Past Sachem in Ninegret Tribe. During the autumn of this great sun
Mendenhall began an active canvas for petitioners for a charter for a
Tribe of Red Men in Lexington, and with the assistance of O. R. King, J.
R. McConnell, and others he was abundantly successful, so that on the
15th of Hunting Moon, G. S. D. 403, he had a list of 121 accepted
applicants, including Past Great Sachem Thos. A. Hornsey, formerly a
member of old Osceola, No. 8, of these hunting grounds, who deposited
his withdrawal card from that Tribe. On the above date the Tribe was
instituted in the Opera House by Great Incohonee A. H. Paton, of
Massachusetts, assisted by Great Chief of Records of the G. C. U. S.,
Charles C. Conley, of Pennsylvania; Past Great Incohonee and National
Exemplifier Thos. K. Donnalley, of Philadelphia; Great Sachem of
Illinois, Wilson Brooks, of Chicago, and Past Great Sachem Judge Alfred
Ellison, of Indianapolis, Ind. The work of the Adoption Degree was
exemplified by the chiefs of the new Tribe, the National Exemplifier
having been drilling them for several suns, and it is doubtful if the
work done by the team at that time has ever been excelled in this
reservation. Immediately the Tribe was instituted its members began
active efforts to establish other Tribes in their vicinity, and under
the leadership of Deputy Great Incohonee J. B. Mendenhall, Miantonomo
Tribe, No. 1, of Lexington, of which he was now a member, assisted in
the institution of the following Tribes:

Onequa Tribe, No. 2, at Winchester, on the 29th of Cold Moon, G. S. D.
404, with 41 charter members, of whom 18 had previously taken
membership in Miantonomo Tribe, No. 1, and became members of Onequa, No.
2, by the deposit of withdrawal cards. Many of these members had been
formerly members of Old Shawnee Tribe, No. 18.

Wyandotte Tribe, No. 3, at Maysville, on the 3d of Hot Moon, G. S. D.
404, with 35 charter members, including many members of old Wyandotte
Tribe, No. 16, one of whom was Past Great Sachem Thos. A. Davis.

Winona Tribe, No. 4, at Lexington, on the 24th of Hot Moon, G. S. D.
404, with 25 charter members.

Tecumseh Tribe, No. 5, at Harrodsburg, on the 27th of Hot Moon, G. S. D.
404, with 25 members.

Paughcaughnaughsinque Tribe, No. 6, at Augusta, on the 1st of Beaver
Moon, G. S. D. 404, with 41 charter members.

Hiawatha Tribe, No. 7, at Louisville, on the 6th of Hunting Moon, G. S.
D. 404. with 63 charter members.

Cherokee Tribe, No. 8, at Louisville, on the 22d of Hunting Moon, 404.

Minnehaha Council, No. 2, Degree of Pocahontas, at Lexington, with a
charter membership of 49, on the 28th of Worm Moon, 404.

Charters were issued to the foregoing by the Great Council of the United
States.

In his long talk to the Great Council of the United States in Corn Moon,
G. S. D. 404, Great Incohonee Andrew H. Paton said:

"More than forty great suns ago a Great Council fire was kindled in
Kentucky, which was extinguished after burning somewhat feebly for about
thirty great suns. In G. S. D. 397 the few members in the State were by
this great Council placed under the jurisdiction of Ohio. The Order
here, as it has in some of the other States we are trying to reorganize,
had fallen into disrepute because of the carelessness, bad management,
and vicious material which had been admitted into the Tribes. Although
these characteristics had ceased to be, the Order was and is yet
suffering in that State because of what had been, and the Great Council
of Ohio found itself unable to overcome the prejudices which prevailed.
Under these circumstances it seemed better to place the interests of the
Order in Kentucky in charge of some one on the ground, who could give
them personal oversight. By consent of our Board of Great Chiefs the
Great Sachem of Ohio was visited, and at a meeting of the Great Chiefs
of Ohio and several of its Representatives and ex-Representatives to
this body, arrangements were made by which Ohio resigned its control of
Kentucky except of the two Tribes, the fires of which were then burning.
At the Great Sun Council of Ohio in Flower Moon, it was voted that its
authority over these two Tribes should be withdrawn this Cold Moon. By
good fortune, an enthusiastic Red Man from Connecticut, Brother J. B.
Mendenhall, had taken up his residence in Lexington, Kentucky, and
arrangements were made with him to rebuild the Order in the State. In
spite of many obstacles, and at much cost of labor and wampum, Brother
Mendenhall has added five Tribes to the two existing at the time of his
appointment, and of material which is an ornament to the fraternity. A
Great Council of Kentucky is therefore also within sight. No member of
the Order has made more sacrifices the past great sun for the Improved
Order of Red Men than has Brother Mendenhall. He has spent his time, his
efforts, and his wampum without stint and under circumstances which
often gave good excuse to do otherwise."

On the 7th sun of Hunting Moon, G. S. D. 404, Deputy Great Incohonee J.
B. Mendenhall addressed a circular letter to all Tribes and Past Sachems
in the Reservation of Kentucky, from which the following extracts are
made:

"Your attention is again directed to my talk of the 11th sun of Beaver
Moon, relative to the institution of the Great Council of Kentucky.

Miantonomo Tribe, No. 1, adopted 106 pale faces last sleep, and I will
institute Hiawatha Tribe, No. 7, at Louisville, Ky., on the 9th sleep of
this moon, with about 70 charter members. This will give us a total of
about 700 members and 50 past Sachems in good standing.

Every Past Sachem will therefore take notice and make a special effort
to be present in the hunting grounds of Lexington on the 27th and 28th
suns of Hunting Moon, G. S. D. 404.

The council fire will be kindled at the 10th run, rising of the sun,
and the Great Council Degree conferred upon all Past Sachems then in
waiting, and the transaction of business will begin immediately
thereafter.

The institution will take place in Red Men's Hall, 38 East Short
street.

Osceola Tribe, No. 18, Ashland, and Miami Tribe, No. 17, Newport, are
now under my jurisdiction, and they will pay their per capita tax to the
Great Council of Kentucky, as soon as instituted, instead of to the
Great Council of Ohio."

The Great Chief of Records of the Great Council of the United States, in
his report to the G. C. U. S. for G. S. D., gives the following
statistics for the Tribes in Kentucky under the jurisdiction of the G.
C. U. S., which does not include Miami, No. 17, and Osceola, No. 18:

Number of Tribes, 5; adopted, 267; admitted by card, 2; withdrawn by
card, 20; Past Sachems, 26: total membership, 249.

[Illustration: FIRST GREAT COUNCIL OF KENTUCKY.--LEXINGTON, KY., DEC.
27, 1895.

First Row--John I. Winter, Frank L. Smith, J. Hull Davidson, J. R.
McConnell, W. C. Conley, P. G. S. of Penn., Chas. C. Conley, P. G. I.,
J. B. Mendenhall, W. E. Fite, A. F. German.

Second Row--W. B. Wilkerson, W. C. Diederich, Willie Walker, J. W.
Hollar, R. W. Jones, O. R. King, T. M. Russell, J. W. Crumbaugh, John
Armstrong, R. Eason, E. G. Van Zandt.]




CHAPTER VII.

ESTABLISHMENT OF THE GREAT COUNCIL OF KENTUCKY AND ITS RECORDS FROM 1895
to 1907.


In compliance with request of petitioners from various Tribes in
Kentucky, Great Chief of Records of the Great Council of the United
States, Charles C. Conley, acting Great Incohonee, and Past Great Sachem
William C. Conley, of Pennsylvania, acting Great Chief of Records,
appeared in the wigwam of Miantonomo Tribe, No. 1, hunting grounds of
Lexington, on the 27th sun of Hunting Moon, G. S. D. 404, for the
purpose of kindling the Great Council fire of Kentucky.

After appropriate remarks of instruction had been given by the two Great
Chiefs, the following named Past Sachems, who responded to the call,
were marked as present:

Miantonomo Tribe, No. 1--J. B. Mendenhall, John Armstrong, Oscar R.
King, J. R. McConnell, Past Great Sachem T. A. Hornsey, Willie Walker,
Henry Vogt, R. Eason, Frank L. Smith.

Onequa Tribe, No. 2--R. W. Jones, J. W. Holler.

Wyandotte Tribe, No. 3--T. M. Russell.

Winona Tribe, No. 4--W. B. Wilkerson, Wm. Metcalfe, J. Hull Davidson.

Paughcaughnaughsinque Tribe, No. 6--John I. Winter, W. E. Fite, J. W.
Crumbaugh.

Hiawatha Tribe, No. 7--E. G. Van Zandt, J. H. Young, A. F. German.

Osceola Tribe, No. 19--W. C. Diederich.

As Past Sachems McConnell, Diederich and Mendenhall had been admitted to
other State Great Councils, the acting Great Incohonee appointed Past
Sachem McConnell as Great Guard of the Forest, pro tem.; Past Sachem
Diederich as Great Guard of the Wigwam, pro tem.; and Great Sannap, pro
tem., was filled by Past Sachem Mendenhall.

The acting Great Incohonee, assisted by the acting Great Chief of
Records and Past Sachem Mendenhall proceeded to constitute the Great
Council of Kentucky, which was consummated at 12 o'clock high sun.

The following named Great Chiefs were then elected or appointed and
raised up:

  J. B. Mendenhall, of No. 1                              Great Sachem
  J. R. McConnell, of No. 1                      Great Senior Sagamore
  W. E. Fite, of No. 6                           Great Junior Sagamore
  J. Hull Davidson, of No. 4                             Great Prophet
  Frank L. Smith, of No. 1                      Great Chief of Records
  A. F. German, of No. 7                        Great Keeper of Wampum
  J. B. Mendenhall, of No. 1   Gt. Rep. to G. C. U. for two great suns

The Great Sachem-elect appointed:

  John I. Winter, of No. 6                                Great Sannap
  Thos. M. Russell, of No. 3                           Great Mishinewa
  W. C. Dienerich, of No. 19                     Great Guard of Wigwam
  R. W. Jones, of No. 2                          Great Guard of Forest

The Great Sachem announced the following committees:

On Laws--P. G. S. Thos. A. Hornsey, Great Senior Sagamore J. R.
McConnell and Great Junior Sagamore W. E. Fite.

On Credentials--Great Prophet J. Hull Davidson and Past Sachems E. G.
Van Zandt and R. Eason.

The committee on Laws recommended that the laws of the Great Council of
Pennsylvania be adopted by the Great Council of Kentucky, and after some
slight amendments they were adopted.

The Committee on Credentials reported Past Sachems P. T. Farnsworth, of
No. 1, John D. Walker, of No. 2 and Charles Scott, of No. 4 as being in
the forest with proper credentials, and recommended they be admitted,
and they were admitted and received the Great Council degree. It was
voted that an appropriation of two hundred fathoms be made for the
expense of the Great Chiefs for the ensuing term.

The Great Chief of Records was authorized to prepare an original design
for a seal and to procure the seal as soon as possible.

The following resolution was unanimously adopted:

Resolved: That in expression of its appreciation of the invaluable
services performed by the Great Chief of Records of the Great Council of
the United States, Charles C. Conley, acting Great Incohonee, and Past
Great Sachem William C. Conley, of Pennsylvania, acting Great Chief of
Records, who have so ably and courteously assisted and instructed the
Great Council of Kentucky during its course of organization, the records
of the Great Council shall contain this resolution expressive of its
gratitude for their distinguished services.

The various bills and expenses incident to institution were ordered
paid, leaving a balance in the wampum belt of seven fathoms, six feet
and two inches.

It was voted to kindle the next council fire in the wigwam of
Paughcaughnaughsinque Tribe, No. 6, at Augusta.

Following are the statistics of the Order at the time of
institution--Whole number of Tribes, 10; Tribes not reporting, 2;
adopted, 265; admitted by card, 12; withdrawn by card, 4; suspensions,
10; rejections, 9; total membership, 638; Past Sachems, 71.

Council of the Degree of Pocahontas--Minneola, No. 1, at Ashland;
Minnehaha, No. 2, at Lexington.

The Great Sachem announced the appointment of standing committees for
the ensuing great sun, as follows--

Finance--J. Hull Davidson, No. 4; Thomas M. Russell, No. 3; John I.
Winter, No. 6.

Law and Usage--W. E. Fite, No. 6; W. C. Diederich, No. 19; Willie
Walker, No. 1.

Returns and Reports--R. Eason, No. 1; T. A. Hornsey, No. 1; John D.
Walker, No. 4.

Board of Appeals--E. G. Van Zandt No. 7; W. C. Diederich, No. 19; J. W.
Crumbaugh, No. 6.

The council fire was then quenched in ample form.


=1896.=

SECOND GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The second Great Sun Council fire of the Great Council of
Kentucky, Improved Order of Red Men was kindled in the wigwam of
Paughcaughnaughsinque Tribe, No. 6, at the 10th run rising of the 12th
sun of Flower moon, G. S. D. 405, with Great Sachem J. B. Mendenhall
presiding. All of the elective Great Chiefs were present except A. F.
German, Great Keeper of Wampum.

The Great Sachem appointed the following named brothers as a committee
on Credentials--John I. Winter, of No. 6, John Armstrong of No. 1 and J.
W. Crumbaugh, of No. 6.

The committee on credentials reported representatives present with
proper credentials from Tribes, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 17, and
19, and recommended that they be recognized and seated as the
representatives from their respective Tribes, which was concurred in.

The committee also reported the following named Past Sachems as being in
the forest for the first time with proper credentials and recommended
that they be admitted and receive the Great Council Degree, which was
agreed to:

Miantonomo, No. 1--H. H. Wilson.

Onequa, No. 2--J. W. Scobee.

Wyandotte, No. 3--W. C. Pelham and D. P. Ort.

Winona, No. 4--L. E. Pearce.

Paughcaughnaughsinque, No. 6--J. W. McKibben, W. E. Hamilton, Thos. M.
Gray and N. Feagan.

Cherokee, No. 8--Chas. A. Lang.

Osceola, No. 19--Conrad Gensler.

Past Sachem Michael Grau, of No. 17, having previously been admitted
to the Great Council of Ohio, was also admitted to a seat in the Great
Council of Kentucky.

The records of the last Great Council were approved as printed.

The Great Sachem then began reading his long talk, and we make the
following extracts therefrom:

"I herewith submit the report of my official actions between 27th
Hunting Moon, G. S. D. 404, at which time this G. C. was instituted, and
11th Flower Moon, 405.

The Order in this reservation has enjoyed a season of prosperity, and
the membership has, through hard work, been greatly increased. The
following new Tribes have been instituted:

Shawnee, No. 9, Louisville, on the 10th of Worm Moon; Mohican, No.
11, Bowling Green, on the 24th of Plant Moon, and three Tribes will be
instituted before the close of this moon.

All of our Tribes, with the exception of Miami, No. 17, and Tecumseh,
No. 5, have greatly increased their membership, as will be seen from the
report of the G. C. of R.

I regret to say that some opposition on the part of some of the members
of Cherokee Tribe, No. 8, has been manifested in regard to fee paid to
organizers, and this matter will, in all probability, be presented by
their representatives for your consideration at this session.

Hiawatha Tribe, No. 7, labored under the impression that no other Tribe
could legally be instituted in the hunting ground of Louisville without
first obtaining their consent, and it was necessary for me to summon
the Great Chiefs to meet with that Tribe on the sleep of the 28th of
Snow Moon, and after considerable discussion the matter was amicably
adjusted, and they have since prospered."

The Great Sachem then recounted appointment of Deputies for each Tribe,
dispensations granted, decisions rendered and visitations made.

Among his recommendations were the following:

"That the salary of the Great Chief of Records be increased to three
hundred fathoms." This was approved by the finance committee and
concurred in by the Great Council.

That the Great Sachem be allowed to draw on the Great Keeper of Wampum
for the expenses of that stump, from time to time, as they may become
necessary." This was agreed to after fixing the limit at one hundred
fathoms.

[Illustration: GREAT COUNCIL OF KENTUCKY--SECOND SESSION, AUGUSTA, MAY
12-13, 1896.

Great Chiefs Seated--N. Feagan, G. of W. Frank L. Smith, G. C. of R. W.
E. Fite, G. Sr. Sag. J. R. McConnell, Gt. Sachem. J. B. Mendenhall, Gt.
Prophet. J. I. Winter, G. Jr. Sag. John Armstrong, G. K. of W.]

The Great Chief of Records in his report said:

"The work of a full great sun has been crowded into the short space of
four and one-half moons, owing to the peculiar time of kindling our
first Great Council fire.

The placing of the Great Council upon a footing to transact business
has required me to cause to be printed not only the records of the first
Great Council, but also the laws, blanks for dispensations, reports,
credentials, stationery, etc., that will not have to be done again for
many great suns.

Having been authorized by the Great Council to prepare an original
design for a seal, I set about the same, and caused a skillful draftsman
to carry out my ideas in an India ink drawing, from which seals were
engraved on wood in two sizes, and a die sunk and the seal properly
prepared. The design proved a difficult one to execute and was quite
expensive, yet when I considered that it was to last for all time as the
Great Seal of the Great Council of Kentucky, I felt warranted in making
the expenditure, as the design has been highly commended by the Great
Chiefs to whom it was submitted.

I beg to submit for the consideration of the Great Council the system I
have adopted for listing, by means of a card catalogue, the entire
membership of the Order in this reservation. I have caused to be printed
two thousand cards like sample filed herewith. These cards are filled
out, one for each member, with all the information obtainable as to the
history and rank in the Order, and are filed alphabetically. This
system, started from the institution of the Great Council and kept up to
date from the semi-great sun's reports from Tribes, will enable the G.
C. of R. at a moment's notice, by referring to the catalogue, to tell
the Tribe to which any brother named may belong, when and where he was
adopted, advanced, raised and exalted; also whether or no he is a Past
Sachem, and if he has been admitted to the Great Council of Kentucky. It
will also show if he has ever been suspended, reinstated, withdrawn,
readmitted, etc., with dates in every case. In the future, I am of the
opinion this will prove to be of inestimable value. I now have the
catalogue of the Order in a complete state up to the first of Plant
Moon.

In order that this system may be carried out in every particular, I
have prepared a special report blank, which, if the Chiefs of Records of
Tribes will be particular to comply with, will enable the list to be
kept complete and accurate.

I have been unable to obtain any report for the last term from Tecumseh
Tribe, No. 5, or even an answer to any of my letters, though the last
one was registered to insure its receipt by the C. of R."

The Great Chief of Records made the following recommendations:

1st. That the Card Catalogue system, as inaugurated by the G. C. of R.,
be approved and adopted.

2nd. That the report blank in connection therewith be approved and
adopted, and Tribes be required to report in accordance therewith.

3rd. That each Tribe be required to place on file with the G. C. of R. a
copy of their by-laws in printed form.

4th. That the price schedule of supplies as printed in the first records
be approved and adopted.

5th. That the G. C. of R. be forbidden to furnish or supply any
individual members of the Order with any supplies whatever, except it be
a question book and necessary literature for the purpose of instituting
new Tribes and charter supplies to new Tribes, and to Tribes only when
ordered under the seal of the Tribe, and in no case unless paid for when
ordered, in current funds.

These five recommendations were reviewed by the committee on the state
of the Order, approved by them and were then adopted by the Great
Council.

The following statistics are drawn from the report of the Great Chief of
Records: Whole number of members at time of institution, 623; adopted
since, 525; admitted by card, 3; reinstated, 2; suspended, 7; withdrawn,
4; number of members in Tribe failing to report, 17; whole number at
present time, 1,125; rejected, 19; Past Sachems, 76; Past Great Sachems,
3; Tribes at institution, 10; Tribes instituted, 2; Tribes failing to
report, 1; Tribes in good standing, 11; balance in hands of Great Keeper
of Wampum, $117.02.

The Great Sachem appointed the following committees:

On State of the Order--H. H. Wilson, No. 1; J. W. McKibben, No. 6; W. C.
Pelham, No. 3.

On Charters--Charles A. Lang, No. 8; R. Eason, No. 1; D. P. Ort, No. 3.

On Grievances--John I. Winter, No. 6; J. R. McConnell, No. 1; L. E.
Pearce, No. 4.

The long talks of the various Great Chiefs were referred to the proper
committees.

Telegrams of congratulation were ordered sent to the various Great
Councils holding concurrent councils.

A special committee was appointed to make arrangements for having the
Great Council photographed.

The Committee on Law and Usage recommended that the various
dispensations granted by the Great Sachem be approved, and they also
reported having approved of the by-laws of several Tribes, and the
report of the committee was concurred in.

The Committee on Charters recommended that charters be issued to Shawnee
Tribe, No. 9, at Louisville, and Mohican Tribe, No. 11, at Bowling
Green, which was approved.

The Committee on Returns and Reports reported having examined the
reports of the various Tribes, and finding them correct in the main,
recommended that they be approved, and the report was concurred in.

The Finance Committee reported having examined the reports of the Great
Chief of Records and the Great Keeper of Wampum and found them correct,
and their report was concurred in.

The Mileage Committee reported the mileage account of the Great Chiefs
and Representatives, and their report was approved and warrants for the
payment of the same were ordered drawn.

The election of Great Chiefs resulted as follows:

  J. R. McConnell, No. 1                              Great Sachem
  W. E. Fite, No. 6                          Great Senior Sagamore
  John I. Winter, No. 6                      Great Junior Sagamore
  J. B. Mendenhall, No. 6                            Great Prophet
  Frank L. Smith, No. 1                     Great Chief of Records
  John Armstrong, No. 1                     Great Keeper of Wampum
  Thos. M. Russell         Gt. Rep. to G. C. U. S. for 1 great sun

The Great Sachem-elect made the following appointments:

  R. Eason, No. 1                                     Great Sannap
  W. C. Diederich, No. 19                          Great Mishinewa
  N. Feagan, No. 6                           Great Guard of Wigwam
  J. W. Scobee, No. 2                        Great Guard of Forest

The foregoing were duly raised up at the proper time by Past Great
Sachem J. Hull Davidson, of No. 4.

It was voted that the Great Council kindle its next council fire in the
wigwam of Osceola Tribe, No. 19, at Ashland.

Great Sachem Mendenhall took occasion to officially thank
Paughcaughnaughsinque Tribe, No. 6, for its munificent gift of a Past
Great Sachem's jewel in a few well chosen words.

The matter of the solution of the financial problem for the ensuing six
moons was referred to a special committee as follows: John D. Walker, of
No. 4; Chas. A. Lang, of No. 8; R. Eason, of No. 1.

It was voted that the Great Representatives be instructed to vote for
and use their influence in favor of the anti-saloon law before the Great
Council of the United States. Rep. Chas. A. Lang, of No. 8, wished to be
recorded as voting nay.

The Special Committee on Finance recommended that the Great Chiefs be
instructed to borrow five hundred fathoms to meet the necessary demands
upon the Great Council, and their recommendation was adopted.

It was ordered that the Great Chiefs take immediate steps to incorporate
the Great Council of Kentucky.

Rep. Chas. A. Lang, of No. 8, presented a complaint from Cherokee Tribe,
No. 8, regarding the disposition of the fees collected from charter
members of that Tribe, and it was ordered that the whole matter of the
investigation of the differences between the Louisville Tribes and the
Great Council of Kentucky be referred to the incoming Committee on
Appeals and Grievances.

The bonds of the Great Chief of Records and the Great Keeper of Wampum
were presented and approved.

The following resolution was adopted:

Resolved: That organizers of Tribes in this reservation shall be allowed
as commission and fee for services rendered in institution, one-half the
fees collected from charter members, the said fee to be for his own use,
and all other wampum collected, after deducting the necessary expenses
of institution, such as traveling expenses of instituting chiefs,
charter fee, etc., shall be paid into the wampum belt of the Tribe by
the organizer, and he shall make an itemized statement of said expenses.

The following resolution was also adopted by a unanimous rising vote:

Resolved: That the thanks of the Great Council be extended to
Paughcaughnaughsinque Tribe, No. 6, for the use of their wigwam for the
meeting of this Great Council, for the very efficient manner in which
its members have entertained the members of this body, and to the kind
ladies and citizens of Augusta for the elegant banquet given, as well as
for all the numerous courtesies which we have received at their hands.
We beg leave to assure them, one and all, who have in any way
contributed to our pleasure while in their midst, that we shall ever
look back with pleasure to our meeting in their beautiful city.

Great Sachem McConnell announced the following appointments on standing
committees for the ensuing great sun:

Finance--Conrad Gensler, No. 19; J. Hull Davidson, No. 4; John I.
Winter, No. 6.

Law and Usage--W. C. Diederich, No. 19; W. E. Fite, No. 6; Willie
Walker, No. 1.

Returns and Reports--Chas. A. Lang, No. 8; R. Eason, No. 1; Thos.
Cassida, No. 19.

Appeals and Grievances--L. E. Pearce, No. 4; Thos. M. Russell, No. 3; R.
W. Jones, No. 2.

The council fire was then quenched, to be rekindled in the wigwam of
Osceola Tribe, No. 19, at Ashland, at the 10th run, rising of the 11th
sun of Flower Moon, G. S. D. 406.


=1897.=

THIRD GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The third Great Sun Council fire of the Great Council of Kentucky was
kindled in the wigwam of Osceola Tribe, No. 19, on the 11th sun of
Flower Moon, G. S. D. 406, at the 10th run, 30th breath, rising of the
sun, Great Sachem J. R. McConnell presiding. All Great Chiefs were
present except John Armstrong, Great Keeper of Wampum, and N. Feagan,
Great Guard of Wigwam.

The Great Sachem made the following appointments, pro tem:

Great Guard of the Wigwam, John D. Walker, No. 4.

Great Keeper of Wampum, Mat. M. Gay, No. 18.

The Great Junior Sagamore reported the credentials of the following
named Past Sachems as being in proper form, and they being in waiting
were introduced and instructed in the Great Council Degree.

Miantonomo, No. 1--W. B. Eason.

Onequa, No. 2--J. W. Shearer.

Wyandotte, No. 3--Frank H. Bromley.

Winona, No. 4--C. M. Chasteen.

Paughcaughnaughsinque, No. 6--Geo. H. Bandle.

Hiawatha, No. 7--H. C. Rhodes, J. G. Sewell.

Cherokee, No. 8--Chas. D. Meyer, James Schrepper, Albert Spies, Herman
V. Cohn.

Shawnee, No. 9--Wm. A. Crader, Louis Vissman.

Mohican, No. 11--T. B. Wright.

Totewa, No. 14--John Hafendorfer.

Calumet, No. 18--Matt. M. Gay.

Osceola, No. 19--C. E. Horrocks, J. F. Horstman, Thos. F. Cassida, M. A.
Rodgers.

The records of the previous Great Council were approved as printed.

The Great Sachem then read his long talk. Therein he reported the
institution of the following Tribes.

Iroquois Tribe, No. 12--at Hopkinsville, on the 28th of Flower Moon, G.
S. D. 405.

Totewa Tribe, No. 14, at Owensboro, on the 4th of Buck Moon, G. S. D.
405.

Otego Tribe, No. 15, at Paducah, on the 21st of Sturgeon Moon, G. S. D.
405.

Seminole Tribe, No. 16, at Henderson, on the 25th of Sturgeon Moon, G.
S. D. 405.

Calumet Tribe, No. 18, at Mt. Sterling, on the 14th of Hunting Moon, G.
S. D. 405.

Choctaw Tribe, No. 20, at Corbin, on the 22nd of Plant Moon, G. S. D.
406.

A list of 128 questions had been propounded to the Great Sachem by
Miantonomo Tribe, No. 1, to which he made answers in his long talk, and
they were reviewed by the Committee on Law and Usage, approving the
Great Sachem's decisions in most cases and altering and reversing them
in some instances. These decisions formed the digest of the Great
Council of Kentucky at that time.

The Great Sachem said: "Having received due notice that Brother J. B.
Mendenhall, of Paughcaughnaughsinque Tribe, No. 6, had been expelled
from all rights and privileges of said Tribe, I declared his office of
Great Prophet and Great Representative to the G. C. U. S. vacant and
appointed P. G. S. Thos. A. Hornsey, of No. 1, as Great Prophet, and
Past Sachem Chas. A. Land, of No. 8, as Great Representative to the G.
C. U. S.

On the 7th sun of Plant Moon I learned that Seminole Tribe, No. 16, had
ceased to kindle its council fire, and was contemplating disposing of
their rituals to pale faces. I therefore appointed Bro. G. B. Vargason,
of Totewa Tribe, No. 14, as a special Deputy to visit Henderson and
arrest their dispensation and secure all property of said Tribe, and to
get possession of rituals at all hazards."

The Great Sachem also reported the expulsion of E. G. Van Zandt, of
Hiawatha Tribe, No. 7.

He reported a list of dispensations granted, which were approved by the
Great Council, after having been reviewed by the proper committee.

He also said: "On the second sun of Corn Moon, 405, I received appeal of
E. G. Van Zandt from the action of Hiawatha Tribe, No. 7, in expelling
him from the Order, which I have referred to the Board of Appeals. Also
that of J. B. Mendenhall, from Paughcaughnaughsinque Tribe, No. 6, which
is in the hands of the Board of Appeals for their consideration.

During the past great sun one Tribe has ceased to kindle its council
fire, that of Tecumseh Tribe, No. 5. Heroic efforts were made by Great
Chief of Records F. L. Smith to keep their council fire burning, but to
no purpose."

Among the recommendations made by the Great Sachem were the following:

"That this Great Council define explicitly what is the legitimate
expenses of organizer in instituting Tribes." This matter was referred
to a special committee, who reported a code of rules to govern
organizers for the ensuing great sun, and to come up for consideration
as an amendment to the by-laws of the Great Council at the next Great
Sun Council.

"That Section 1, Article XVII, of the Constitution of Tribes be amended
so as to read as follows: 'No person shall be adopted into a Tribe of
the Order, except a free white male, of good moral character and
standing, and of the full age of eighteen great suns.'" This matter was
discussed at some length, and the Great Sachem finally ruled that it
must lay over one great sun and would be in order at the next Great Sun
Council.

"That the Chiefs of Records of this reservation be more prompt in
forwarding their six moons' reports and per capita tax to the Great
Chief of Records, immediately after the 31st sun, Worm Moon, and 30th of
Corn moon of each six moons." This recommendation was concurred in by
the Great Council.

"That Past Sachems be required to procure and wear regalia according to
their rank as Past Sachems in this Great Council," and this
recommendation was adopted.

"That the decisions of this Great Council be adopted as a code and
digest for the government of Tribes in this reservation," which was
agreed to.

"As new Tribes, after being instituted, are so often left with but a
faint idea of the workings of the Order, that the Great Sachem, or some
one properly qualified, visit them at least within six moons after
institution, to instruct them in the work, or designate some Past Sachem
for this work when he cannot do it himself." The recommendation was
adopted.

"I recommend that the dispensation issued to Seminole Tribe, No. 16, be
revoked, and that the incoming Great Sachem take proper steps to receive
and recover all books and paraphernalia belonging to the Tribe, and the
same measure in regard to Iroquois Tribe, No. 12." The subject matter
was referred to the incoming Great Sachem with instructions to endeavor
to revive the council brands before arresting the dispensations.

The following extracts are made from the report of the Great Chief of
Records:

"I am pleased to report that there has been a marked improvement in the
matter of reports from Tribes, yet several of the reports received are
neither complete nor correct. As the Tribes and chiefs become more
accustomed to their duties I believe this matter will adjust itself. The
card catalogue is now nearly complete, containing the names of members
of every Tribe in the reservation to date except Iroquois, No. 12, and
Choctaw, No. 20. No report has ever been received from No. 12 at
Hopkinsville, and communications from brothers in those hunting grounds
lead me to believe the Tribe is defunct. I received a report from
Seminole Tribe, No. 16, of Henderson, for the term ending 30th of Corn
Moon last, but no tax, there being none due from them at that time.
Since then I have been unable to get any communication from their Chief
of Records. Otego Tribe, No. 15, of Paducah, has made no report for the
last six moons' term, and repeated speaking leaves to its C. of R.
during the past moon have elicited no response. I have no other
intimation that the Tribe is not in good condition.

At the last Great Sun Council I was empowered to have the Great Council
incorporated, and the same has been done, and the articles legally
recorded. Herewith I append the incorporation papers:"


Articles of Incorporation.

These Articles of Incorporation, formed and entered into to incorporate
The Great Council of Kentucky of the Improved Order of Red Men, of the
State of Kentucky, an order instituted for the purpose of affording
relief to such of its members as may be suffering from sickness,
distress or other causes, for the furtherance of the general welfare of
the members thereof, for the better government of the Order, and for the
more effectual accomplishment of the charitable objects which are to be
furthered by the Order and this corporation.

1.--The name of the corporation shall be the Great Council of Kentucky
of the Improved Order of Red Men.

2.--The object for which this corporation is formed is to perpetuate the
legal existence of the Great Council of Kentucky of the Improved Order
of Red Men, to have a corporation with the legal capacity to sue and be
sued, to contract with and be contracted with, to pass the necessary
laws for the government of the Tribes belonging to and under the
jurisdiction of this Great Council, to purchase, hold, mortgage and sell
real personal property, to incur debt sufficient to carry out its
purposes, and to afford relief to such of its members as may be in
distress, and to accomplish charitable aims as are consistent with the
constitution and continued existence of the Improved Order of Red Men.

3.--Its principal office shall be located in the city of Lexington,
county of Fayette, State of Kentucky.

4.--The private property of the members of the corporation shall not be
subject to the debts of the corporation.

5.--No stock or shares shall be issued, and no dividends or profits
shall be divided.

6.--The existence of the corporation shall commence from the signing of
these articles and the filing of same in the office of the Secretary of
State of Kentucky; and the corporation shall continue in existence for a
period of 25 years.

7.--The officers of this corporation for the present shall be J. R.
McConnell, of Lexington, Great Sachem; W. E. Fite, of Augusta, Great
Senior Sagamore; John I. Winter, of Augusta, Great Junior Sagamore; J.
B. Mendenhall, Great Prophet; Frank L. Smith, of Lexington, Great Chief
of Records; and John Armstrong, of Lexington, Great Keeper of Wampum;
and they shall hold their offices for such terms as the corporation may
by by-laws determine, and until their successors are elected in
accordance with the said by-laws.

8.--That the said corporation shall from time to time establish, make
and put into execution such constitution, by-laws, rules and regulations
as may be passed from time to time by the Great Council, and may revoke,
annul, alter and amend them at pleasure, provided that they be not
repugnant to the constitution and laws of the United States, or of the
State of Kentucky, or to the provisions of this act.

9.--That these articles be formed and this corporation made for the
benefit of all persons who are now members in good standing of the Great
Council of Kentucky of the Improved Order of Red Men, in the State of
Kentucky, and they shall be members of said corporation without any
further act on the part of those who sign these articles, and for their
benefit from this corporation.

Signed and acknowledged this 16th day of June, 1896.

  J. R. McConnell, Great Sachem.
  W. E. Fite, Great Senior Sagamore.
  John I. Winter, Great Junior Sagamore.
  J. B. Mendenhall, Great Prophet.
  Frank L. Smith, Great Chief of Records.
  John Armstrong, Great Keeper of Wampum.

The Great Chief of Records, continuing his report, said: "On the 24th of
Hunting Moon, G. S. D. 405, I received the charter and effects of
Tecumseh Tribe, No. 5, of Harrodsburg. At the last Great Council the
Great Chiefs were authorized to borrow five hundred fathoms. No such
loan was ever negotiated, and the G. C. of R. and the G. K. of W. were
left to adjust matters as best they could. I issued Great Council notes
to creditors to the total amount of $376.50, all of which are now paid,
and the Great Council now has a small balance in its wampum belt, with
all debts paid. Following are the statistics of the Order in this
reservation to close of term ending 31st Worm Moon, G. S. D. 406:

Whole number of members as per last report, 1,142; adopted since last
report, 468; reinstated, 2; admitted by card, 17; suspended, 204;
expelled, 4; withdrawn, 24; deceased, 9; present membership, 1,388;
gain, 246; rejected, 17; Past Sachems, 116; Past Great Sachems, 4;
number of Tribes at last report, 11; Tribes instituted, 6; defunct, 1;
whole number of Tribes, 16; Tribes making no report, 3; Tribes in good
standing, 13; balance in Great Council Wampum belt, $73.04."

The Board of Appeals reported that they had carefully examined the
appeal of E. G. Van Zandt from the action of Hiawatha Tribe in expelling
him, and sustained the action of the Tribe. Also in the appeal of J. B.
Mendenhall, from the action of Paughcaughnaughsinque Tribe, No. 6, in
expelling him, the committee made the same finding.

A new law was proposed providing for the consolidation of two or more
Tribes in the same hunting grounds.

The Finance Committee recommended, "That this Great Council issue
mileage vouchers to the Representatives and Great Chiefs entitle to
same, said mileage vouchers to be turned in as per capita tax by the
Tribe of which the brother is a member," which was agreed to.

The Committee on Charters recommended that charters be issued to the
following Tribes:

Calumet Tribe, No. 18, of Mt. Sterling.

Choctaw Tribe, No. 20, Corbin.

Totewa Tribe, No. 14, Owensboro.

The Great Council then proceeded to the nomination and election of Great
Chiefs, which resulted as follows, and they were raised with impressive
ceremonies at the proper time by Past Great Sachem Thomas A. Hornsey.

  W. E. Fite, of No. 6                          Great Sachem
  John I. Winter, of No. 6             Great Senior Sagamore
  W. C. Diederich, of No. 19           Great Junior Sagamore
  J. R. McConnell, of No. 1                    Great Prophet
  Frank L. Smith, of No. 1            Great Chief of Records
  John D. Walker, of No. 4            Great Keeper of Wampum

Great Sachem Fite announced the following as Appointive Chiefs:

  J. W. Scobee, of No. 2                        Great Sannap
  H. C. Rhodes, of No. 7                     Great Mishinewa
  Fred J. Kramer, of No. 19            Great Guard of Wigwam
  John Hafendorfer, of No. 14      Great Guard of the Forest
  Thomas M. Russell, of No. 3      Great Rep. to G. C. U. S.

An amendment to the general laws was proposed providing for a penalty
for Tribes failing to make reports in accordance with the law.

An amendment to the general laws was proposed to reduce the per capita
tax.

Much time was taken in the discussion of the many decisions of the Great
Sachem, and they were finally adopted with some changes.

The Finance Committee then made the following report: "We have carefully
examined that portion of Frank L. Smith's report which properly comes to
our committee, and find the same true and correct--all vouchers being
attached. We find the books and accounts of this Great Chief in
excellent shape and we tender him our thanks for his help rendered this
committee by the simplicity and fullness of his books and accounts and
vouchers. We recommend the adoption of the Great Chief of Records'
report. We have carefully examined the books and vouchers of the Great
Keeper of Wampum, and find the same correct, and recommend the adoption
of his report with this exception: We advise that the note dated Jan.
20, 1897, payable to the Elite Stationery Co., for $135.25, and on which
there appears a credit of $85.00, be referred to the incoming Finance
Committee." Action on the foregoing report was deferred until after the
report of the Committee on State of the Order had been received.

The Committee on State of the Order recommended that the reports of the
Great Chief of Records and the Great Keeper of Wampum be referred to the
incoming Finance Committee for careful investigation, which was agreed
to.

The following resolution was offered, which was made a special act for
the ensuing great sun, to be considered at the next Great Council as an
amendment to the general laws:

Resolved: That the Great Sachem, and he for his Deputy, give a bond to
the amount of $500.00 with three good signatures, for the faithful
performance and settlement of all expenses in organizing Tribes in this
reservation.

An amendment to the constitution governing Tribes was proposed reducing
the minimum age for eligibility to membership to 18 great suns.

The point was raised that at the last Great Council the salary of the
Great Chief of Records was raised to three hundred fathoms, and that the
act was not regular, it requiring an amendment to the by-laws to apply,
and that the resolution would not hold for the next great sun. The Great
Sachem ruled the point well taken, and on motion it was voted that the
salary of the Great Chief of Records for the ensuing great sun be one
hundred fathoms.

An amendment was offered to increase the salary of the Great Chief of
Records to two hundred fathoms.

A special dispensation was ordered issued to Miami Tribe, No. 17,
permitting said Tribe to kindle its council fires once each moon.

A special committee was appointed to formulate a code of laws to govern
the organization of new Tribes.

It was unanimously voted to accept the invitation of Onequa Tribe, No.
2, of Winchester, to kindle the next Great Sun Council fire in its
wigwam.

A vote of thinks was extended to Osceola Tribe, No. 19, for its
hospitality in entertaining the Great Council.

The special committee on formulation of laws governing organizers
presented a report embracing a code of laws, which was adopted for the
ensuing great sun, to be considered at the next Great Council as an
amendment to the general laws.

The Great Sachem announced the following appointments of standing
committees:

Finance--Chas. D. Meyer, of No. 8; C. M. Chasteen, of No. 4; L. E.
Pearce, of No. 4.

Law and Usage--W. C. Pelham, of No. 3; C. E. Lyddane, of No. 2; O. R.
King, of No. 1.

Returns and Reports--H. C. Rhodes, of No. 7; Willie Walker, of No. 1;
Charles A. Lang, of No. 8.

Board of Appeals--T. B. Wright, of No. 11; Watt. M. Gay, of No. 18;
Charles A. Lang, of No. 8.

The council fire was then quenched, to be rekindled in the wigwam of
Onequa Tribe, No. 2, hunting grounds of Winchester, at the 10th run,
rising of the 10th sun of Flower Moon, G. S. D. 407.


=1898.=

FOURTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The fourth Great Sun Council fire of the Great Council of Kentucky was
kindled in the wigwam of Onequa Tribe, No. 2, hunting grounds of
Winchester, at the 10th run, rising sun of the 10th sun of Flower Moon,
G. S. D. 407, all the elective Great Chiefs being present. Great Sachem
W. E. Fite presided.

The Great Junior Sagamore reported the credentials of the following
named Past Sachems as being correct, and they being in the forest were
introduced and received the Great Council Degree:

Miantonomo, No. 1--H. A. Daniel.

Onequa, No. 2--M. E. Pearce, H. Lundberg.

Wyandotte, No. 3--J. Harry Richardson.

Winona, No. 4--F. M. Taylor, J. J. Finigan.

Paughcaughnaughsinque, No. 6--W. G. Knoedler.

Hiawatha, No. 7--J. W. Jarboe.

Cherokee, No. 8--G. W. Hinesley.

Shawnee, No. 9--B. W. Bierbaum.

Mohican, No. 11--J. C. Willett

Totewa, No. 14--Charles Oderman, H. W. Miller.

Calumet, No. 18--R. A. Chiles.

Osceola, No. 19--Ed Ballard.

Indianola, No. 21--W. A. B. McNutt.

Representatives' credentials were recognized from Tribes Nos. 1, 2, 3,
4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 18, 13, 21.

The Great Sachem appointed the following committees:

On Charters--Thos. A. Hornsey, of No. 1; H. V. Cohn, of No. 8; R. W.
Jones, of No. 2.

State of the Order--Frank L. Smith, of No. 1; Ben C. Nunn, of No. 14; R.
Eason, of No. 1.

The minutes of the previous Great Council were approved as printed.

The Great Sachem in his long talk said: "I have no flattering report to
make; yet I thank the Great Spirit and many loyal brothers that the
Order is in as good condition as it is, for Redmanship in Kentucky has
had a fight for existence, instead of being buoyed up by the strong hand
of co-operation and fraternal love."

He reported that on the 7th of Hunting Moon, 406, he received the
resignation of Frank L. Smith as Great Chief of Records, which he
accepted, and appointed Chas. D. Meyer, of No. 8, to fill out the
unexpired term, and that Bro. Meyer qualified and was raised on the 11th
sleep of Cold Moon in the wigwam of Cherokee Tribe, No. 8.

"While I have the honor of reporting to you but one new Tribe, yet I
feel that one good Tribe is worth half a dozen that after a short time
become a burden and a worry to the Great Council to keep them alive.
On the sleep of the 9th sun, Buck Moon, G. S. D. 406, aided by our
Great Senior Sagamore, Bro. John I. Winter, and the degree team of
Paughcaughnaughsinque Tribe, No. 6, I instituted Indianola Tribe, No.
21, at Minerva, with 24 charter members."

The Great Sachem recounted a list of dispensations granted and
visitations made, showing that he had sat around the council fire of
nearly every Tribe in the reservation.

He made the following recommendations:

That a charter be granted to Indianola Tribe, No. 21, at Minerva. Agreed
to.

That immediate and definite action be taken in regard to Otego Tribe,
No. 15, at Paducah; Iroquois Tribe, No. 12, at Hopkinsville, and
Seminole Tribe, No. 16, at Henderson, as it is possible to save one or
more of these Tribes if this Great Council sees fit to take the steps
necessary to do so. It was ordered that the incoming Great Sachem visit
these Tribes and endeavor to relight their council brands, and that an
appropriation of 90 fathoms be made to cover his expenses.

"That this Great Council take such steps as will in the future
prevent the organization of new Tribes and leaving them bankrupt.
Too much attention cannot be given to this." With reference to this
recommendation the Great Council at the proper time passed a code of
laws governing the organization of new Tribes.

The Finance Committee reported as follows:

"We have examined the books and accounts of the Great Chief of Records,
Chas. D. Meyers, and the Great Keeper of Wampum, John D. Walker, and
find the same correct up to date. We recommend that the Great Chief of
Records have a new set of books gotten up at the expense of the Great
Council." They also recommended the payment of current accounts and
mileage of Representatives and Great Chiefs, all of which was concurred
in.

The amendment proposed at the previous Great Council providing for the
giving of a bond by the Great Sachem in the sum of five hundred fathoms
was brought up by the Committee on Law and Usage and decided to be
inexpedient and unnecessary.

Laws governing the organization of new Tribes were adopted, which are in
force at the present time and a part of the general laws.

The Committee on Law and Usage reported favorably on the following
amendment to the general laws, and recommended its adoption, but the
records do not show that any action was ever taken in the matter: "That
the Great Chief of Records shall receive for his services the sum of two
hundred fathoms per great sun, to be paid monthly."

The Committee on Law and Usage reported adversely on the proposed
amendment to admit pale faces of eighteen great suns of age, and their
recommendation was adopted and the proposed law defeated.

It was moved and seconded that Councils of the Degree of Pocahontas
be allowed representation in this Great Council, but that the
Representatives must be Past Sachems and pay their own expenses, but the
motion was tabled.

The Great Council was invited to kindle its next Great Sun Council fire
in the hunting grounds of Louisville, and the invitation was unanimously
accepted.

It was moved and seconded that "Our Representatives to the Great
Council of the United States be instructed to vote against any liquor
legislation," but the question was laid on the table.

The following amendment to the general laws was proposed to lay over one
Great Sun for action: "Resolved: That the by-laws be changed by striking
out Section 4, Article XX." This would have the effect of relieving
Councils of the Degree of Pocahontas from paying per capita tax.

An amendment was proposed, to lay over one great sun for action,
providing for the election of Great Chiefs on the second sun of the
great sun session instead of the first.

It was voted that the Great Keeper of Wampum be authorized to borrow the
necessary amount to pay the running expenses for the ensuing year.

Great Representative Thomas M. Russell, of No. 3, presented a report,
from which we extract the following:

"The question of importance to our Great Council at the late session of
the Great Council of the United States was the action of the Committee
on Appeals in the Van Zandt case, which decision will be found in the
records of the G. C. U. S. of G. S. D. 406, page 493, in which they
sustain Mr. Van Zandt's appeal, giving as a reason for so doing that he
did not receive the notices of the charges. I personally talked to
Brother Gregory, chairman of the committee, and while he believed that
Van Zandt had committed things unbecoming a Red Man, he said that the
law was very plain and they could not deviate from it."

The following is extracted from the report of the Great Chief of
Records:

Number of members at last report, 1,174. adopted, 76; admitted by card,
9; reinstated, 23; suspended, 109: withdrawn, 16; expelled, 1; deceased,
3; present membership, 1,209; gain since last report, 38; pale faces
rejected, 1; amount in Great Council wampum belt, $252.42.

Brother C. C. Conley, Great Chief of Records of the Great Council of the
United States, was then introduced and received with the usual honors.
After an appropriate address he proceeded to raise the elective and
appointive Great Chiefs as follows:

  John I. Winter, of No. 6                      Great Sachem
  W. C. Diederich, of No. 19           Great Senior Sagamore
  Willie Walker, of No. 1              Great Junior Sagamore
  W. E. Fite, of No. 6                         Great Prophet
  C. E. Lyddane, of No. 2             Great Chief of Records
  John D. Walker, of No. 4            Great Keeper of Wampum
  H. V. Cohn, of No. 8                          Great Sannap
  Louis Vissman, of No. 9                    Great Mishinewa
  E. E. Bennett, of No. 11             Great Guard of Forest
  John Hafendorfer, of No. 14          Great Guard of Wigwam
  Enos Spencer, of No. 8           Great Rep. to G. C. U. S.

The Great Sachem announced the standing committees as follows:

Finance--W. S. Roberts, of No. 7; C. M. Chasteen, of No. 4; Louis
Vissman, of No. 9.

Law and Usage--W. C. Pelham, of No. 3; E. E. Bennett, of No. 11; Ben C.
Nunn, of No. 14.

State of the Order--G. A. Ellerkamp, of No. 9; George Hinesley, of No.
8; Samuel G. Dorr, of No. 11.

Returns and Reports--H. C. Rhodes, of No. 7; T. B. Wright, of No. 11; H.
W. Ray, of No. 3.

Board of Appeals--L. E. Pearce, of No. 4; J. G. Sewell, of No. 7; George
Dehler, of No. 8.

Appropriate resolutions of thanks were then adopted thanking Onequa
Tribe, No. 2, for its hospitality and Brother C. C. Conley for his
distinguished services and counsel during the burning of the council
brand.

The council fire was then quenched, to be rekindled in the hunting
grounds of Louisville, at the 10th run, rising of the 9th sun of Flower
Moon, G. S. D. 408.


=1899.=

FIFTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The fifth Great Sun Council fire of the Great Council of Kentucky,
Improved Order of Red Men, was kindled in the wigwam of Cherokee Tribe,
No. 8, in the hunting grounds of Louisville, on the 9th sun of the
Flower Moon, G. S. D. 408.

Representatives were present from Tribes Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9,
11, 14, 18, 19, 21.

Alonzo Walker was appointed official stenographer to report the
proceedings of this Great Council.

The following named Past Sachems were admitted for the first time:

Hiawatha, No. 7--S. O. Knoche, W. B. Leatherman, J. W. Jarbee, M. M.
Harbeson.

Cherokee, No. 8--L. S. Leopold, W. S. Marshall, H. W. Stockhoff, L. P.
Rammers.

Shawnee, No. 9--J. C. Boardman, H. W. Bohmer, B. W. Bierbaum, W. M.
Evans, G. A. Ellerkamp, E. M. Miller.

Mohican, No. 11--J. L. Small.

Totewa, No. 14--B. Rosenthall, H. W. Miller.

Osceola, No. 19--C. A. Malone.

The minutes of the previous Great Council were approved as printed.

The Great Sachem then presented his long talk, in which he said: "The
Great Book says that whom the Great Spirit loves he chasteneth; the Red
Men of Kentucky certainly stand very close to the big heart of the Great
Spirit, having been greatly tried in the fires of ignorance, stupidity
and greed. But, brothers, methinks I see behind the dark cloud that has
long enveloped Kentucky Redmanship a silver lining, denoting the rising
of the sun of prosperity. I believe the dross has been separated from
the gold; I believe the day is not far distant when I shall see Kentucky
Redmanship where it belongs numerically. To see my beloved Order on its
proper plane in Kentucky will amply repay me for many weary day's labor
in our vineyard."

The Great Sachem then recounted the appointments made and dispensations
granted by him, as well as the decisions he had made, all of which were
referred to the proper committees, as were also the long talks of the
Great Chief of Records and the Great Keeper of Wampum.

The Committee on Law and Usage reported recommending that the Great
Council concur in and adopt the recommendations of the Great Sachem, and
the report was agreed to.

The amendment to the by-laws proposed at the last session, relieving
Councils of the Degree of Pocahontas from taxation, was adopted.

The following proposed amendment was the cause of much discussion, but
was finally defeated by a small margin:

"No brother shall be eligible to the Chieftaincy of Great Sachem unless
he has served one term as an elective Chief of a Great Council; nor to
the Chieftaincy of Great Prophet unless he has served in the Chieftaincy
of Great Sachem."

An attempt was made to change the date for kindling the Great Sun
Council fire, but without success.

The incoming Great Sachem was directed to take immediate steps to close
up the affairs of Iroquois, Otego and Seminole Tribes, they each being
reported defunct.

The Finance Committee made its report approving the accounts of the
Great Chief of Records and Great Keeper of Wampum, and ordered mileage
that was to be paid those entitled thereto. The committee strongly
recommended that the Great Sachem visit every Tribe in the reservation.

Lexington was selected as the next hunting grounds in which to kindle
the Great Sun Council fire.

A rising vote of thanks was extended to Great Chief of Records Lyddane
for having waited until there was sufficient wampum in the belt before
drawing his salary, in order that the per capita tax might be paid
promptly.

The Committee on the State of the Order made its report, in which it
noted the fact that there had been a diminution in the membership for
the past great sun, but that, notwithstanding, the Order was in a
healthy and vigorous condition. It recommended that the incoming Great
Chiefs be more zealous in making official visitations.

Amendments to the general laws were offered, to lay over one great sun,
to "admit pale faces 18 great suns of age," and also to grade the
representation of Tribes according to their membership.

Bro. T. A. Hornsey, as the Senior Past Great Sachem present, raised the
following named Great Chiefs:

  W. C. Diederich, of No. 19                    Great Sachem
  Willie Walker, of No. 1              Great Senior Sagamore
  Gustav A. Ellerkamp, of No. 9        Great Junior Sagamore
  John I. Winter, of No. 3                     Great Prophet
  C. E. Lyddane, of No. 2             Great Chief of Records
  John D. Walker, of No. 4            Great Keeper of Wampum
  John Hafendorfer, of No. 14                   Great Sannap
  E. E. Bennett, of No. 11                   Great Mishinewa
  James Schrepper, of No. 8            Great Guard of Forest
  R. A. Chiles, of No. 18              Great Guard of Wigwam

Bro. H. C. Rhodes, of No. 7, Great Representative to the G. C. U. S. for
two great suns.

Great Keeper of Wampum Walker announced that after all bills payable at
this Great Council had been settled the wampum belt would be empty, but
that there would be no debt.

After the Great Prophet had invoked the Great Spirit, the council fire
was quenched.


SIXTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

=1900.=

A special session of the Great Council was called at Louisville on the
5th sun of Hunting Moon, G. S. D. 408, and the Council fire was kindled
by special dispensation from the Great Incohonee in the absence of the
Charter of the Great Council. Great Senior Sagamore Willie Walker
presided.

The special session had been called for two purposes. First, to
investigate charges that had been preferred against Great Sachem W. C.
Diederich, accusing him of having conspired with certain organizers to
do illegal acts, and to have otherwise acted in violation of the law
respecting the organization and institution of Tribes. Second, to adjust
a dissention among the chiefs and members of Hiawatha Tribe.

Representatives were present from Tribes Nos. 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, and 14.

After due investigation of the charges against Great Sachem Diederich,
it was ordered that they be withdrawn, and the same being done, Great
Sachem Diederich was conducted to his stump amidst applause.

The commissions of J. B. VanZandt and W. E. Fite as organizers were
revoked.

After a thorough investigation of the affairs of Hiawatha Tribe, the
same were adjusted, and the council fire of this special session was
quenched.


Regular Session.

The sixth Great Sun Council Fire was kindled in the Hunting Grounds of
Lexington, at the 10th run, rising of the 8th Sun of Flower Moon, G. S.
D. 409.

All Great Chiefs were present and the representatives of 27 Tribes. The
gross attendance was 95 Past Sachems.

Great Sachem W. C. Diederich then read his long talk, in which he said,
"I entered upon the duties of the office with a firm determination to
devote my best endeavor to the upbuilding of our beloved Order in the
Great Reservation. Finding I had not much time to devote to the
upbuilding of our Order, I had the pleasure of appointing Brother John
B. VanZandt as my Organizer, and the progress he has made will be seen
in his report. I have, during my term, had some unpleasantness. It has
not all been smooth sailing, but now peace and harmony reign once more.
I have tried to fulfil my obligations to the best of my ability and the
Great Spirit has safely guided me through."

The Great Sachem reported having visited nearly every Tribe in the
reservation, the institution of a number of new tribes, a few
dispensations granted and decisions made.

The State Organizer, J. B. VanZandt reported the institution of 19 new
tribes, as follows:--Hiokatoo, No. 5, Louisville; Wahoo, No. 10,
Louisville; Wabee, No. 13, Louisville; Choctaw. No. 15, Louisville;
Montezuma. No. 16, Louisville; Tecumseh, No. 12, Louisville; Mohawk, No.
20, Louisville; Chippewa, No. 22, Louisville; Delaware, No. 23, Lebanon;
Black Hawk, No. 24, Springfield; Matamora, No. 25, St. Matthews;
Wyoming, No. 26, Danville; Seneca, No. 27, Stanford; Dakota, No. 28,
Junction City; Onondaga, No. 30, Lancaster; Manitou, No. 31, Eminence;
Iroquois, No. 32, Pittsburg; Massasoit, No. 33, LaGrange; Montauk, No.
35, East Bernstadt.

Great Chief of Records C. E. Lyddane in his long talk said:--"In no
other reservation has Redmanship increased to such an extent during the
past great sun as in Kentucky. Council Fires have been kindled in the
metropolis, in the country towns and in the mining villages." From his
report is gleaned the following: Number of members adopted, 1015;
reinstated, 29; Admitted by card, 10; suspended, 176; withdrawn, 34;
expelled, 3; deceased, 9; present membership, 2018; number of working
tribes, 36; amount disbursed by tribes for relief, $1,525.36; for
funeral benefits, $343.00; for other purposes, $7,386.80; total worth of
tribes, $9,247.06.

The Great Council then went into the election for Great Chiefs.

W. C. Diederich, of No. 19, was elected Great Prophet, there being no
other nominations.

Willie Walker, of No. 1 was elected Great Sachem, no others being
nominated.

G. A. Ellerkamp, of No. 9 was elected Great Senior Sagamore, with no
other nominations.

W. C. Pelham, of No. 3 was elected Great Junior Sagamore, with O. R.
King, of No. 1, S. C. Moore of No. 7 and John Ropke, of No. 8 also in
nomination.

C. E. Lyddane, of No. 2 was elected Great Chief of Records without
opposition.

John D. Walker, of No. 4 was elected Great Keeper of Wampum by
acclamation.

Louis Vissman, of No. 9 was elected Great Representative to the Great
Council of the United States for two great suns, E. E. Bennett, of No.
11 and J. R. McConnell, of No. 1 being also in nomination.

Danville was selected as the place for the kindling of the next council
fire, Maysville and Owensboro being also in nomination.

A resolution was introduced and adopted to elect a General State
Organizer.

After one of the most spirited races of the session, John Hafendorfer,
of No. 14, was elected over J. B. VanZandt, of No. 9.

This was the first time an official Organizer had been selected by the
Great Council, heretofore it having been considered entirely within the
power of the Great Sachem to regulate the matter to suit himself, the
theory being that the Great Sachem was the official Organizer, and it
was his privilege to appoint such deputies as he thought proper.

An amendment to the laws was adopted permitting membership of palefaces
18 great suns of age, with the proviso that such applications should
bear the endorsement of parent or guardian.

A resolution was offered providing for representation of tribes in the
Great Council according to membership, but the matter was laid on the
table.

Charters were ordered issued to all Tribes instituted during the
previous great sun.

On the recommendation of the Committee on Returns and Reports it was
ordered that in the future the organizer of a new Tribe shall file a
written report of its institution within one moon thereafter.

On the recommendation of the Committee on the State of the Order it was
ordered that no "Supervisory District Deputy Great Sachems having
authority over tribal Deputies be appointed."

The following resolution was unanimously adopted:--"The roll of Great
Chiefs and Representatives shall be called at the close of each sun's
session and no brother shall be entitled to mileage unless he shall
answer thereto."

It was also ordered that the Great Sachem be required to visit every
Tribe in the Reservation at least once during his term, and the finance
committee was directed to set aside an amount sufficient to cover
expenses incurred. This would be quite an expensive matter if followed
in the present day, and the Great Sachem's term would have to be
extended to cover more than one sun or it would be impossible for him to
comply with the law.

Past Sachem Frank L. Smith was allowed a small fee for his services as
Assistant Great Chief of Records, being the first recognition of such a
sub-chieftaincy.

The Great Sachem ruled that representatives of Tribes not having been
instituted two moons and not having paid tax were not entitled to
mileage. The fiscal great sun at that time ended the 30th of Worm Moon,
and the Great Sun Council was held then as now the second Tuesday in
Flower Moon, and but few tribes were thus deprived of mileage for their
representatives.

The Finance Committee recommended the allowance of mileage to 38 Great
Chiefs and Representatives, amounting to $161.70, an average of $5.22 to
each.

The Great Sachem's expense account of $97.37 for the great sun was
allowed.

A controversy between Tippecanoe Tribe, No. 29 and Hiawatha Tribe, No.
7, regarding a claim of the latter against the former that certain
Hiawatha members had taken membership in Tippecanoe without leave or
license was adjusted by ordering that such members take cards from
Hiawatha Tribe. It would seem that the matter should have been settled
in a different manner, as it is not possible for dual membership to
exist, and the brothers in question were members of either one tribe or
another, and as membership of a Red Man in another Tribe is impossible
without the depositing of a card, it should have been ruled that the
brothers were still members of Hiawatha Tribe and subject to its laws in
every respect.

Past Great Sachem J. R. McConnell raised the following named Great
Chiefs:--

  Willie Walker, of No. 1                    Great Sachem.
  G. A. Ellerkamp, of No. 9         Great Senior Sagamore.
  W. C. Diederich, of No. 19                Great Prophet.
  C. E. Lyddane, of No. 2          Great Chief of Records.
  John D. Walker, of No. 4         Great Keeper of Wampum.
  W. B. Eason, of No. 1                      Great Sannap.
  Wm. A. Crader, of No. 9                 Great Mishinewa.
  M. M. Harbeson, of No. 7          Great Guard of Wigwam.
  Geo. W. Griffith, of No. 11       Great Guard of Forest.

Past Great Sachem McConnell appointed Thos. M. Russell and Henry W. Ray,
of No. 3, to raise the Great Junior Sagamore elect, W. C. Pelham, to
his stump in the council chamber of his Tribe.

Former organizer J. B. VanZandt presented petitions for charters for
Irondequoit Tribe, No. 38, at Hardinsburg and Choctaw Tribe, No. 39 at
Bardstown, and it was ordered that charters be granted the tribes as
soon as instituted.

Great Sachem Walker announced the appointment of the following
committees:--

On Finance.--John M. Shely, of No. 1; Chas. A. Hess, of No. 10; J. M.
Martin, of No. 2.

On Laws and Usage.--Ben. C. Nunn, of No. 14; E. E. Bennett, of No. 11;
Frank L. Smith, of No 1.

On Returns and Reports.--Henry W. Ray, of No. 3; W. E. Grubbs, of No.
28; Michael Grau, of No. 17.

On Appeals.--Wm. M. Evans, of No. 9; R. A. Chiles, of No. 18; H. V.
Cohn, of No. 8.

On State of the Order.--John Ropke, of No. 8; W. A. Waters, of No. 24;
J. W. Scobee, of No. 2.

After thanks had been given to Miantonomo Tribe for its courteous
entertainment of the Great Council, and to Past Great Sachem Diederich
for his services as Great Sachem, the Great Prophet said a prayer, and
the Council Fire was quenched.


SEVENTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

=1901.=

Prior to the kindling of the council fire, the Great Council was called
to order at the Opera House by Past Sachem V. Freeman, chairman of the
local committee, and after an invocation by the Rev. J. O. Vaught, in a
few well chosen remarks he introduced the Hon. William Jennings Price,
who delivered an address of welcome, which was a beautiful word picture.
This was appropriately responded to by Great Sachem Willie Walker, after
which the guests were dismissed and the Seventh Great Sun Council Fire
of the Great Council of Kentucky was kindled in the Wigwam of Wyoming
Tribe, No. 26, Hunting Grounds of Danville.

All of the Great Chiefs were present and twenty-six Past Sachems. Frank
L. Smith was appointed Assistant Great Chief of Records.

The Great Council Degree was conferred upon forty-one Past Sachems in
waiting, and thus the total attendance at the session was 78.

Representatives were present from 42 Tribes and but two were
unrepresented.

Great Sachem Willie Walker, in his long talk said--"The past great sun
has wrought most magnificent results and shows what human desire and
harmonious action can accomplish. Where the banner of thirty-six Tribes
and one council of the Degree of Pocahontas hung in the breeze, there
now triumphantly floats, kissed by the winds of heaven, thirty-one
additional emblems, and one of the Degree of Pocahontas." He may well
have been proud of his record, for not until five great suns had passed
was it even equaled. He also said--"One of the most exalted things a
man can do is to succor the distressed, feed the hungry and clothe the
poor, and especially to care for the widows and orphans. We should by
all means begin a fund for the establishment of a Widows' and orphans'
Home for our Order. I suggest that a committee of five be appointed
to formulate a plan by which we can establish this fund and that they
report at this Council." This was the first mention in the Great Council
of Kentucky of this subject, soon destined to be one of the most
important objects of legislation, and Great Sachem Walker has the credit
of its inception.

After having made several other important recommendations, given a list
of his appointments of Deputies, a digest of decisions and opinions
rendered, he closes with a glowing tribute to deceased Past Sachems John
R. Shely, of No. 1; R. W. Jones, of No. 2 and Joe Gast, of No. 18.

The Great Chief of Records Lyddane reported as follows:--

Adopted since last report, 1564; reinstated, 38; admitted by card, 23;
suspended, 266; withdrawn, 69; expelled, 22; deceased, 28; present
membership, 3,196. Disbursed by Tribes for relief, $3,921.43; for burial
of the dead, $1,065.00; for other purposes, $15,025.86; total worth of
tribes, $13,478.09.

Great Keeper of Wampum John D. Walker reported there being $1,851.64 in
the Great Council wampum belt.

The Great Sachem made appointments on the standing Committees as
follows, to fill vacancies:--

Finance--W. S. Cramer, of No. 1; Lawrence Leopold, of No. 8; L. Vissman,
of No. 9.

Law and Usage--D. N. Zimmerman, of No. 4.

Appeals--H. S. Chase, of No. 28.

State of the Order--Henry Schwieters, of No. 8; J. R. McConnell, of No.
1; Jas. R. W. Smith, of No. 63.

Charters--R. F. Arnett, of No. 1; L. W. Zweydorf, of No. 7; S. T. Noe,
of No. 24.

The following named Great Chiefs were elected for the ensuing great
sun:--

Willie Walker, of No. 1 was elected Great Prophet without opposition.

Gustav A. Ellerkamp, of No. 9, was elected Great Sachem, there being no
other nominations.

W. C. Pelham, of No. 3 was unanimously elected Great Senior Sagamore.

H. J. McFarlan, of No. 33, was elected Great Junior Sagamore, other
candidates being E. B. Ryan, of No. 4; Lee W. Zweydorf, of No. 7; O. R.
King, of No. 1.

C. E. Lyddane, of No. 2 was re-elected Great Chief of Records without
opposition.

John D. Walker, of No. 4 was unanimously re-elected Great Keeper of
Wampum.

Willie Walker, of No. 1, Lawrence S. Leopold, of No. 8 and John
Hafendorfer, of No. 14 were elected Great Representatives to the Great
Council of the United States.

It developed later that Kentucky was entitled to only two of the three
Great Representatives elected, and thus credentials were not issued to
Past Sachem Hafendorfer, he being the last to be elected.

F. W. Jones was unanimously elected State Organizer.

Owensboro was selected as the next place for kindling the Great Council
Fire, in the Wigwam of Totewa Tribe, No. 14.

Great Sachem Willie Walker announced that contributions had been
received from Kentucky Tribes for the relief of the sufferers from the
Galveston flood amounting to $242.50, which had been forwarded to the
Relief Committee.

[Illustration: GREAT COUNCIL OF KENTUCKY--SEVENTH SESSION. DANVILLE, MAY
14-15, 1901.]

The Committee on Law and Usage recommended that there be some means
adopted to bring about more uniformity in Tribal by-laws, and suggested
that a model code be prepared as a guide to new tribes especially.

A resolution to amend the laws so as to allow Tribes representation
according to membership was defeated.

Great Mishinewa Wm. A. Crader, for the special Committee appointed at
the last Great Council to adjust the differences between Tecumseh Tribe,
No. 29 and Hiawatha Tribe, No. 7 reported that the matter had been
amicably settled.

Past Sachem John Hafendorfer, who had been elected State Organizer at
the previous Great Sun Council presented a report, in which he stated he
had appointed F. W. Jones as Chief Deputy Organizer, and that credit was
due to Bro. Jones for the work that had been accomplished, thirty-one
new Tribes having been instituted.

The Finance Committee reported having found the books and
accounts of the Great Chief of Records and Great Keeper of Wampum
correct, and made the following recommendations, all of
which were concurred:--

That fifty fathoms be appropriated for the relief of the Galveston
flood sufferers.

That mileage be allowed all members of Standing Committees. This was the
first time members of the Standing Committees had been paid.

That the Great Sachem be authorized to appoint a State Exemplifier, and
that $500.00 be appropriated for the use of the Great Sachem and the
Exemplifier. The Great Sachem appointed Past Sachem Frank L. Smith, of
No. 1 to this position, which he has held by re-appointment each Great
Sun to the present time, 1908.

That a special Committee of three Past Sachems be appointed to
investigate the matter of a Widows' and Orphans' Fund and report at the
next Great Council. The Great Sachem appointed on this Committee, O. R.
King, of No. 1; W. M. Evans, of No. 9; and H. V. Cohn, of No. 8,
together with the incoming Great Sachem, ex-officio.

The Committee on Charters recommended that charters be issued to the
following named tribes, they having been instituted during the past
Great Sun: Cataraugus, No. 36, Livingston; Red Hawk, No. 40, Falmouth;
Shabbona, No. 46; Somerset; Oconee, No. 47, Bloomfield; King Phillip,
No. 48, Hustonville; Shingawassa, No. 50, Bardfordsville; Comanche, No.
51, New Haven; Ta wa-wa, No. 52, Vine Grove; Minewa, No. 53, Beaver Dam;
Kentucky, No. 54, McHenry; Tioga, No. 55, Sturgis; Huron, No. 56,
Versailles; Standwaitee, No. 57, Earlington; Blazing Arrow, No. 58,
Madisonville; Sagwa, No. 59, Lawrenceburg; Otego, No. 60, Paducah;
Wichita, No. 61, Mayfield; Waukee, No. 62, Fulton; Pequod, No. 63,
Louisville; Lotowana, No. 64, Midway; Maumee, No. 65, Paris; Sagamore,
No. 66, Hickman; Black Foot, No. 67, Frankfort. Juanita Council, No. 3,
D. of P., Louisville. No charter was issued to Minetonka Tribe, No. 49,
it being reported defunct.

It was reported that Shawnee Tribe, No. 9 and Tecumseh Tribe, No. 12,
both of Louisville, had consolidated, and it was ordered that a charter
be issued to the new Tribe as Tecumseh Tribe No. 9.

A resolution to establish the minimum fee for adoption and degrees at
ten farthoms ($10.00) was defeated.

Upon the recommendation of the Finance Committee, mileage was allowed to
Great Chiefs, representatives and members of standing committees, sixty
in number, amounting to $473.50, being an average of $7.89 per capita.

An amendment to the general laws fixing the minimum fee for adoption at
eight fathoms was presented to be considered at the next Great Council.

The contract for printing proceedings was awarded to A. J. Domeck, of
Louisville, at 75 cents per page.

An amendment to the general laws providing for the election of Great
Chiefs by the "Australian Ballot", all Past Sachems to participate, the
election to take place in the wigwams of the various Tribes was
presented to lay over one Great Sun. This proposed law was styled by its
opponents the "Goebel" law of Redmanship.

It was ordered that portraits of all deceased Past Sachems, members of
this Great Council, be printed in the records, together with a memorial.

The Great Chief of Records was instructed to prepare a roster of all
members of the Great Council, to be kept in a book provided for that
purpose, and to have it present at each Great Council.

It was the sense of the Great Council that the Great Council of the
United States be invited to kindle its next Great Sun Council Fire in
the Reservation of Kentucky.

Past Great Sachem J. R. McConnell raised the Great Chiefs elect, as
follows:--

  Gustav A. Ellerkamp, of No. 9            Great Sachem.
  W. C. Pelham, of No. 3          Great Senior Sagamore.
  H. J. McFarlan, of No. 33       Great Junior Sagamore.
  Willie Walker, of No. 1                 Great Prophet.
  C. E. Lyddane, of No. 2        Great Chief of Records.
  John D. Walker, of No. 4       Great Keeper of Wampum.

Upon assuming his stump, Great Sachem Ellerkamp was presented with a
handsome Great Sachem's regalia by Past Sachem F. L. Smith, in behalf of
his many friends and Brothers.

The Great Sachem announced the appointment of Great Chiefs as follows,
and they were raised in due form:

  W. M. Evans, of No. 9                    Great Sannap.
  John W. Riley, of No. 11              Great Mishinewa.
  Ed. L. Hays, of No. 26          Great Guard of Wigwam.
  Harry F. Davis, of No. 15       Great Guard of Forest.

An amendment to the laws was offered providing that organizers should
submit a list of all proposed charter members of a new Tribe, to all
Tribes in the same hunting grounds where same was to be instituted in
hunting grounds already containing one or more tribes. Consideration was
deferred one great sun.

The Great Sachem announced the following standing committees for the
ensuing great sun:--

Finance--Henry Schwieters, of No. 8; M. M. Harbeson, of No. 7; Henry W.
Ray, of No. 3.

Law and Usage--Wm. A. Crader, of No. 9; Frank L. Smith, of No. 1; L. D.
Owen, of No. 8.

Returns and Reports--N. G. Mothershead, of No. 57; C. S. Hill, of No.
23; E. E. Reno, of No. 41.

Appeals--M. H. McCorkle, of No. 43; F. A. Gould, of No. 10; D. R.
Breeding, of No. 50.

State of Order--A. J. Domeck, of No. 16; C. A. Melone, of No. 9; Chas.
A. Wheeler, of No. 48.

After extending a hearty vote of thanks to the Chiefs and members of
Wyoming Tribe, No. 26 for the many courtesies shown the Great Council,
the council fire was quenched.


EIGHTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

=1902.=

This Council Fire was kindled in the wigwam of Totewa Tribe, No. 14,
Hunting Grounds of Owensboro, at the tenth run, 45th breath, rising of
the 13th sun of Flower Moon, G. S. D. 411. All of the elective Great
Chiefs were present.

Previous to the kindling of the Council Fire welcoming exercises were
held in the Court House, where Past Sachem S. W. Bedford, of No. 14, as
chairman, introduced Mayor Yewell and Bro. LaVega Clement, who delivered
addresses of welcome responded to by Great Sachem Ellerkamp, when the
meeting adjourned to the council chamber of Totewa Tribe.

The Great Sachem made appointments as follows to fill vacancies in the
appointive Great Chiefs:--

  George W. Griffith, of No. 11         Great Mishinewa.
  Lee W. Zweydorf, of No. 7       Great Guard of Wigwam.
  Chas. R. Brent, of No. 8        Great Guard of Forest.

The Great Sachem stated that he had been requested to appoint a Chief's
Degree member of No. 14 as official stenographer of the Great Council,
but the brother not being a Past Sachem, he could not be admitted. A
motion being made that the Great Council Degree be conferred upon the
Brother in question, the Great Sachem ruled the matter out of order.

It was then ordered that the Great Council go into the nomination and
election of an Assistant Great Chief of Records. Prior to this session,
the Assistant to the Great Chief of Records had been appointed by that
Great Chief.

Frank L. Smith, of No. 1 and J. G. Sewell, of No. 7 were placed in
nomination, but Past Sachem Sewell declining to serve if elected, the
remaining candidate was elected by acclamation.

The following were appointed a Credential Committee--Great Junior
Sagamore H. J. McFarlan, assisted by Con Trouth, of No. 7; H. H.
Denhardt, of No. 11, and C. M. Chasteen, of No. 4. This Committee
reported recommending the admission of 47 Past Sachems in waiting, and
the recognition of the representatives of 37 Tribes. The total
attendance at this Great Council was 101.

From the Great Sachem's Long Talk, the following is quoted:--

"To my regret I am compelled to say, that the growth of the Order is not
as phenomenal as that of the two previous great suns when a gain of 1500
members was made, but still I am proud to state that, what a few moons
ago seemed a probable loss in membership is reverted into a gain, and
where the membership one year ago was 3269 we now have 3525 members.
Since last Great Council Delaware Tribe, No. 23, at Lebanon, Ononga
Tribe, No. 34 at Covington, Red Hawk No. 40 at Somerset, Tawawa, No. 52
at Vine Grove, Sagwa, No. 59, at Lawrenceburg, Wichita, No. 61, at
Mayfield, Waukee, No. 62 at Fulton, and Black Hawk, No. 24, at
Springfield have become defunct. After due investigation to ascertain
the cause of so many Tribes quenching their council fires, I find that
the most of the trouble can be found in the following three causes:
First, lack of proper instruction; Second, the organizer did not
exercise enough care when soliciting charter members for new tribes,
placing therein members objectionable to a majority; Third, Tribes
numerically and financially weak would overreach themselves in the
matter of buying paraphernalia, then finding themselves involved would
attempt to give a pow-wow, and instead of bettering themselves would
plunge deeper in debt and dissolution would follow. To the credit of
Bro. F. W. Jones it must be said that he exercised splendid judgement
as to the character of the charter members of the tribes he instituted
during the past great sun."

The Great Sachem enumerates his visitations, appointments of Deputies,
and decisions rendered. From the recommendations offered by that Great
Chief we quote the following:--

"The Articles of Incorporation need to be revised and I would urge
immediate attention to this matter.

The minimum fee for the three degrees should be placed at ten fathoms.

The fee for adoption in Councils of the Degree of Pocahontas should be
fixed. The laws are at present vague.

The Great Council should empower the Great Sachem to appoint an
instructor or Exemplifier, and fix his compensation. A little wampum
invested in this manner will materially enlighten and strengthen weak
and tottering Tribes."

The Great Sachem recounted the memorial services held by the Louisville
Tribes on the death by assassination of President Wm. McKinley, and paid
tribute also to the memory of Past Sachems Wm. A. Metcalf, of No. 1 and
Thos. Wendroth, of No. 17, who had passed to the great beyond since last
Great Council.

The institution of fifteen new Tribes by State Organizer F. W. Jones is
recounted, and also of two Councils of the Degree of Pocahontas.

The following consolidations are recorded:

Minewa, No. 53, of Beaver Dam with Kentucky, No. 54, of McHenry, the
council fire of the former being quenched forever.

Pequod, No. 63, with Hiawatha, No. 7, both of Louisville, the Council
fire of No. 63 being quenched forever.

Red Jacket, No. 44, with Hiawatha, No. 7, both of Louisville, quenching
forever the council fire of Red Jacket, No. 44.

Tippecanoe, No. 29, with Cherokee, No. 8, both of Louisville, the former
going of existence.

Tecumseh No. 9, which had already absorbed Shawnee No. 9 and Tecumseh
No. 12, with Cherokee, No. 8, the former quenching its council fire
forever.

An extended review is made of the efficient work done by Special Deputy
Great Sachem Wm. A. Crader in visiting weak and defunct Tribes,
endeavoring to revive where possible, and where not possible closing the
Tribes by quenching their council fires forever.

The following were appointed to fill vacancies in Standing Committees:--

State of the Order--Ben C. Nunn, of No. 14; Edw. L. David, of No. 5.

Great Keeper of Wampum John D. Walker made his report showing balance in
wampum belt of $2,537.37.

The Great Chief of Records presented his Long Talk, from which we make
the following extracts: Members adopted since last report, 1221;
admitted by card, 110; reinstated, 35; suspended, 513; expelled, 2;
withdrawn, 55; deceased, 25; disbursed by Tribes for

relief, $5,247.45; for burial of the dead, $1,050.00; for other
purposes, $17,152.19; amount invested by Tribes, $7,742.08; total worth
of Tribes, $17,079.23.

The election of Great Chiefs was then entered into, with the following
results:--

Gustav A. Ellerkamp was unanimously elected Great Prophet.

W. C. Pelham, of No. 3, being the only nominee for Great Sachem was
elected by acclamation.

Horace J. McFarlan, of No. 33, was elected Great Senior Sagamore without
opposition.

H. H. Denhardt, of No. 11, was elected Great Junior Sagamore on the
third ballot, other candidates being W. A. Crader, of No. 8, L. L.
Bebout, of No. 60, and O. R. King, of No. 1.

C. E. Lyddane, of No. 2, being the only candidate, was unanimously
elected Great Chief of Records.

S. C. Moore, of No. 7 was elected Great Keeper of Wampum, there being no
other nominee. John D. Walker, the former encumbent having served five
great suns successively was given the honors of a Past Great Sachem, and
he declined to be a candidate for re-election.

Past Great Sachems G. A. Ellerkamp and John D. Walker were elected Great
Representatives for two great suns each. Other candidates in nomination
being F. W. Jones, of No. 14 and John Hafendorfer, of No. 14.

The Great Sachem announced the following appointments to fill vacancies
on Committees:--

Appeals--J. M. Clifford, of No. 10; Ben H. Schrader, of No. 5; W. B.
Eason, of No. 1.

Charters--J. G. Sewell, of No. 7; C. A. Woolfolk, of No. 7; L. L.
Bebout, of No. 60.

It was ordered that the matter of organization of new Tribes for the
ensuing Great Sun be left in the hands of the Great Sachem, he to
appoint such organizer or organizers as he might deem for the best
interests of the Order.

Maysville was unanimously selected as the place for kindling the next
Great Sun Council Fire.

The special Committee appointed at the last Great Sun Council to present
a plan for the establishment of a Widows' and Orphans' Fund presented a
report embodying the text of a law and recommended its adoption, but
its consideration was deferred one great sun that the matter might be
referred back to the tribes for thorough discussion therein. The bill,
as recommended by this Committee was adopted four great suns later with
some slight modifications.

The Committee on Law and Usage reported having prepared a model code of
by-laws for the use of Tribes, and they having been promulgated by the
Great Sachem were already in use by many Tribes.

A law was enacted establishing the minimum fee for adoption at eight
fathoms, it formerly being three fathoms.

An amendment to the law was adopted requiring organizers to submit a
list of all candidates for charter membership to all tribes in the same
hunting grounds.

The Great Representatives to the Great Council of the United States made
a written report, which was the first time this had been done.

State Organizer Jones reported having instituted fourteen new Tribes,
and gave data in regard to each.

It was ordered that the Great Representatives invite the Great Council
of the United States to kindle its Great Sun Council Fire in 412 in the
hunting grounds of Louisville.

The bill proposed at the previous Great Sun Council, providing for the
election of Great Chiefs in the Council Chambers of Tribes, by the
"Australian" ballot, was reported on adversely by the Committee on Law
and Usage, and thus the so-called "Goebel" bill was defeated.

On the recommendation of the Committee on Laws and Usage, it was ordered
by the Great Council that Tribes must pay benefits to a disabled brother
as long as his disability should continue. It had been the custom of
Tribes to provide by a by-law to that effect that benefits should cease
after a stated period. The ruling also provided that the minimum amount
of benefits to be paid should be a sum equal to the dues of the brother
that might accrue during his disability, or in other words, enough to
keep the brother in good standing. Later the Great Council of the United
States fixed the minimum amount at one fathom per seven suns.

A resolution was adopted requiring the financial Great Chiefs to give
bond in an indemnity bonding company, and that the Great Keeper of
Wampum should be paid a salary of fifty fathoms per Great Sun.

The Finance Committee, among other recommendations offered the following
which were agreed to:--

That the Assistant Great Chief of Records be allowed fifty fathoms for
his services.

That the printing for the ensuing Great Sun be awarded to the "American
Red Man" at 95 cents per page.

That five hundred fathoms be appropriated for the use of the Great
Sachem for the best interests of the Order.

The minimum fee for adoption in Councils of the Degree of Pocahontas was
fixed at one fathom.

Charters were granted the following new Tribes:--Otawa, No. 68, Olive
Hill; Powhatan, No. 69, Carrollton; Sioux, No. 70, Louisville; Little Ha
Ha, No. 71, Owenton; Morning Star, No. 72, Fordsville; Warsaw, No. 73,
Rockport; Floating Canoe, No. 76, Richmond; Shawnee, No. 77, Georgetown;
Grand Glaze, No. 79, Monterey; Ptocawa, No. 80, Louisville; Yosemite,
No. 81, Louisville; Appalachia, No. 82, Pineville; Passyunk, No. 83,
Harrodsburg; Spotted Wolf, No. 84, Coalton; Red Cloud, No. 85, Warsaw;
Big Eagle, No. 86, Sanders; Alfaretta Council, No. 4, Louisville;
Prairie Flower, No. 5, Newport.

On the recommendation of the Finance Committee mileage was allowed the
Great Chiefs, Representatives, and Members of Standing Committees,
amounting to $610.47, being paid to 68 individuals, an average of $8.97
per capita.

An amendment was proposed to be considered at the next Great Sun Council
advancing the minimum fee for adoption to fifteen fathoms.

A resolution was adopted instructing the Great Representatives to
endeavor to have a change made in the grip.

An emblematic Tomahawk was ordered presented to Totewa Tribe, No. 14, in
commemoration of the present session of the Great Council in its wigwam.

It was ordered that a committee of two be appointed to prepare new
Articles of Incorporation, and the Great Sachem appointed Lawrence S.
Leopold, of No. 8, and H. J. McFarlan, of No. 33.

Great Representative Lawrence Leopold presented a ring to Great Sachem
Ellerkamp in behalf of the Past Sachem's Association of Louisville.

Past Great Sachem W. C. Diederich, senior Past Great Sachem present
raised the Great Chiefs elect as follows:--

  W. C. Pelham, of No. 3                   Great Sachem.
  H. J. McFarlan, of No. 33       Great Senior Sagamore.
  H. H. Denhardt, of No. 11       Great Junior Sagamore.
  Gustav A. Ellerkamp, of No. 8           Great Prophet.
  C. E. Lyddane, of No. 2        Great Chief of Records.
  S. C. Moore, of No. 7          Great Keeper of Wampum.
  John Hafendorfer, of No. 14              Great Sannap.
  J. H. Richardson, of No. 3            Great Mishinewa.
  J. Robin Garr, of No. 7         Great Guard of Wigwam.
  J. K. Moore, of No. 32          Great Guard of Forest.

[Illustration: GREAT COUNCIL OF KENTUCKY--EIGHTH SESSION, OWENSBORO, MAY
13-14, 1902.]

The Great Sachem announced the following as members of Standing
Committees for the ensuing great sun:--

Finance--Henry W. Ray, of No. 3; O. R. King, of No. 1; W. M. Evans, of
No. 8.

Law and Usage--Frank L. Smith, of No. 1; W. A. Crader, of No. 8; Geo. C.
Wolf, of No. 77.

Returns and Reports--Robert Lee Page, of No. 80; N. G. Mothershead, of
No. 57; Forsee D. Lee, of No. 71.

Appeals--Louis Vissman, of No. 8; C. H. Bateman, of No. 50; Sebastian
Stone, of No. 56.

State of the Order--L. L. Bebout, of No. 60; J. H. Kemper, of No. 18; L.
E. Herrell, of No. 54.

After Past Sachem Frank L. Smith, of No. 1 had exemplified the unwritten
work of the Order, the Council Fire was quenched to be rekindled in the
wigwam of Wyandotte Tribe, No. 3, hunting grounds of Maysville, G. S. D.
412.


=1903.=

NINTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

Previous to the kindling of the council fire an excellent program of
welcome was rendered, including musical selections by the Red Men's
Band, and addresses by Past Great Sachem John I. Winter, Past Great
Incohonee Thomas K. Donnalley, of Pennsylvania, and Great Sachem Pelham.

At the 10th run, rising of the 12th sun of Flower Moon, G. S. D. 412,
the ninth Great sun council fire was kindled in ample form, all elective
and appointed Great Chiefs being present, as well as 78 Past Sachems.

D. N. Zimmerman, of No. 4 and Thomas M. Russell, of No. 3, were
appointed to assist Great Junior Sagamore Denhardt in the examination of
credentials, which committee soon reported the presence of fifty-six
Past Sachems in the forest for the first time, and they were admitted to
seats in the Great Council, making the total attendance 134.

The roll call of representatives disclosed the presence of the
representatives of fifty-seven Tribes out of sixty-three.

An election for Assistant Great Chief of Records was then entered into,
and Past Sachem Frank L. Smith was chosen, the opposing candidate being
P. P. Doll, of No. 8.

Great Sachem Pelham presented his long talk in print, the first time it
had been done, which met with the approval of all.

The following quotations are from that document:--

"I am proud to say the condition of the Order in this Reservation is
prosperous and progressive. Probably fifteen hundred names have been
added to the roster of membership during the past great sun, and with
few exceptions the Tribes and Councils are on the hunt for palefaces
with that enthusiasm and energy that knows no such word as fail."

In regard to Councils of the Degree of Pocahontas he said:--"This branch
of the Order appears to have been almost entirely neglected by former
Great Councils of this Reservation. The tax formerly assessed against
members of Councils was repealed by this Great Council at its fifth
session, and I find no mention of them in the Records since.

Experience has shown that the Tribe and Council are each benefited by
the presence of the other, and the membership of both are alike
interested in the upbuilding of their local branches and in the
advancement of the interests of the Order generally.

Under the care of this Great Council are five Councils who are entirely
at sea in the matter of laws for their government; and it would surely
be wise in this body to formulate a code for their benefit.

Diligent inquiry failing to furnish me with the name of any person who
would undertake the business of organizing Tribes in this Reservation, I
therefore tried to find some one in each locality who would undertake to
organize a Tribe nearby. As a direct result, ten new Tribes were
instituted, the organizers being in each case persons living in the near
locality of the new Tribes."

The method thus inaugurated by Great Sachem Pelham has been pursued by
his successors to the present, with results never equaled by any
Reservation in the history of the Order.

As usual he recounts the dispensations granted, decisions made, and
announces the inauguration by the Great Council of the United States of
the Orphan's Guardian Fund.

"I appointed Past Sachem Frank L. Smith Exemplifier for the Reservation
at large, and sent him on an extended trail, and he visited and
exemplified the work to forty-one tribes in two moons. It is to be
regretted that the amount of the appropriation for this purpose would
not permit the visitation of every Tribe in the Reservation. That the
visits and instructions were highly appreciated is attested by numerous
letters from the Tribes, and they clearly remonstrate the great
importance of following up the institution of a Tribe by proper
instruction and encouragement, either by a neighboring Tribe or by a
Great Chief or Exemplifier."

He reported the following tribes as being defunct:--Delaware, No. 23,
Lebanon; Seneca, No. 27, Stanford; Narragansett, No. 43, Middlesboro;
Shabbona, No. 46, Somerset; Sagamore, No. 66, Hickman; Nokomis, No. 74,
Franklin.

Among the recommendations offered were the following:--

"That a code of laws be prepared for the government of Councils of the
Degree of Pocahontas of this Reservation."

"That the horse be adopted as the Totem of this Reservation as
recommended by our Great Representatives at Norfolk last Corn Moon."

The following appointments were made to fill vacancies:--

On Laws and Usage--C. P. Harding, of No. 5.

On State of the Order--Thos. O. Long, of No. 57.

On Charters--John H. Ropke, of No. 8; Chas. Wheeler, of No. 48; G. W.
Griffith, of No. 11.

The Great Council then went into the election of Great Chiefs.

Horace J. McFarlan, of No. 33, was elected Great Sachem by acclamation.

H. H. Denhardt, of No. 11 was elected Great Senior Sagamore without
opposition.

Lewis L. Bebout, of No. 60 was elected Great Junior Sagamore on the
second ballot, O. R. King, of No. 1, L. D. Owen, of No. 8, and D. H.
Russell, of No. 10 being also in nomination.

Henry W. Ray, of No. 3 was unanimously elected Great Chief of Records,
Henry Schwieters, of No. 8 being also nominated but declined to make the
race. C. E. Lyddane, who had held the chieftaincy for five consecutive
great suns was not a candidate for re-election, and he was awarded the
honors of a Past Great Sachem.

S. C. Moore, of No. 7 was re-elected Great Keeper of Wampum without
opposition.

W. C. Pelham, of No. 3, Chas. A. Hess, of No. 10 and John H.
Buschemeyer, of No. 8 were elected Great Representatives for two Great
Suns each, other candidates in nomination being Lawrence S. Leopold, of
No. 8; W. C. Diederich, of No. 19; Willie Walker, of No. 1; J. Robin
Garr, of No. 7; John H. Ropke, of No. 8.

Great Keeper of Wampum S. C. Moore reported balance in the Great Council
wampum belt as being $2,853.10.

It was agreed by unanimous vote to kindle the next Great Sun Council
fire in the wigwam of Otego Tribe, No. 60, hunting grounds of Paducah.

An amendment to the laws was adopted fixing the minimum fee for adoption
at four fathoms. It had been fixed at eight fathoms by the previous
Great Council, and it was proposed at this time to increase it to
fifteen fathoms, but with the result of fixing it at the first named
figure where it has remained to the present. Much confusion was caused
by the misunderstanding of the term "adoption fee" many supposing it to
be the total fee for membership, including all three degrees. It was
here defined as meaning the fee for the "adoption" or first degree of
Redmanship.

The Great Chief of Records presented his long talk from which the
following data is obtained:--Adopted, 2158; admitted by card, 133;
reinstated, 44; suspended, 467; expelled, 16; withdrawn by card, 61;
deceased, 40; present membership, 5,053; disbursed by Tribes for relief,
$6,633.94; for burial of the dead, $1,604.00; for other purposes,
$18,085.74; invested by Tribes, $6,705.10. total worth of Tribes,
$28,280.65.

The Finance Committee reported having found the books and accounts of
the Great Chief of Records and Great Keeper of Wampum in correct form,
and made the following recommendations, which were concurred in:--

That Councils of the Degree of Pocahontas be assessed five in. per Great
Sun for each female member, for the benefit of the Orphans' Guardian
Fund of the Great Council of the United States.

That the Great Sachem and Exemplifier be allowed the sum of $1,000 for
the ensuing great sun.

That the printing of the Record be awarded to the Louisville Anzeiger
Co. at $1.10 per page.

That the Assistant Great Chief of Records be allowed fifty fathoms for
services rendered.

Past Great Incohonee Thos. K. Donnalley, of Pennsylvania, representing
the Great Incohonee of the Great Council of the United States, Thomas G.
Harrison, of Indiana, addressed the Great Council and exemplified the
unwritten work of the Order.

The Committee on State of the Order expressed the sentiments of all in
the following:--"Throughout the entire reservation there is universal
complaint at the carelessness and delay in getting the proceedings of
the last Great Council in hands of the various Tribes." Although the
copy had been furnished promptly to the printer, the book in question
had not been delivered until just prior to the present session.

The Committee on Returns and Reports, of which Robert Lee Page was
chairman paid the following tribute to Great Sachem Pelham:--"Under his
guidance and administration the Order has prospered and grown in
strength. His advice and decisions have been fair and impartial and his
conduct such as to meet with the approbation of the entire membership.
His administration is one that will ever be remembered, and we feel that
we cannot give him the praise he so richly deserves. We could with
greater ease add beauty to the lily or fragrance to the rose than we
could adequately express our appreciation of Bro. Pelham."

The following resolution was adopted:--That the Horse's Head on an
Indian Shield as recommended by the Great Council of the United States
be adopted as the totem of this Great Council, and that this Great
Council reserve unto itself the right to control the manufacture and
disposal of the said Totem or jewel.

The Committee on Charters recommended that charters be granted to the
following new Tribes, which was agreed to:--Kabo, No. 78, Petra; Eyota,
No. 87, Ball's Landing; Swift Foot, No. 88, Campbellsburg; Tallalu, No.
89, Callaway; War Eagle, No. 90, Bedford; Idaho, No. 91, Four Mile;
Tallapoosa, No. 92, Milton; Mingo, No. 93, Newport; Sago, No. 94,
Germantown; Wissahickon, No. 95, Lockport; Iona Council, No. 6, D. of
P., Pittsburg.

Great Prophet Ellerkamp offered the following suggestions, which were
adopted:--

That memorial page or pages be printed in each great sun's record
containing the names of all brothers deceased during the previous great
sun.

That at the opening of each Great Council every representative be handed
a copy of the last record and a copy of the manual.

That the Asst. Great Chief of Records prepare a page or pages containing
all new laws and resolutions enacted and also all unfinished business.

It was ordered that the Great Chief of Records prepare and have printed
a suitable form upon which Deputy Great Sachems shall hereafter make
their reports.

That matter of deferred business, consisting of the report of the
special Committee on Widow's and Orphan's Home Fund was taken up, and on
motion of Past Sachem H. C. Yunker, of No. 7 was laid on the table.

An amendment to the laws was offered to lay over one great sun providing
a penalty for electioneering.

Another to take the same course was offered providing for holding the
Great Sun Council in Hot Moon instead of Flower Moon.

The Finance Committee recommended the payment of mileage to 78
Representatives, Great Chiefs and members of Committees, amounting to
$753.53, being an average of $9.66 per member.

Past Great Incohonee Thomas K. Donalley proceeded to raise the Great
Chiefs elect, appointing as Great Tocakon Past Great Sachem Willie
Walker.

  Horace J. McFarlan, of No. 33            Great Sachem.
  H. H. Denhardt, of No. 11       Great Senior Sagamore.
  Lewis L. Bebout, of No. 60      Great Junior Sagamore.
  W. C. Pelham, of No. 3                  Great Prophet.
  Henry Wood Ray, of No. 3       Great Chief of Records.
  S. C. Moore, of No. 7          Great Keeper of Wampum.
  A. C. Prewitt, of No. 33                 Great Sannap.
  Geo. W. Griffith, of No. 11           Great Mishinewa.
  J. H. Kemper, of No. 18         Great Guard of Wigwam.
  J. K. Moore, of No. 32          Great Guard of Forest.

The following Standing Committees were announced for the ensuing Great
Sun:--

Finance--W. M. Evans, of No. 8; Henry Schwieters, of No. 8; O. R. King,
of No. 1.

Law and Usage--L. D. Owen, of No. 8; W. C. Morgan, of No. 90; H. J.
Northcutt, of No. 37.

Returns and Reports--Robert Lee Page, of No. 80; Forsee D. Lee, of No.
71; N. G. Mothershead, of No. 57.

State of the Order--Thos. M. Russell, of No. 3; C. H. Bateman, of No.
50; Louis Vissman, of No. 8.

Appeals--J. Robin Garr, of No. 7; C. A. Melone, of No. 8; John
Hafendorfer, of No. 14.

Thanks of the Great Council were tendered Wyandotte Tribe, No. 3 for its
hospitality, and after the Great Prophet had said a prayer, the Council
Fire quenched in ample form.


=1904.=

TENTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Tenth Great Sun Council Fire of the Great Council of Kentucky was
kindled in the wigwam of Otego Tribe, No. 60, at Owensboro, at the 11th
run rising of the 10th sun of Flower Moon, G. S. D. 413.

Prior to the kindling, introductory exercises were held as
follows:--Addresses by Mayor Yeiser, and Judge R. V. Lightfoot, with
responses by Bros. R. L. Page, S. C. Moore, and Great Minewa, Thos. J.
Smith, representing the Great Incohonee.

At the kindling of the council fire there were present all the Great
Chiefs, except Great Prophet, three Past Great Sachems and 75 Past
Sachems.

Lee W. Zweydorf, of No. 7 and Ben H. Schrader, of No. 5 were appointed
to assist the Great Junior Sagamore in the examination of Credentials.

Past Great Sachem Willie Walker of No. 1 was appointed Great Prophet for
the session, Great Prophet Pelham being unable to be present.

Upon the recommendation of the Credential Committee fifty-seven
Past Sachems were admitted to seats in the Great Council, and the
representatives of sixty-two Tribes were recognized. The attendance this
session was 136.

It was agreed that Representatives of Tribes instituted so recently as
not to be legally entitled to representation be allowed mileage.

The Great Sachem announced the following appointments on committees to
fill vacancies:--

State of the Order--C. P. Harding, of No. 5; L. H. Roberts, of No. 10.

Charters--Claude B. Terrell, of No. 90; J. M. Clifford, of No. 10; Hugh
Johnson, of No. 81.

A communication was read from Great Incohonee Thomas G. Harrison,
expressing his regret at not being able to be present and appointing
Great Minewa, Thomas J. Smith as his representative.

The Deputy or Acting Great Incohonee was announced in the Forest and
Past Great Sachems Willie Walker, Ellerkamp and John D. Walker were
appointed as escorts, when he was admitted with the usual honors.

Great Sachem McFarlan presented his long talk in print, from which the
following extracts are made:--

"We have much for which to extend thanks to the Great Spirit who has so
kindly 'blessed us with plenty' and 'rewarded our labors two-fold'; at
least have we not to be content with present conditions which everywhere
indicate that the affairs of the Order are in splendid condition; that
the affairs of the Great Council are in safe hands and that the rank and
file is made up of indefatigable and competent workers, who are filled
with enthusiasm and an earnest desire to advance the Order to that high
and prominent position which it must eventually occupy and which every
Red Man wishes it to attain. From every source comes to me good tidings
of noble work being carried on; of palefaces being adopted; of a search
for a better understanding of the fundamental principles and laws of the
Order; Peace and harmony; good fellowship and brotherhood. I believe we
can safely say that during the next Great Sun our membership will be
increased to the extent that we shall have a larger representation in
the Great Council of the United States. I wish that I could say my
administration was one of perfection.

  'It surely was my profit had I known,
  It would have been my pleasure had I seen.

"There have been sent to me words of encouragement; words of
discouragement; words of hope; words of despair; words of praise; words
of censure; but through all, gathering to himself the flowers of love,
patience, kindness and sympathy, he has pressed on, giving to you his
sincerest and best efforts, and now, extending to his brothers his
thanks for these flowers, he greets you in truth, in Freedom, Friendship
and Charity."

The Great Sachem recounted the institution of ten new Tribes and two new
Councils of the Degree of Pocahontas, as well as the relighting of the
council brand of Sagwa Tribe, No. 69, at Lawrenceburg.

He recited a long list of decisions, nearly all of which met with
approval.

Concerning the Degree of Pocahontas he said:--"My report would be both
inadequate and insufficient, indeed, should I fail to make some mention
of the Degree of Pocahontas, now an important factor in our great
American Order, and whose members are actuated and inspired to noble
work by those cardinal principles we as Red Men hold so dear, Freedom,
Friendship and Charity. The auxiliary is certainly becoming popular, and
is now in a prosperous condition, and from information I can advisedly
say that wherever it is established properly will prove a valuable
adjunct to our work. I might add by way of suggestion or recommendation
that it would be a wise move to establish as soon as practicable in this
Reservation a Great Council of the Degree of Pocahontas, believing it
is due them, and that much more good can come from this branch of the
Order if they have the right and privilege extended them to counsel and
legislate. * * * I note that the Great Incohonee in his report very
pertinently remarks: 'This Degree deserves from the Great Council its
wisest consideration, and no pains should be spared in any matters which
may effect the interests and increase the usefulness of our Councils.'"

Cherokee Tribe, No. 8 and Hiawatha Tribe, No. 7, both of Louisville met
with the misfortune to lose their charters and effects in the burning
of the Masonic Temple on the 20th of Beaver Moon, G. S. D. 412, and the
Great Sachem granted both Tribes dispensations to work without a charter
until the Great Council should grant then new Charters.

On the 18th of Worm Moon, G. S. D. 413, by invitation of Great Sachem
McFarlan, Great Incohonee Thos. G, Harrison made a visit to Kentucky,
and a reception and banquet was given in his honor at the Louisville
Hotel. More than two hundred guests were entertained, and the occasion
was one of particular moment to Redmanship in this Reservation. In his
Long Talk, the Great Sachem records extracts from many of the addresses,
words of wisdom, encouragement and commendation.

From the Long Talk of Great Chief of Records Ray, the following
statistics of the Order are taken:--Adopted since last report, 1152;
admitted by card, 60; reinstated, 11; suspended, 594; expelled, 19;
withdrawn, 50; deceased, 41; disbursed for relief, $9,015.29; for burial
of the dead, $1,969.89; for other purposes, $14,396.12; invested by
Tribes, $17,895.60; Total fund of Tribes, $35,589.28; number of working
tribes, 73; number of Councils Degree of Pocahontas, 7.

The Great Keeper of Wampum reported the cash balance on hand as being
$2,191.95.

An election for Assistant Great Chief of Records was then entered
into with the result that Past Sachem Frank L. Smith, of No. 1 was
re-elected, Past Sachem J. Robin Garr, of No. 99 being also in
nomination.

A committee was appointed, Acting Great Incohonee Thos. J. Smith,
presiding, to draft resolutions of sympathy and condolence on account
of the recent death of the infant son of Great Sachem McFarlan, the
following serving in that capacity:--N. G. Mothershead, of No. 57; C. P.
Harding, of No. 5 and Claude B. Terrell, of No. 90.

The Great Council then went into the election of Great Chiefs with the
following results:--

Horace J. McFarlan, of No. 33, was unanimously elected Great Prophet.

H. H. Denhardt, of No. 11 was elected Great Sachem without opposition.

Lewis L. Bebout, of No. 60 was elected Great Senior Sagamore, there
being no other nominations.

Dan H. Russell, of No. 10 was elected Great Junior Sagamore, other
nominees being Robert Lee Page, of No. 80, and Ben C. Nunn, of No. 14,
the latter asking that his name be withdrawn.

Henry W. Ray, of No. 3 was elected Great Chief of Records for the
second time, without opposition.

S. C. Moore, of No. 7 was unanimously elected Great Keeper of Wampum
for the third time. Dr. Harry J. Phillips was nominated for this
position, but he refused to become a candidate.

Horace J. McFarlan, Robert Lee Page and Lawrence S. Leopold were
elected Great Representatives for two great suns each, the other
candidates in nomination being G. A. Ellerkamp, of No. 8; Ben H.
Shrader, of No. 5; John D. Walker, and Willie Walker, of No. 1.

At the request of Acting Great Incohonee Thos. J. Smith, State
Exemplifier, Frank L. Smith, the recognized custodian of the work in
Kentucky exemplified the unwritten work of the Order.

Frankfort was unanimously accepted as the hunting grounds in which the
next Great Sun Council fire should be kindled.

The Great Council of the United States having adopted a new Code of
laws embracing a new Constitution governing State Great Councils, it
was ordered that the incoming committee on Law and Usage be augmented
by the addition of two members, and they to prepare a new code of
laws governing the Great Council of Kentucky and the Tribes under its
jurisdiction, to report in print to the various Tribes, and their report
to be reviewed at the next Great Sun Council.

The contract for the printing for the ensuing Great Sun was let to the
Louisville Anzeiger Co. at $1.10 per page.

The amendment to the law laid over from last Great Council making
electioneering a penal act was adopted.

The Great Council refused to change the time for holding the Great Sun
Council from Flower Moon to Hot Moon.

It was ordered that each Past Great Sachem of the Great Council be
presented with Past Great Sachem's Jewel, to cost no more than 25
fathoms each.

The Committee which had been previously appointed to prepare new
Articles of Incorporation not having reported, the Great Sachem was
authorized to appoint another Committee.

The Finance Committee recommended the payment of mileage to Great
Chiefs, Representatives and members of standing committees, 82 in
number, amounting to $1,403.19, averaging $17.11 each.

The Great Council then went into the Committee of the Whole for the
consideration of amendments to the laws.

Upon the recommendation of the Finance Committee the following
appropriations were made:--

To the Tribe entertaining the Great Council each Great sun, $150.00.

To the Assistant Great Chief of Records for services, $75.00.

To the Great Sachem for the use of himself and State Exemplifier,
$1,250.

A new code of laws governing the organization and institution of
Tribes was adopted. Up to this time the matter of organization had
been conducted much upon the "go as you please" plan, each Great
Sachem using his own judgment in the matter. The adoption of definite
laws governing this matter was a boon to following Great Sachems.

A regulation was adopted requiring financial chiefs of the Great
Council and Tribes and Councils of the Degree of Pocahontas to be
bonded in such indemnity company as might be selected by the Finance
Committee from time to time.

An amendment was offered to be considered at the next Great Sun
Council providing for the nomination and election of Great Chiefs on
the second sun of the session instead of the first.

An amendment was offered defining the bounds of Deputy Great Sachems,
providing for districts, and for the holding of district meetings for
the purpose of exemplification, but same was laid over for one great
sun.

Upon the recommendation of the Committee on Charters the following
named Tribes and Councils of the Degree of Pocahontas were granted
charters:--Niagara, No. 96, Orangeburg; Kenawha, No. 97, Vanceburg;
Pontiac, No. 98, Louisville; Wauneeka, No. 99, Louisville; Buffalo,
No. 100, Sardis; Raritan, No. 101, Worthville; Modoc, No. 102,
Louisville; Ute, No. 103, Torrent; Lackawanna, No. 4, Salt Lick;
Catawba, No. 105, Prestonville; Tamina, No. 106, Jennings; Ramona
Council, No. 7, Augusta; Hiawatha Council, No. 8, Fourmile; Mojave
Council, No. 9, Maysville; Charters were also ordered issued to
Cherokee, No. 8, and Hiawatha, No. 7, both of Louisville, both having
been lost by fire.

It was ordered that a special committee be appointed to take charge
of any orphan matters, to investigate, and take the proper steps to
secure them the benefits of the Orphans' Guardian Fund. The Great
Sachem appointed Ben C. Nunn, of No. 14; O. R. King, of No. 1; A. C.
Fahrenberg, of No. 10.

Acting Great Incohonee Thomas J. Smith proceeded to raise the elective
and appointive Great Chiefs, with the assistance of Past Great Sachem
Willie Walker, of No. 1, Acting Great Tocakon.

  H. H. Denhardt, of No. 11                    Great Sachem.
  L. L. Bebout, of No. 60             Great Senior Sagamore.
  Dan. H. Russell, of No. 10          Great Junior Sagamore.
  H. J. McFarlan, of No. 33                   Great Prophet.
  Henry Wood Ray, of No. 3           Great Chief of Records.
  S. C. Moore, of No. 7              Great Keeper of Wampum.
  Harry J. Phillips, of No. 10                 Great Sannap.
  Lee W. Zweydorf, of No. 7                 Great Mishinewa.
  J. K. Moore, of No. 32              Great Guard of Wigwam.
  J. Robin Garr, of No. 99            Great Guard of Forest.

The special committee on Orphans reported they had performed the
duties intrusted to them and asked to be discharged, which was done,
and it was ordered that the Great Sachem appoint another committee to
continue the work ad interim.

The following committees were announced to serve the ensuing Great
Sun:--

Finance--H. J. Northcutt, of No. 37; Henry Schwieters, of No. 8; J. H.
Kemper, of No. 18.

Law and Usage--George W. Hinesley, of No. 8; John W. Riley, of No. 11;
Gustav A. Ellerkamp, of No. 8; O. R. King, of No. 1; J. W. Matthews,
of No. 67.

Returns and Reports--T. J. Tierney, of No. 80; J. H. Adams, of No. 83;
Hugh Johnson, of No. 81.

State of the Order--J. J. Freundlich, of No. 60; N. G. Mothershead, of
No. 57; J. M. Clifford, of No. 10.

Appeals--C. H. Morris, of No. 33; C. P. Harding, of No. 5; John
Hafendorfer, of No. 14.

After tendering a rising vote of thanks to Otego Tribe No. 60 for
their more than hospitable treatment of the Great Council and its
members while in their hunting grounds, and when the Great Prophet had
said a prayer, the council fire was quenched.


=1905.=

ELEVENTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The eleventh Great Sun Council fire of the Great Council of Kentucky
was kindled in the Council Chamber of Blackfoot Tribe, No. 67, Hunting
Grounds of Frankfort, at the 11th run, 30th breath, rising of the 9th
Sun of Flower Moon, G. S. D. 414. Previous to the kindling of the
Council Fire addresses of welcome, with responses, interspersed with
music, were delivered by Hon. James Darnell, Mayor; Great Sachem H. H.
Denhardt; Bro. T. H. Crockett, of No. 67; Great Senior Sagamore L. L.
Bebout. When the friends and guests had departed, the regular session
began, all the elective Great Chiefs being present, and 90 Past
Sachems.

The Great Sachem appointed the following to fill vacancies for the
session:--

Ben. C. Nunn, of No. 14, Great Sannap.

M. M. Harbeson, of No. 7, Great Mishinewa.

Chintz Royalty, of No. 38, Great Guard of Wigwam.

To assist the Great Junior Sagamore in the examination of credentials
the Great Sachem appointed W. M. Toomey, of No. 83; and Frank Wagner,
of No. 14.

A communication was received from Great Incohonee J. W. Cherry,
announcing that Great Guard of the Forest Jas. H. Cook had been
commissioned to represent him at this session, and he being announced
as being in the forest, Great Representatives Louis Vissman, John H.
Buschemeyer and Robt. Lee Page were appointed to escort him into the
Council Chamber.

Acting Great Incohonee James H. Cook was formally introduced and
greeted with the honors of the Order.

It was agreed that the representatives of Tribes so recently
instituted as not to be legally entitled to representation be admitted
and allowed mileage.

Upon the recommendation of Great Junior Sagamore D. H. Russell, 66
Past Sachems in waiting were introduced and received the Great Council
Degree.

Upon the recommendation of the same Great Chief, the credentials of
the representatives of 67 Tribes, and they being present were accorded
seats as such in the Great Council.

The total attendance at this session was 145.

The following were appointed to fill vacancies on Committees:--

Judiciary--M. B. Wallerstein, of No. 60.

Orphans--E. M. Wallace, of No. 5 and J. G. Renaker, of No. 37.

Charters--J. C. Lykins, of No. 113; M. M. Redding, of No. 64; W. H.
McDonald, of No. 111.

Great Sachem H. H. Denhardt, as was now the custom, presented his Long
Talk in print, and the following extracts will be of interest:--

"As the members of the Great Council of Kentucky assemble in peace
and harmony around this Great Sun's Council fire, we can congratulate
ourselves upon the close of the most prosperous year in the history
of the Order in Kentucky. From Paducah our runners swiftly to their
Tribes returned spreading the spirit of true fraternity there
engendered into every wigwam in our Reservation, and as a result
the council fires of the various Tribes have been kept brightly
burning; discord has been banished from their midst; and the braves
and warriors have become accustomed to assemble not for the purpose
of wrangling among themselves, of gaining some petty advantage over
another brother or over another Tribe, but plans for the capturing
of palefaces were discussed and as a result at least two thousand
palefaces' scalps are dangling at the belts of our warriors and braves.

This Great Sun has been one fraught with many blessings and pleasures.
The propitious sky has occasionally been obscured by a fleeting cloud,
but the passing shadow only intensified the brightness that followed.

Through the sunshine and the shadows, the pleasures and trials, our
beloved Order has grown until now it has taken rank as one of the most
prosperous fraternal societies in Kentucky.

I have brought to the performance of the duties devolving upon me
my best energies, my untiring efforts and all the zeal and industry
I could command. It, no doubt, is true that I have not measured up
to the full requirements of the high and important Chieftaincy to
which your over-kindness has elevated me; I have, however, labored
with an eye single to the advancement of our Order. I have tried to
be diligent, sought to be impartial and endeavored to be zealous and
faithful."

Concerning Councils of the Degree of Pocahontas he said:--"I have done
what I could to promote the welfare of this most excellent branch of
our order. Some progress has been made, but still there is need of
encouragement being given those who are striving to push forward the
cause of this Degree."

He reported the institution of twenty-one new Tribes and two Councils
of the Degree of Pocahontas, as well as the resuscitation of four
Tribes and one Council D. of P.

Concerning the Widows' and Orphans' Home Fund he said:--"It seemed to
be almost the unanimous opinion of those to whom I talked concerning
this matter that the time for the creation of this fund had arrived
even at the last Great Council; however, no action was taken. I
believe that the movement to establish a Home for the Widows and
Orphans of Kentucky Red Men is the greatest work ever undertaken by
our beloved Order in Kentucky. When we establish a Home of this sort
we are doing some real good in the world and that is what our Order
exists for, and that is, or should be, the aim of every member of the
Order."

After publishing a list of subscriptions to the Home Fund amounting to
$438.30, and having recounted a long list of visitations, he said--

"The Angel of Death has laid his hand heavily on our Order during
the past Great Sun. Mary McFarlan, wife of Horace J. McFarlan, Great
Prophet of the Great Council of Kentucky, died on the 15th Sun of Buck
Moon, G. S. D. 413.

Thomas Alden Hornsey, Past Great Sachem of the Great Council of
Kentucky died on the 12th Sleep of Beaver Moon, G. S. D. 413.

Thomas H. Watts, Great Incohonee of the Great Council of the United
States, died on the 29th Sun of Worm Moon, G. S. D. 414.

Past Sachem M. J. Madden, member of the Widows' and Orphans' Committee
of this Great Council died on the 17th Sun of Worm Moon, G. S. D. 414."

After an account of dispensations granted, decisions made, and details
of minor transactions, the Great Sachem closes with thanks to his
associates and to the Great Council.

The Great Chief of Record's Long Talk affords the following
information:--Adopted since last report, 1,994; admitted by card, 118;
reinstated, 13; suspended, 643; expelled, 14; withdrawn, 81; deceased,
72; present membership, 6,993; disbursed for relief, $10,958.09;
for burials, $3,436.31; for other purposes, $25,326.71; invested,
$24,107.60; total fund of Tribes, $46,302.86; Tribes instituted since
last report, 21; number of working Tribes 91.

The Great Keeper of Wampum reported the cash balance in the Great
Council wampum belt as being $1,886.30; in the Widows' and Orphans' Home
Fund, $438.30.

The election for Great Chiefs resulted as follows:--

Lewis L. Bebout, of No. 60 was elected Great Sachem unanimously.

Dan. H. Russell, of No. 10 was elected Great Senior Sagamore without
opposition.

H. H. Denhardt, of No. 11 was elected Great Prophet, by acclamation,
there being no other nominees.

Robert Lee Page, of No. 80 was elected Great Junior Sagamore, Past
Sachem J. W. Matthews, of No. 67 being also in nomination. J. H.
Kemper of No. 18 had been nominated, but desired his name to be
withdrawn.

Henry Wood Ray, of No. 3 was unanimously elected Great Chief of
Records for the third consecutive term.

S. C. Moore, of No. 7 was, upon motion of O. R. King, of No. 1, who
had been placed in nomination against him, unanimously re-elected
Great Keeper of Wampum for the fourth consecutive term. Past Sachem
King declined to be a candidate.

Gustav A. Ellerkamp, of No. 8; John H. Buschemeyer, of No. 8; W.
A. Crader, of No. 8, and M. B. Wallerstein, of No. 60 were elected
Great Representatives to the Great Council of the United States for
two Great Suns each. Other candidates in nomination were Lawrence S.
Leopold, of No. 8; Frank L. Smith, of No. 1 and C. P. Harding of No. 5.

The Great Council agreed unanimously to return to Frankfort one Great
Sun hence and again kindle its Great Sun Council fire in the Capitol
City.

Past Sachem Albert Miller of No. 1 presented the Great Council with
a magnificent Great Sachem's Stump, carved from the solid wood in
representation of a Chieftain's bust, decorated with feathers and
emblems of the Order.

The Committee on Revision of the Laws, which had been appointed
at the previous Great Council, now presented its report in print.
Shortly after the adjournment one great sun ago, the committee had
met, and realizing the magnitude of the work before them, expressed
its belief that one brother could accomplish the desired result with
less difficulty and in a shorter time than a number, and agreed to
employ Past Sachem Frank L. Smith, of No. 1, to do the work, if he
would undertake it. That chief accepting the commission, submitted his
report to the full committee in Sturgeon Moon, G. S. D. 413, and with
slight changes was adopted by the committee.

This report, embracing an entirely new code of law, founded upon the
general plan outlined by the Great Council of the United States,
making an entire separation of the legislative, executive and judicial
departments, was now before the Great Council, which went into the
Committee of the Whole for its consideration. Upon the rising of the
committee, the laws as presented by the Revision Committee were adopted,
with the exception of that article relating to the establishment of the
Widows' and Orphans' Home Fund. This article was made a special order of
business, and was the subject of earnest debate.

Those opposing the adoption of the law were not adverse to the
principle, but to the method of applying relief to the needy, their
plan, which they wished to substitute for a Widows' and Orphans' Home,
was the establishment of an Endowment Fund, the income from which should
be used to defray the expenses of its beneficiaries in private homes
rather than in an institution. After protracted debate, the law as
presented by the Committee on Revision, establishing the Widows' and
Orphans' Home Fund, with some slight technical alterations, was adopted
by an almost unanimous vote. The law as finally adopted was almost
identical with that presented at the previous Great Council and which
was then tabled.

The Committee on Incorporation of the Great Council presented a verbal
report, stating that articles had been prepared and would be submitted
when properly recorded. The articles prepared by this committee, while
published as preface to the new code of laws, were never recorded, and
consequently never were in operation.

Upon the recommendation of the Committee, charters were ordered issued
to the following named Tribes: Juanita, No. 107, Ghent; Kenton,
No. 108, Artemus; Wautauga, No. 109, Bosworth; Wabash, No. 110,
Nicholasville; Tchoupitoulas, No. 111, Barbourville; Winnebago, No.
112, Henderson; Ocono, No. 113, Campton; Tonawanda, No. 114, Grayson;
Minnehaha, No. 115, Cropper; Saco, No. 116, West Liberty; Neponset,
No. 117, Jackson; Akkeewassa, No. 118, Cannel City; Ganoga, No. 119,
Gratz; Navajo, No. 120, Sandy Hook; Tacoma, No. 121, Hazel Green;
Oseetah, No. 122, Redwine; Kinniconick, No. 125, Bowen; Seminole, No.
126, Denniston; Apache, No. 127, Robbins; Indianola Council, No. 10,
D. of P., Carrollton. A new charter was also granted Calumet Tribe,
No. 18, theirs having been destroyed by fire.

The Committee on Appeals rendered several decisions, which were
approved, but it is not thought best to here record them, they being
of a personal nature.

The Finance Committee recommended the payment of mileage to 100 Great
Chiefs, Representatives and members of Standing Committees, amounting
to $661.32, being an average of $6.6123 per member paid.

That committee recommended a Bonding Company; that the printing be
awarded to the Louisville Anzeiger Co.; that the salary of the
Assistant Great Chief of Records be increased to $150.00; all of which
were approved.

The Assistant Great Chief of Records now being an appointee of the
Great Chief of Records, G. C. of R. Ray appointed Frank L. Smith, of
No. 1, to that position.

The Great Chief of Records presented to the Great Council the set of
jewels said to have been in use by the old Great Council of Kentucky
at the time of its demise, they having been secured through the
efforts of the members of Miami Tribe, No. 17, and Mingo Tribe, No.
93, both of Newport, and it was agreed they should be worn by the
Chiefs of the present Great Council. The jewels, however, proved not
to be Great Council Jewels, being of silver, but the regulation Tribal
Jewels.

Acting Great Incohonee Jas. H. Cook, having appointed Past Great
Sachem G. A. Ellerkamp as Great Tocakon, raised the following elective
and appointive Great Chiefs:

  Lewis L. Bebout, of No. 60                       Great Sachem
  Dan H. Russell, of No. 10               Great Senior Sagamore
  Robert Lee Page, of No. 80              Great Junior Sagamore
  H. H. Denhardt, of No. 11                       Great Prophet
  Henry Wood Ray, of No. 3               Great Chief of Records
  S. C. Moore, of No. 7                  Great Keeper of Wampum
  C. P. Harding, of No. 5                          Great Sannap
  W. E. Buck, of No. 60                         Great Mishinewa
  Val. J. Baader, of No. 17               Great Guard of Wigwam
  G. Michael, of No. 22                   Great Guard of Forest

The Great Sachem announced the following appointments:

Board of Appeals--Geo. W. Hinesley, of No. 8, three great suns; J. J.
Freundlich, of No. 60, two great suns; O. R. King, of No. 1, one great
sun.

Trustees of Widows' and Orphans' Home Fund--Henry C. Yunker, of No. 7,
three great suns; G. W. Griffith, of No. 11, two great suns; C. Royalty,
of No. 38, one great sun.

Finance--H. J. Northcutt, of No. 37; J. H. Kemper, of No. 18; T. J.
Tierney, of No. 80.

Judiciary--J. W. Mathews, of No. 67; Jos. C. Lykins, of No. 113; N. G.
Mothershead, of No. 57.

State of the Order--Sebastian Stone, of No. 56; W. H. McDonald, of No.
111; Ben C. Nunn, of No. 14.

Returns and Reports--J. M. Clifford, of No. 10; Duke White, of No. 3; C.
F. Melton, of No. 70.

State Exemplifier--Frank L. Smith, of No. 1.

Past Great Sachem's Jewels were presented to the following Past Great
Sachems: Thos. A. Davis, of No. 3; John I. Winter, of No. 3; W. C.
Diederich, of No. 19; Willie Walker, of No. 1; Gustav A. Ellerkamp, of
No. 8; John D. Walker, of No. 1; W. C. Pelham, of No. 3; C. E. Lyddane,
of No. 2; H. J. McFarlan, of No. 33; H. H. Denhardt, of No. 11.

After appropriate resolutions of thanks, and when the Great Prophet had
invoked the Great Spirit, the council fire was quenched.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Code of Laws as adopted at the Eleventh Great Sun Council was
approved by the Judiciary Committee of the Great Council of the United
States, entire, yet when that Great Council met in Great Sun Council
in Corn Moon, G. S. D. 414, the committee recommended that its action
be reversed in approving that part of the Laws of the Great Council
of Kentucky relating to the establishment of the Widows' and Orphans'
Home Fund. Appeal was taken to the Great Board of Appeals of the Great
Council of the United States, and that Great Board ruled the whole
matter in conflict with the Constitution of the Great Council of the
United States, which Great Council reserved unto itself the exclusive
right to legislate concerning the maintenance of orphans.

The effect of this ruling was to make nul and void all legislation
by the Great Council of Kentucky concerning the Widows' and Orphans'
Home Fund. The laws as enacted at the eleventh Great Council were
again submitted to the Judiciary Committee of the Great Council of
the United States, minus any reference to a Widows' and Orphans' Home
Fund, and were then approved and published.


=1906.=

TWELFTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Twelfth Great Sun Council fire of the Great Council of Kentucky
was kindled in the Legislative Hall of the State Capitol, hunting
grounds of Frankfort, by courtesy of Blackfoot Tribe, No. 67, at the
11th run, 40th breath, rising of the 8th sun of Flower Moon, G. S. D.
415.

Prior to the kindling of the council fire, addresses of welcome and
responses were delivered by Gov. J. C. W. Beckham, Mayor E. E. Hume,
Col. G. B. Harper, Great Sachem L. L. Bebout, Great Senior Sagamore D.
H. Russell, Representative T. Hiter Crockett, Great Junior Sagamore
Robert L. Page, Past Great Sachem H. H. Denhardt, and Wilson Brooks,
Great Chief of Records of the Great Council of the United States.

After the visitors had retired, the council fire was kindled in
ample form, all elective Great Chiefs being present, seven Great
Representatives, five Past Great Sachems and 112 Past Sachems.

Great Chief of Records Ray appointed F. L. Smith as Assistant Great
Chief of Records.

Great Sachem Bebout appointed Claude B. Terrell, of No. 90, and
Con. Trauth, of No. 7, to assist the Great Junior Sagamore in the
examination of credentials. He also appointed Harry J. Richardson,
of No. 3, to fill a vacancy on Committee on Returns and Reports, all
other members of Standing Committees being present.

Upon the recommendation of the Credential Committee, 102 Past Sachems
were admitted for the first time. The total attendance at this session
was 204.

The roll call of representatives revealed the presence of a
representative from each of 83 Tribes out of 109 entitled to
representation.

Great Sachem Bebout presented his long talk in print, as usual, and
the following extracts reveal the general condition of the Order at
that time:

"Our runners have been busy in paying visitations to the various
hunting grounds in this reservation, and from each hunting ground
where a Tribe of our Order exists comes the glad tidings that our
brothers are dwelling in peace and harmony.

No longer does the pale face nation look with distrust upon our
warriors, but truly the "tomahawk has been buried" and the Red Men and
pale face meet as friends.

I desire first of all to recall to your minds the motto of our beloved
"Old Kentucky", "United we stand, divided we fall," and trust this may
be adopted in our deliberations. The Improved Order of Red Men has a
mission to perform among our fellow men that we alone can perform.

We are now permited to report the establishment and institution of
more tribes within our borders, since the quenching of our last Great
Sun Council fire than during any Great Sun since our Order has been in
existence."

Great Sachem Bebout is in error. He reports the institution of 29 new
Tribes, while during Willie Walkers administration (G. S. D. 409-410)
32 new Tribes were organized.

"Our representatives at our last Great Sun's Council placed upon the
pages of our speaking book a law, in accordance with the fundamental
teachings of our Order, which provided for the creation of a fund
to be used in the establishment of a Home within our borders, which
should be a shelter for the unfortunates of our Tribes, who may not
be able to withstand the trials and hardships which attend the
unprotected in this busy, hustling commercial age in which we live.

In the Great Book of Life we find this expression, 'And a little
child shall lead them.' How true this is in this instance. The little
children of the membership of Irondequoit Tribe, No. 38, located at
Hardinsburg, were the first contributors to this fund.

After the enactment of this law, with the other laws enacted by us,
the whole was presented to the Judiciary Committee of the Great
Council of the United States for their approval, and having received
the approval of that committee were promulgated to the Tribes."

The fate of this measure has already been recorded on these pages,
and the Great Council at this time found itself with an overwhelming
sentiment in favor of the law as previously passed or a similar one,
but without the power of enactment.

Continuing, the Great Sachem said: "Realizing that the desire of
our membership is as strong, nay stronger than ever before, for the
establishment of a Red Men's Widows' and Orphans' Home in our beloved
State, I beg to suggest that your Representatives to the Great
Council of the United States be instructed to request that Great
Council to pass an enabling act which will permit you to put your
desires into execution. This request, properly presented, will, in my
opinion, appeal to our brothers, members of our noble order in other
reservations, in such a way that your request will be unanimously
granted."

After recounting a list of appointments, visitations made, decisions
and opinions, the Great Sachem again speaks as follows:

"The members of the Great Council are perhaps aware of the
organization of the Great Chief of Records Association of the United
States. This organization meets annually at the same time and place of
the Great Council of the United States, and is composed of the Great
Chiefs of Records of the several reservations. It must be apparent to
all that such an organization will be of material advantage to the
Order, and I desire to recommend that the Great Council of Kentucky
make an allowance and request our Great Chief of Records to attend and
become a member of this organization.

Conforming to the organization of the Great Chief of Records
Association of the United States, I would recommend the organization
of a State Association of Chiefs of Records, to be composed of the
Chiefs of Records of all the Tribes in the Reservation, and urge upon
all Tribes the importance of such an organization, and to make proper
appropriation of wampum for the expense of their Chief of Records in
attending these meetings.

Regarding Councils of the Degree of Pocahontas, he said: "I feel that
this branch of our work is neglected, and that we should make more
effort to assist our sisters in their noble work. I would recommend
that a permanent committee to be known as the 'Committee on Degree
of Pocahontas' be appointed by the Great Sachem, and the matter of
organization and other duties relating to this branch of our order be
referred to this committee."

The following statistics are taken from the long talk of Great Chief
of Records Henry W. Ray: Adopted since last report, 2,440; admitted by
card, 62; reinstated, 45; suspended, 1,336; expelled, 11; withdrawn,
by card, 67; deceased, 79; present membership, 7,651; number of
Tribes instituted since last report, 29; number of working tribes,
109; disbursed by Tribes for relief, $13,508.73; for burial of dead,
$3,513.55; for other purposes, $48,095.02; amount invested by Tribes,
$35,472.24; total worth of Tribes $59,569.00.

The Great Council by a unanimous vote instructed its Great
Representatives to apply to the Great Council of the United States for
an "enabling act" or to so modify its laws as to permit State Great
Councils to found Homes for their widows' and orphans. The resolution
was offered by Great Senior Sagamore Russell.

A Committee, consisting of Past Great Sachems Willie Walker, Ellerkamp
and McFarland was appointed to escort to the Council Chamber Great
Chief of Records Wilson Brooks, who had been delegated to represent
the Great Incohonee at this session. The committee performed its
duties, and Acting Great Incohonee Wilson Brooks was received with due
honors.

The Great Sachem appointed the following as a committee on Charters:
H. H. Denhardt, of No. 11; D. A. Cross, of No. 60; J. G. Renaker, of
No. 37.

Mention had been made by the Great Sachem in his long talk of
the terrible disaster to the hunting grounds of San Francisco by
earthquake, and of an appeal for aid for sufferers from same. The
Great Chief of Records reported that subscriptions to the amount of
$295.45 had been received and forwarded to the Great Sachem of the
reservation of California.

As at the previous Great Sun's Council an entirely new Code of laws
had been adopted, the Judiciary Committee (formerly Committee on Law
and Usage) had been instructed to continue as a Committee on Revision,
and at this session, quite a number of amendments were reported by
that committee, tending to improve and "smooth up" the laws, and were
adopted.

Another attempt was made to change the time for kindling the Great Sun
Council fire from Flower Moon to Hot Moon but without success.

It was claimed that the Articles of Incorporation as printed in the
new Code were faulty, and never having been recorded were not in
force. The Great Representatives to the Great Council of the United
States were appointed a Committee to prepare new Articles and to have
them recorded.

A resolution was offered to amend the laws in such a manner that the
voting franchise should be limited to Representatives of Tribes only.
This resolution was laid over for one Great Sun, but caused great
commotion, as heretofore all Past Sachems had been qualified to vote
upon all questions and in the election for chiefs, except when the
representative vote might be demanded on a measure of legislation.

The representatives to the Great Council of the United States were
instructed to endeavor to have the laws of the G. C. U. S. amended so
as to provide for biennial instead of annual sessions.

The Great Council went into the election of Great Chiefs with the
following results:

Dan H. Russell, of No. 10 was elected Great Sachem by acclamation.

Robert L. Page, of No. 80 was elected Great Senior Sagamore without
opposition.

Joe H. Kemper, of No. 18 was elected Great Junior Sagamore on the
first ballot, W. H. McDonald, of No. 111 being also in nomination.

Lewis L. Bebout was unanimously elected Great Prophet.

Henry Wood Ray, of No. 3 was elected Great Chief of Records for the
Fourth consecutive term, Ben. C. Nunn, of No. 14, being also in
nomination.

Herman V. Cohn, of No. 8 was elected Great Keeper of Wampum, S. C.
Moore, of No. 7, who had filled the chieftaincy for four consecutive
terms being defeated for re-election by a narrow margin.

L. L. Bebout, of No. 60, Lawrence S. Leopold, of No. 8 and H. J.
McFarlan, of No. 33; were elected Great Representatives, the others in
nomination being R. L. Page, of No. 80 and Willie Walker, of No. 1.

The Charter committee recommended the issuing of charters to the
following named Tribes and Councils: Shawnee, No. 77, Georgetown;
Tuscarora, No. 124, Tyrone; Antigo, No. 128, Claysville; Mendota, No.
131, Corinth; Oneida, No. 132, Cherokee; Paduke, No. 133, Murray;
Logan, No. 134, Ewing; Wahbee, No. 135, Yocum; Wamsutta, No. 136,
Dan; Tuscola, No. 137, Warfield; Connewago, No. 138, Fallsburg;
Uppowoc, No. 139, Maytown; Uchees, No. 140, Rockdale; Tonnuluka,
No. 141, Millers Creek; Nevada, No. 142, Flat Gap; Chickasaw, No.
143, Paintsville; Algona, No. 144, East Bernstadt; Algonquin, No.
145, Berry; Shawnese, No. 146, Cave City; Elkatawa, No. 147, Ford;
Natchez, No. 148, Glenwood; Oniska, No. 149, Middlesboro; Cohota, No.
150, Louisa; Ocono, No. 113, at Campton, to replace one destroyed by
fire; Collo Kene Council, No. 11, D. of P.; Chanzeck, No. 129, of Lee
City, and Lechawa, No. 130, of Mize, were not granted charters, their
council fires having become extinct.

The Finance Committee reported mileage paid to 111 members, amounting
to $752.38 being an average of $6.77-1/2 per member.

Lexington was selected as the next place for kindling the Great Sun
Council fire, Newport and Frankfort being in nomination.

The question on the limitation of franchise to representatives only
was taken up and lost by a Tribal vote of 47 ayes to 16 nays, it
requiring a four-fifths vote to pass the resolution.

The bill to limit the franchise was again offered to be considered at
the next Great Suns Council.

Acting Great Incohonee Wilson Brooks then raised the Great Chiefs,
appointing Past Great Sachem G. A. Ellerkamp as Great Tocakon.

  Dan H. Russell, of No. 10                 Great Sachem.
  Robert Lee Page, of No. 80       Great Senior Sagamore.
  Joe H. Kemper, of No. 18         Great Junior Sagamore.
  Lewis L. Bebout, of No. 60               Great Prophet.
  Henry Wood Ray, of No. 3        Great Chief of Records.
  Herman V. Cohn, of No. 8        Great Keeper of Wampum.
  A. Englehardt, Jr., of No. 8              Great Sannap.
  L. H. Roberts, of No. 10               Great Mishinewa.
  Val. J. Baader, of No. 17        Great Guard of Wigwam.
  M. L. Levin, of No. 22           Great Guard of Forest.

Great Sachem Russell announced his appointments on Standing Committees
as follows:

Member of Board of Appeals for three great suns--T. Hiter Crockett, of
No. 67.

Trustee of Widows' and Orphans' Home Fund, for three Great Suns--Chintz
Royalty, of No. 38.

Finance--Henry Schwieters, of No. 8; T. J. Tierney, of No. 80; Chas. A.
Hess, of No. 10.

Judiciary--W. H. McDonald, of No. 111; R. A. Chiles, of No. 18; A. J.
Steele, of No. 10.

State of the Order--Ben C. Nunn, of No. 14; Frank Hartman, of No. 5; L.
Rosenfield, of No. 98.

Returns and Reports--Jacob Gross, of No. 5; Hugo Schultz, of No. 25; S.
T. Rabold, of No. 11.

The appointments of the Great Sachem on Board of Appeals and Trustee of
Widows' and Orphans' Home Fund were unanimously approved.

After appropriate resolutions of thanks to Blackfoot Tribe, and when the
Great Prophet had said a prayer, the Great Council fire was quenched.


=1907.=

THIRTEENTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

The Thirteenth Great Sun's Council fire of the Great Council of Kentucky
was kindled in the Auditorium at Woodland Park, Hunting Grounds of
Lexington, under the auspices of Miantonomo Tribe, No. 1, at the 11th
run, 30th breath, rising of the 14th sun of Flower Moon, G. S. D. 416.

Before the council fire had been kindled addresses of welcome and
response were delivered by Hon. Thos. H. Clay, acting for Mayor Combs,
Great Sachem D. H. Russell, Chief Wallace Muir, of No. 1, and Past
Sachem T. Hiter Crockett, of No. 67.

All of the Great Chiefs were present, eight Great Representatives, eight
Past Great Sachems, and 153 Past Sachems.

Great Chief of Records Henry W. Ray appointed Frank L. Smith, of No. 1
as Assistant Great Chief of Records.

Great Sachem Russell appointed Past Sachem Sam Marcus, of No. 8 as a
member of the Committee on Returns and Reports to fill a vacancy.

The same Great Chief appointed the following to constitute a Committee
on Charters:--Con. Trouth, of No. 7; H. J. McFarlan, of No. 33; Geo. S.
Wiemer, of No. 6.

Great Junior Sagamore Joe H. Kemper reported the presence of 131 Past
Sachems in the Forest with proper credentials, and they were admitted
and received the Great Council Degree. The total attendance at this
Great Council was 268.

The roll call of representatives revealed the presence of the
representatives of 110 Tribes out of 145 eligible to representation.

Great Incohonee W. A. S. Bird of the Great Council of the United
States was admitted and received with the Grand Honors of the Order.

Great Sachem Russell presented his long talk in print, and the
following quotations will be found of interest, revealing the
condition of the Order at that time:--

"Our membership now numbers over eleven thousand, with forty-five
new Tribes and three new Councils. Redmanship stands in Kentucky
unchallenged as one of the greatest benevolent fraternities of
modern times, commanding the respect of all acquainted with its
accomplishments, the admiration of all who know its purpose and the
affection of all who participate around the council brands of our
Tribes.

The oldest truly American fraternity has grown greater, stronger and
better in our Reservation and its present position fills with pride
those who have assisted in its marvelous growth during the past Great
Sun, and every member must rejoice in his affiliation with such a
powerful thoroughly American organization.

The Great Sachem, assisted by the brothers of all the Tribes in
Jefferson County, organized a mammoth class adoption of 500 palefaces,
and on the sleep of the 28th of Beaver Moon, G. S. D. 415, in the
presence of Great Incohonee W. A. S. Bird, more palefaces were adopted
than at any one time in the history of the Order in Kentucky."

The Great Sachem offered many recommendations for the consideration of
the Great Council, in the nature of amendments to the laws, particularly
regarding the matter of sick and funeral benefits, and among these
recommendations the following:--concerning the clause forbidding
electioneering:--"This portion of Kentucky Laws is unreasonable,
inasmuch as it does not give to the members of our Order the privileges
usually accorded to an American citizen. No harm can be done, and no
wrong committed by the publicity of the personal wishes of a brother of
our Order."

Great Sachem Russell records a vast amount of business transacted,
decisions made, appointments, etc., and concludes the records of a
remarkable administration as follows:--

"We come to this Great Council with every Tribe having reported and
paid its per capita tax, and when the great number of Tribes in this
reservation is considered, it is a remarkable condition, and it is due
to the enthusiastic fraternal spirit that exists in the hearts of every
Red Man in our Reservation.

The American Flag, the emblem of Freedom, renews in every Red Man's
heart the true American spirit that was breathed into the souls of the
Sons of Liberty and which later proclaimed for them their Independence.

The spirit of Liberty was the foundation of the greatest fraternity of
modern times and this same spirit of freedom that prompted the Sons of
Liberty has been given additional force by the presence of the Stars and
Stripes in the council chambers of the various Tribes, and engenders
more thorough fraternal and patriotic feeling than any one emblem. I
suggest that the Great Council of Kentucky give each and every Tribe on
the night of institution this emblem of freedom, so this same spirit
will be injected into the hearts of all the newly adopted brothers."

From the long talk of the Great Chief of Records the following
statistics are taken:--adopted since last report, 2,853; admitted by
card, 81; reinstated, 145; suspended, 1,623; expelled, 14; withdrawn
by card, 95; deceased, 65; present membership, 8,933; Number of tribes
last report, 109; new tribes, 31; tribes resuscitated, 5; tribes extinct
since last report, 17; whole number of tribes Jan. 1st, 1907, 128.
Disbursed for relief, $13,721.55; for burial of the dead, $2,941.50; for
other purposes, $41,566.25; invested by Tribes, $49,872.96; Total worth
of Tribes, $78,001.86.

The Great Council of the United States had, since the last session of
the Great Council of Kentucky, adopted an enabling act, permitting
State Great Councils to legislate for the care and maintenance of
Widows, Orphans and Aged Red Men, and a bill was now introduced
with the following title, being quite similar to the one previously
enacted by the Great Council of Kentucky, but which had been declared
unconstitutional by the supreme authority:--

"A bill, to provide for the support of Widows and Orphans of deceased
Red Men, and of Aged Red Men, and the ultimate establishment of a Home
for the same."

In one respect the bill was quite different from the former, in that it
provided for the immediate relief of beneficiaries, a portion of the tax
proposed to be levied to be set aside for that purpose.

As has been recorded on these pages, there were two factions in the
Great Council, each eager for the adoption of relief laws, but with
different ideas as to the application of the same. On the one side were
those who desired the immediate establishment of a Home or Institution,
while on the other was the party desiring the care and support of its
beneficiaries within the homes of individuals. The bill now presented
provided for the trial of the latter plan, while a fund was being
accumulated for the adoption of the former in the future. After
discussion in the Committee of the whole and protracted debate on the
floor of the Great Council the bill was adopted by a Tribal vote of 85
ayes to 11 nays.

The per capita tax was increased from 60 inches per great sun to 80
inches, fifteen inches of which to be set aside for the relief fund, and
5 inches of this to be devoted to immediate relief if required.

Great Sachem Russell immediately appointed the three members of the
Board of Trustees of the Widows', Orphans' and Aged Red Men's Relief
Fund, as provided in the enactment, as follows:--H. C. Yunker, of No. 7
for one Great Sun; Ben Rosenthall, of No. 14 for two Great Suns and Sam
Marcus, of No. 8 for three Great Suns, the Great Sachem and Great Chief
of Records being also members of the Board ex-officio.

A bill was presented providing for the reduction of the commission to be
paid to organizers of new Tribes, but it failed to pass.

The contract for printing for the ensuing great sun was awarded to the
Louisville Anzeiger Company of Louisville.

Upon the recommendation of the Finance Committee mileage was paid to
147 Great Chiefs, Representatives and members of Standing Committees,
amounting to $970.86, being an average of $6.77-1/2 to each.

The old committee on Widows and Orphans reported having in its
possession the sum of $472.68.

A bill was presented for future consideration providing for a maximum
amount to be paid for benefits when the dues of the beneficiary are paid
in advance, and a minimum when not so paid.

Great Sachem Russell was presented with a beautiful emblematic ring, on
behalf of his many friends in the Order.

The famous "Disfranchisement Bill" was withdrawn and thus came to an end
a measure which promised to cause much dissension.

The Committee recommended that charters be issued to the following
named forty-five Tribes and three Councils of the Degree of Pocahontas,
which was the largest number of Tribes ever instituted under the
administration of any Great Sachem of Kentucky, and the only list
excelling in number that under the administration of Willie Walker, in
1901. This record also excelled any record ever made by any other State
Great Council.

Minnewa, No. 151, Whitehouse; Ontario, No. 152, Flat Lick; Black
Eagle, No. 154, Gray; Rowena, No. 155, Hopkinsville; Stillwater, No.
156, Russellville; Delaware, No. 157, Blanche; Metacom, No. 158,
Corbin; Shenandoah, No. 159, Logmont; Saranac, No. 160, Richardson;
Iron Star, No. 161, Trosper; Yazoo, No. 162, Boston; Chicora, No. 163,
Shepherdsville; Tuskeno, No. 164, Hellier; Ouray, No. 165, Oakdale;
Geronimo, No. 166, London; Silver Arrow, No. 167, Lebanon Junction;
Susquehanna, No. 168, Inez; Spotted Elk, No. 169, Island; White Bear,
No. 170, Williamsburg; Red Crow, No. 171, Rockhold; Kill Buck, No.
172, Elizabethtown; Choctaw, No. 173, Wilton; Washtella, No. 174,
Fonde; Wanalanset, No. 175, Sadieville; Cheyenne, No. 176, Chenoa;
Kiowa, No. 177, Osie; Lackawaxen, No. 178, Borderland; Pewakee, No.
179, Luzerne; Uncas, No. 180, Bolts, Fork; Piute, No. 181, Culbertson;
Maumee, No. 182, Graham; Cahoosic, No. 183, Leitchfield; Scioto, No.
184, Covington; Kickapoo, No. 185, Big Clifty; Potomac, No. 186,
Glasgow; Sequepah, No. 187, Drakesboro; Ohio, No. 188, Hartford;
Conanchet, No. 189, Halsey; Tawawa, No. 190, Centertown; Owasso, No.
191, Cleaton; Bogohama, No. 192, Princeton; Mashingomisha, No. 193,
Blaine; Oklahoma, No. 194, Chambers; Trade Water, No. 195, Dawson
Springs; Wenonah Council, No. 12, Tyrone; Wahneta, Council, No. 13,
Blanche; Nenemoosha Council, No. 41, Bell Jellico.

New Charters were also granted Petewa Tribe, No. 41, at Central City and
Mohawk, No. 20, at Shelbyville.

The election for Great Chiefs resulted as follows:--

Robert Lee Page, of No. 80 was unanimously elected Great Sachem.

Joe H. Kemper, of No. 18 was elected Great Senior Sagamore without
opposition.

W. H. McDonald, of No. 111 was elected Great Junior Sagamore on the
second ballot, other candidates being H. J. Northcutt, of No. 184 and
Harry J. Phillips, of No. 10.

Dan H. Russell, of No. 10 was unanimously chosen Great Prophet.

Henry W. Ray, of No. 3 was unanimously elected Great Chief of Records
for the fifth consecutive term.

Herman V. Cohn, of No. 8 was elected Great Keeper of Wampum without
opposition for the second consecutive term.

Dan. H. Russell, of No. 10, W. A. Crader, of No. 8, John H.
Boschemeyer, of No. 8 and H. H. Denhardt, of No. 11 were elected Great
Representatives for two Great Suns each, and Chas. A. Hess, of No. 10
and H. J. McFarlan, of No. 33 for one Great Sun each, other candidates
being Willie Walker, of No. 1; H. C. Rhodes, of No. 60; Louis Vissman,
of No. 8.

Frankfort was selected as the place for kindling the next Great Sun
Council fire, though the Finance Committee recommended St. Matthews.

Great Sachem Russell appointed members of the new Committee on Degree of
Pocahontas, which had been created by an enactment, as follows: L. H.
Roberts, of No. 10; Christ Schwitzer, of No. 17; Warren Wilson, of No.
91.

Great Sachem elect Page announced that he should consider the term
of the appointees as having expired with his being raised to the
Chieftaincy of Great Sachem, and would then appoint a new Committee.

Great Incohonee W. A. S. Bird, being obliged to leave, authorized Past
Great Sachem G. A. Ellerkamp to raise the newly elected Great Chiefs.

The question of quorum was then raised, and it being found that not a
quorum was present, further business could not be entertained, and Past
Great Sachem Ellerkamp proceeded to raise the Chiefs, first appointing
Past Great Sachem Willie Walker as Great Tocakon.

  Robert Lee Page, of No. 80                Great Sachem
  Joe H. Kemper, of No. 18         Great Senior Sagamore
  W. H. McDonald, of No. 111       Great Junior Sagamore
  Dan H. Russell, of No. 10                Great Prophet
  Henry Wood Ray, of No. 3        Great Chief of Records
  Hermann V. Cohn, of No. 8       Great Keeper of Wampum
  P. J. Nelligan, of No. 80                 Great Sannap
  Lee W. Zweydorf, of No. 7              Great Mishinewa
  L. H. Roberts, of No. 10         Great Guard of Wigwam
  Val. J. Baader, of No. 17        Great Guard of Forest

The Great Sachem announced the following appointments of Standing
Committees:--

Board of Appeals for three Great Suns--D. A. Cross, of No. 60.

Finance--T. J. Tierney, of No. 80; Henry Schwieters, of No. 8; S. C.
Moore, of No. 7.

Judiciary--Sebastian Stone, of No. 56; Joe C. Lykins, of No. 113; R. A.
Chiles, of No. 18.

State of the Order--John M. Clifford, of No. 10; Wm. Stoeckel, of No.
93; Geo. S. Weimer, of No. 6.

Degree of Pocahontas--Warren Wilson, of No. 91; H. J. Northcutt, of No.
184; W. E. Coleman, of No. 78.

Returns and Reports--Claude B. Terrell, of No. 90; G. Michael, of No.
22; Chas. Stout, of No. 19.

State Exemplifier--Frank L. Smith, of No. 1.

After suitable resolutions of appreciation of the courtesies shown by
Miantonomo Tribe, No. 1, and when the Great Prophet had said a prayer,
the council fire was quenched.


=1908.=

FOURTEENTH GREAT SUN COUNCIL.

At the tenth run, rising of the 12th sun of Flower Moon, G. S. D. 417,
there gathered in the Legislative Chamber of the State Capitol, the
Past Sachems of the Kentucky Tribes, visiting and local Red Men, when,
under the auspices of Blackfoot Tribe, No. 67, of Frankfort, addresses
of welcome to the Great Council of Kentucky were delivered by Hon. Jas.
T. Buford, in behalf of Mayor Hume, Past Sachem T. Hiter Crockett, of
No. 67, and Lieut. Governor Cox, responded to by Great Prophet D. H.
Russell, and Great Junior Sagamore W. H. McDonald, of Barbourville.

At the close of the introductory ceremonies, and when the visitors had
departed, the Great Sun Council fire was kindled in ample form, all
Great Chiefs being present and all Great Representatives, eight past
Great Sachems and two hundred and five Past Sachems.

Great Sachem Robert Lee Page appointed Past Great Sachem L. L. Bebout
and Past Sachem Henry Yunker to assist Great Junior Sagamore W. H.
McDonald in the inspection of credentials.

It being evident that the Legislative Hall was to small to accommodate
the Great Council, it already being crowded with the old members, and
the new not having been introduced, it was decided to adjourn to the
Skating Rink, where the future sessions were held.

The record of the previous Great Council was approved as printed, when
the Great Sachem presented his Long Talk, the Credential Committee not
being ready to report. The document being in print was distributed and
much interest was manifested in its perusal. The following extracts will
be of especial interest:--

"My work is done--my labors over. It has been a Great Sun of labor, but
a labor of love, and one that has the best efforts of my mind and heart.

I have sought to render efficient and faithful service, and, while the
year has not been free from perplexities and responsibilities, I trust
that I can return unsullied the regalia you bade me wear. It is an
honor to wear the insignia of our Brotherhood--of the Fraternity which
has done and is doing so much for man and country, but with power and
influence come responsibilities, and this Great Order needs the care,
support and helping hand of all who constitute its household.

To your efforts am I able to report the largest gain in membership
and the largest number of new Tribes organized than ever before in the
history of this Reservation. In fact, it has been said that Kentucky has
made the best record of any Reservation in the United States. The Order
has prospered beyond precedent or prophecy.

Pure religion and undefiled before the Great Spirit is this--To visit
the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world."

"Inspired by this Spirit, animated by this faith, exemplifying these
noble precepts by acts of helpfulness, Redmanship has, for many Great
Suns, been a living power within this land, and at the close of this
Great Sun has the confidence of, and dwells in honor among a free,
enlightened people.

We honor a wonderful past, and rejoice in a prosperous present, yet we
know that the work of the Order has not ended, and that so long as time
shall last, and the enemies of society endure, it will be necessary for
this and similar Orders to exist. The need of good men, honest men, men
who believe in manhood and in brotherhood, who know responsibilities and
can assume them, was never greater than today. This Order has given us
men who have lifted human burdens and have lived to help, aid and assist
their fellow man.

We have a strong, vigorous and constantly expanding organization. The
past with its lessons, its struggles, its successes, is ours. We live in
sunlight now; fortune has favored us; the skies are bright with promise;
surely at the close of this Great Sun, we can sincerely and honestly
repeat:

  Oh Great Spirit from out whose hands,
  The Great Suns fall like grains of sand,
  We meet today, united, free,
  And loyal to our land and Thee,
  To thank Thee for the era done
  And trust Thee for the opening one."

Concerning the Long House, the Great Sachem said: "As yet, the manner of
raising wampum for this purpose has not been decided upon. The location
of the Long House in this Reservation means far more for the Kentucky
Redman than we realize. It means that each Great Sun Louisville will
be the Mecca for a large number of the most influential members of our
Order. In addition to this, it will be of great financial benefit to
the Red Men and paleface merchants of Kentucky's metropolis, and, while
more directly beneficial to them, is indirectly beneficial to you. This,
however, should not be considered in comparison to the good that will
result to the Order here."

Among the recommendations of the Great Sachem were the following:--

That a tax be levied for the purpose of raising a fund for the
erection of a Long House in Louisville by the Great Council of the
United States.

That some action should be taken whereby each member of the Order can
be supplied with a copy of the laws.

That the time of holding the Great Sun Council should be changed from
Flower Moon to Cold Moon.

That the law requiring the Chiefs of Tribes to be bonded through the
chieftaincy of the Great Chief of Records be abolished.

That the salary of the incoming Great Chief of Records be increased
from five hundred fathoms to nine hundred fathoms.

That a code of laws governing the Trustees of the Widows', Orphans'
and Aged Red Men's Relief Fund be adopted.

After reciting a long list of opinions and decisions rendered, the
Great Sachem enumerates the sixty-five Tribes and three Councils of
the Degree of Pocahontas instituted during his administration, with
dates, and names of Organizers and Instituting Chiefs.

After recounting the dispensations granted by himself and his
Deputies, Great Sachem Page closed his admirable Long Talk as follows:

"In discharging my duties I have been made a better Red Man and a
better man. I love my fellow-man more to-day than I did one Great Sun
ago. I shall never cease to lend my humble aid and assistance to the
cause of this great fraternity.

In conclusion I trust that in passing judgment upon my efforts and
work you may be able to say: 'He hath done what he could, and in the
best manner he knew how.'"

The following statistics are from the Long Talk of Great Chief of
Records Henry W. Ray:--

Membership last report, 8,933; adopted, 4,486; admitted by card,
122; reinstated, 227; suspended, 1,647; expelled, 21; withdrawn
by card, 109; deceased, 91; present membership, 11,950; number of
Tribes last report, 128; tribes instituted, 58; extinct since last
report, 6; whole number of Tribes Jan. 1, 1908, 180; gain in tribes,
52; disbursed by Tribes for relief, $16,904.12; for burial of dead,
$4,103.30; amount invested by Tribes, $70,500.79; amount in wampum
belts of Tribes, $33,075.79; total worth of Tribes, $103,576.78;
expenses of Great Council for great Sun, $9,611.46; balance in Great
Council wampum belt, $2,208.01.

The Great Representatives to the Great Council of the United States
presented a report of the transactions of the Great Council of
particular interest to the Great Council of Kentucky, and particularly
as to the legislation in regard to the proposed Long House. The
following was reported as having been adopted by the Great Council of
the United States:

"Be it resolved by this Great Council of the United States: That a
committee of three of its members be appointed to devise ways and
means for the erection of the Long House, to be erected at Louisville,
Kentucky, and to report at the next session of this Great Council.
Be it further resolved, that said Committee shall consist of the
present Great Incohonee as Chairman and two Past Great Incohonees to
be selected by the Great Incohonee and to serve at no expense to this
Great Council."

The Credential Committee then reported having approved of the
credentials of 175 Past Sachems who were in waiting in the Forest, the
same were admitted and instructed in the Great Council Degree. The
same Committee also approved of the Credentials of the representatives
of 143 Tribes. The total attendance was 343 Past Sachems.

A speaking leaf was then read from Great Incohonee W. A. S. Bird,
announcing the appointment of Past Great Sachem D. H. Russell as his
special representative, and the credentials were acknowledged. Acting
Great Incohonee Russell was then received with the usual honors.

Great Sachem Page announced the following appointments to fill
vacancies on Standing Committees:--

Degree of Pocahontas--Henry Lyons, of No. 166, Vice W. E. Coleman, of
No. 78.

State of the Order--W. E. Buck, of No. 60, vice Wm. Stoeckel, of No.
93.

Past Sachem Albert Miller, of No. 1 presented the Great Council with
two emblematic Tomahawks his own handiwork.

Great Sachem Page appointed the following as a Committee on
Charters:--N. G. Mothershead, of No. 57; Joe Woodruff, of No. 195; J.
W. DeHart, of No. 8.

The Finance Committee reported the following recommendations which
were concurred in:

That the books and accounts of the Great Chief of Records, the Great
Keeper of Wampum and the Trustees of the Widows', Orphans' and Aged
Red Men's Relief Fund, having been audited and found correct, be
approved.

That the sum of two thousand fathoms be appropriated from the funds of
this Great Council for the use of the Great Sachem in the performance
of his duties.

That the Kentucky Red Man and American Red Man be declared to be the
official journals of this Great Council, and that the sum of one
hundred and fifty fathoms be appropriated to each.

That no appropriation be made for salary of Assistant Great Chief of
Records for the ensuing great sun.

That Mileage be paid to the Great Chiefs, Representatives and Members
of the Standing Committees, amounting $1,457.01, an average of $8.18
to each of 178 individuals.

The Judiciary Committee reported having approved of the by-laws of 53
Tribes and Councils.

The following amendment to the laws was unanimously adopted it being
mandatory, in conformity to a requirement of the Great Council of the
United States:--No paleface following the occupation of saloon keeper,
bar tender, liquor dealer or professional gambler shall be eligible
to membership in a Tribe of the Improved Order of Red Men.

Great Senior Sagamore J. H. Kemper, who until this time had been
absent, entered the Council Chamber and was given a fraternal
reception.

The Great Chief of Records was authorized to have printed in
convenient form the Constitution governing Tribes.

The Great Chief of Records was authorized and instructed to attend the
sessions of the Great Chief of Records Association, at the expense of
the Great Council.

A model code of by-laws was authorized, under which new Tribes are
required to work at least six moons after instituted.

The law requiring the Great Chief of Records to notify all Tribes of
all suspensions was repealed.

The law requiring the financial chiefs of Tribes to be bonded in a
specified bonding company was repealed, leaving it to each Tribe to
make its own selection of a Company.

The salary of the Great Chief of Records was increased from 500 to 900
fathoms per great sun.

An amendment was presented to provide for additional revenue for the
purpose of erecting a Widows' and Orphans' Home, but action on same
was deferred for one great sun.

An attempt to provide for the appointment of official organizers was
defeated.

The Board of Trustees of the Widows', Orphans' and Aged Red Men's
Relief Fund reported a code of laws to govern that Body, and the
disbursement of relief, which was unanimously adopted.

The report of the Secretary of that Board, Bro. Sam Marcus, shows,
total amount in the Home Fund $1,122.51; total amount disbursed for
relief, $73.00; total balance in relief fund, $312.07.

A bill was presented reducing the amount to be paid organizers to
$2.00 for each paleface, but was defeated.

Lexington was selected as the place for the kindling of the next
great sun council fire, Bowling Green and Elizabethtown being also in
nomination.

Past Great Sachem L. L. Bebout in a characteristic speech presented
Great Sachem Robert Lee Page with a beautiful and costly silver
service, the joint gift of many Tribes and individuals. Great Sachem
Page responded, expressing his heartfelt appreciation of the handsome
tribute.

Great Junior Sagamore W. H. McDonald presented a Great
Representative's sash to Acting Great Incohonee D. H. Russell, which
that Great Chief accepted in appropriate terms.

Great Prophet Russell, in behalf of Past Sachem N. Bierman, of
Cherokee Tribe, No. 8, offered as a reward for faithful work for the
Order an emblematic Ring to the member of the Order who shall bring
into his Tribe the greatest number of new members in each Great Sun,
counting from each Great Council.

The contract for the printing for the ensuing great sun was let to The
Louisville Anzeiger Company, the Record being the base, at $1.00 per
page.

The run having arrived for the election of Great Chiefs, the Great
Sachem announced that when tellers were required to receive and count
ballots, each candidate in nomination for Chieftaincy should have the
privilege of appointing one of the tellers in his race.

Past Great Sachem H. H. Denhardt presiding, the election took place,
resulting as follows:

Robert Lee Page was unanimously elected Great Prophet.

Joe H. Kemper, of No. 18 was elected Great Sachem by acclamation.

W. H. McDonald, of No. 111 was elected Great Senior Sagamore, there
being no other candidates in nomination.

Homer J. Northcutt, of No. 184 was elected Great Junior Sagamore,
Wm. A. Grader, of No. 8, being also in nomination, and lost by small
margin.

Frank L. Smith, of No. 1 was elected Great Chief of Records, other
candidates in nomination being T. J. Tierney, of No. 80; J. M.
Holstner, of No. 10 and C. F. Melton, of No. 81. Henry W. Ray, the
retiring Great Chief of Records, having served for five consecutive
great suns, was awarded the honors of a Past Great Sachem and declined
to be a candidate for re-election.

Herman V. Cohn, of No. 8, was elected Great Keeper of Wampum for the
third term, M. M. Redding, of No. 64 being also in nomination.

Four Great Representatives to the Great Council of the United States
were elected, each to serve for two great suns as follows:--Past Great
Sachem Robert Lee Page, of No. 80; L. L. Bebout, of No. 60; G. A.
Ellerkamp, of No. 8 and Henry Wood Ray, of No. 3. Other candidates
in nomination were Past Great Sachem H. J. McFarlan, of No. 33; Past
Sachem Lawrence S. Leopold, of No. 8; Past Great Sachem John D.
Walker, of No. 1; Past Sachem Chas. A. Hess, of No. 10.

A bill was presented and passed increasing the per capita tax to be
levied upon Tribes to five feet each six moons, the additional ten
inches to be set aside as a special fund to aid the Great Council
of the United States in the erection of a Long House, or permanent
headquarters in the hunting grounds of Louisville.

Great Sachem Page announced the appointment of Henry C. Yunker as a
member of the Board of Trustees of the Widows', Orphans' and Aged Red
Men's Relief Fund for three great suns.

Upon the recommendation of the Committee, charters were granted to the
following named New Tribes and Councils:--Ogallala, No. 196, Polsgrove
Landing; Nipsit, No. 197, Pilgrim; Suwanee, No. 198, Trinity; Shawmut,
No. 199, Jattie; Merrimac, No. 200, Hammond; Adirondack, No. 201,
Clifford; Walla Walla, No. 202, Calhoun; Creek, No. 203, Dayton;
Arapahoe, No. 204, Providence; Brule, No. 205, Clay; Naugatuck,
No. 206, West Naugatuck; Monon, No. 207, Stamping Ground; Saginaw,
No. 208, Denton; Pewawbeek, No. 209, Hopper; Sangamon, No. 210,
Manchester; Emahaka, No. 211, Morganfield; Weshaway, No. 212, Wofford;
Agawam, No. 213, Catlettsburg; Manhattan, No. 214, Jellico; Wahnahton,
No. 215, McCarr; Kearsarge, No. 216, Aberdeen; Tuscahoma, No. 217,
Charley; Chicotah, No. 218, Dekoven; Incas, No. 219, Fletcher;
Petaluma, No. 220, Lily; Samoset, No. 221, Majestic; Canonicus, No.
222, Gallup; Kennebec, No. 223, Meek; Watstika, No. 224, Marion;
Santana, No. 225, Pikeville; Itaska, No. 226, Rumsey; Monadnock, No.
227, Slick Rock Creek; Ozark, No. 228, Elkhorn City; Tuskaloosa, No.
229, Benton; Ioka, No. 230, South Carrollton; Ninegret, No. 231, Elk
Lick; Anawan, No. 232, Big Creek; Napanee, No. 233, Muddy Branch;
Pocasset, No. 234, Uniontown; Waco, No. 235, Oneida; Kokomo, No. 236,
Danleyton; Tonkawa, No. 237, Sebree; Tecumseh, No. 238, Tannery;
Pokonoket, No. 239, Bush; Erie, No. 240, Fork Ridge; Kiowon, No. 241,
Slaughtersville; Ramona, No. 242, Sawyer; Chicopee, No. 243, Bonanza;
Washoan, No. 244, Onton; Horicon, No. 245, Morgantown; Alleghan,
No. 246, Burnwell; Nokonan, No. 247, Ashbyburg; Beaver, No. 248,
Allen; Kewanee, No. 249, Greenville; Genesee, No. 250, Hunnewell;
Chessapeake, No. 251, Dixon; Tonikan, No. 252, Madisonville;
Kenaway, No. 253, Harlan; Casco, No. 254, Beaver Dam; Canadawa,
No. 255, Barnetts Creek; Atabaska, No. 256, Cromwell; Waukesha,
No. 257, Teague; Cayuga, No. 258, Maplesville; Dekorra, No. 259,
Ingram; Catawissa, No. 260, St. Charles. Councils of the Degree of
Pocahontas:--Aletah, No. 15, Middlesboro; Minnewawa, No. 16, Jennings;
Leola, No. 17, Georgetown.

A bill was presented, to lay over one great sun, providing for a
reduction in the fee for admission by withdrawal card.

Acting Great Incohonee D. H. Russell, assisted by Past Great Sachem G.
A. Ellerkamp, as Great Tocakon, raised the Great Chiefs as follows:--

  Joe H. Kemper, of No. 18                  Great Sachem
  W. H. McDonald, of No. 111       Great Senior Sagamore
  Homer J. Northcutt, of No. 184   Great Junior Sagamore
  Robert Lee Page, of No. 80               Great Prophet
  Frank L. Smith, of No. 1        Great Chief of Records
  Hermann V. Cohn, of No. 8       Great Keeper of Wampum
  Ben C. Nunn, of No. 14                    Great Sannap
  A. Englehard, Jr., of No. 8            Great Mishinewa
  W. E. Buck, of No. 60            Great Guard of Wigwam
  L. H. Roberts, of No. 10         Great Guard of Forest

Great Sachem Kemper announced the appointment of Past Sachem Geo. W.
Hinesley, of No. 8 as a member of the Board of Appeals for three great
suns.

Following were the appointments on Standing Committees:

Finance--Henry Schwieters, of No. 8; R. F. Arnett, of No. 1; Roy C.
Scott, of No. 18.

Judiciary--Robert T. Crowe, of No. 33; Claude B. Terrell, of No. 90;
Chas. A. Davis, of No. 111.

State of the Order--W. B. Dillon, of No. 166; R. S. Hunter, of No. 11;
John J. Sandmann, of No. 70.

Degree of Pocahontas--J. M. Clifford, of No. 10; W. Fred Thomas, of
No. 3; T. J. Tierney, of No. 80.

Returns and Reports--Sebastian Stone, of No. 56; V. M. Hainline, of
No. 18; T. H. Sanders, of No. 89.

The thanks of the Great Council were extended to Robert Lee Page, for
his dignified, fair and impartial rulings, and to Blackfoot Tribe for
its hospitality.

Past Great Sachem's Jewels were presented to Henry Wood Ray and
Robert Lee Page, and when the Great Prophet had said a prayer, the
council fire was quenched.




CHAPTER VIII.

BRIEF REVIEW OF THE INSTITUTION OF EACH TRIBE IN KENTUCKY, WITH THE
SIGNIFICANCE OF ITS NAME WHERE POSSIBLE.


_Miantonomo_, No. 1. (Last Sachem of the Narragansetts, a nephew of
Canonicus) Lexington. Instituted 5th Hunting Moon, 403, with 121
Charter members. Organized by J. B. Mendenhall and instituted by the
Great Chiefs of the Great Council of the United States. Absorbed
Winona Tribe, No. 4 by consolidation 3d Buck Moon, 417.

_Onequa_, No. 2. (Rocky Ford) Winchester. Instituted 29th Cold
Moon, 404, with 41 Charter members. Organized and instituted by J.
B. Mendenhall, the degree work being done by Miantonomo, No. 1,
twenty-one of whose members became charter members of No. 2 by Card,
and many of these had been members of old Shawnee Tribe, No. 18, the
history of which see.

_Wyandotte_, No. 3. (Name of a Tribe of the Iroquois Nation. Huron
is another name of the same Tribe, both being derived from the same
Indian word "A-hon-an-dote." Wyandotte is the French version and
Huron the English) Maysville. Instituted 3d Hot Moon, 404, with 35
Charter members. Organized by J. R. McConnell and instituted by J. B.
Mendenhall, members of Miantonomo Tribe assisting in the degree work.

_Winona_, No. 4. (Same as "Wenonah", meaning "first born") Lexington.
Instituted 24th Hot Moon, 404, by J. B. Mendenhall, with 25 Charter
members. The tribe was quite prosperous for several great suns, but
gradually declined and was absorbed by Miantonomo Tribe, No. 1 in 412.

_Hiokatoo_, No. 5. (Hi-o-ka-too) Louisville. Instituted 13th sun
Buck Moon, 408, by J. B. VanZandt, with 77 charter members. Although
suffering from mistreatment by the organizer, the tribe has been
prosperous.

_Tecumseh_, No. 5. (A famous Shawnee Chief, signifying "he who walks
over water") Harrodsburg. Instituted 27th Hot Moon, 404 by J. B.
Mendenhall, with 25 Charter members. Surrendered its charter on the
24th Hunting Moon, 405.

_Paughcaughnaughsinque_, No. 6. Augusta. Instituted 1st Beaver Moon,
404, with 41 charter members, by J. B. Mendenhall. Has been prosperous
from the beginning, and is now one of the strong tribes in the
Reservation.

_Hiawatha_, No. 7. (A name made famous by Longfellow, the
signification of which is "wise man") Louisville. Instituted 9th
Hunting Moon, G. S. D. 404, with 63 charter members, by J. B.
Mendenhall. The Tribe has had many vicissitudes, but has weathered
them all, and is one of the strongholds of Redmanship in Kentucky.
Absorbed by consolidation Pequod Tribe, No. 63 and Red Jacket, No. 44.

_Cherokee_, No. 8. (Tribe of the Iroquois stock, living South of
the Ohio River) Louisville. Instituted 22nd Hunting Moon, 404 by J.
B. Mendenhall. This Tribe has since absorbed by consolidation the
following named tribes:--Tippecanoe, No. 29, Tecumseh, No. 9, Pawnee,
No. 42. Tribe has from the start been one of the most vigorous in the
Reservation, and is the largest, having at present 433 members.

_Shawnee_, No. 9. ("Southerner") Louisville. Instituted 10th Worm
Moon, 405, by J. B. Mendenhall, and its charter was the first to be
issued by the present Great Council of Kentucky. Consolidated with
Tecumseh Tribe, No. 12 on the 22nd of Flower Moon, 410.

_Tecumseh_, No. 9. ("He who walks over the water") Founded by the
consolidation of Shawnee Tribe, No. 9 and Tecumseh Tribe No. 12 on
the 22nd sleep of Flower Moon, 410, and soon after consolidated with
Cherokee Tribe, No. 8.

_Wahoo_, No. 10. ("Egg",) Louisville. Instituted 9th Sturgeon Moon,
408 with 89 charter members by J. B. VanZandt. Absorbed Wahbee, No.
15, by consolidation.

_Mohican_, No. 11. (Name of Tribe of New England Indians, signifying
"Wolf") Bowling Green. Instituted 24th Plant Moon, 405 by Great Sachem
J. R. McConnell. Although the tribe has met with several mishaps, it
has never "faltered or proved false."

_Iroquois_, No. 12. (The name applied to the "Six Nations")
Hopkinsville. Instituted 29th Flower Moon, 405 by Past Great Sachem
J. B. Mendenhall. The tribe lived but a short time and was defunct in
406. Council brand was relighted by Past Great Sachem W. E. Fite on
the 1st of Sturgeon Moon, 407, which burned but feebly and was defunct
soon after.

_Tecumseh_, No. 12. ("He who walks over the water") Louisville.
Instituted 5th Traveling Moon, 408, with 20 charter members by J. B.
VanZandt. Consolidated with Shawnee, No. 9.

_Wabee_, No. 13. ("White") Louisville. Instituted 11th Corn Moon, 408
with 46 charter members by J. B. VanZandt. Consolidated after a few
seven suns with Choctaw, No. 15.

_Totewa_, No. 14. ("To sink, dive, or go under water, to rise again
as logs when carried over a water fall") Owensboro. Instituted 4th
Buck Moon, 405 by Great Sachem J. R. McConnell, the work being done by
Waukee Tribe, No. 150, of Evansville, Ind.

_Otego_, No. 15. Paducah. Instituted 21st Sturgeon Moon, 405.
Organized by J. B. VanZandt and instituted by Great Sachem J. R.
McConnell. Tribe was reported defunct in 406, and its Council brand
was relighted by Past Great Sachem W. E. Fite on the 20th of Buck
Moon, 407, but the tribe was reported defunct in 408.

_Choctaw_, No. 15. ("Charming voice." A numerous tribe of Indians)
Louisville. Instituted 28th Corn Moon, 408 with 31 charter members, by
J. B. VanZandt, but soon after consolidated with Wabee Tribe, No. 13.

_Wabee_, No. 15. ("White") Louisville. Instituted by the consolidation
of Wabee Tribe, No. 13 and Choctaw Tribe, No. 15. This new Tribe soon
after consolidated with Wahoo Tribe, No. 10.

_Seminole_, No. 16. ("Separatists" or "Run away people") Henderson.
Instituted 25th Sturgeon Moon, 405 by Great Sachem J. R. McConnell,
the work being done by the degree team of Waukee Tribe, No. 150 of
Evansville, Ind. The tribe was reported defunct in 406. Council brand
was relighted on the 4th of Sturgeon Moon, 407 by Past Great Sachem W.
E. Fite, which burned fitfully for a few seven suns and then went out
forever.

_Montezuma_, No. 16. Louisville. Instituted 4th Traveling Moon, G. S.
D. 408, with 40 charter members by J. B. VanZandt. Consolidated with
Sioux Tribe, No. 70 in Sturgeon Moon, 412.

_Miami_, No. 17. (Same as Maumee. "People who live in the
Peninsular.") Newport. Instituted 25th Buck Moon, 385 (1876) by the
Old Great Council of Kentucky, and was an offshoot from Minnehaha
No. 10 and Pocahontas, No. 3. Was transferred to the jurisdiction of
the Great Council of Ohio on the surrender of the Charter of the Old
Great Council of Kentucky in 393 (1884) and at the institution of
the present Great Council of Kentucky was transferred back to its
jurisdiction, having at that time fifteen members. This is the oldest
tribe in Kentucky, and numbers among its members several aged brothers
who have been in continuous good standing in the Order for more than a
half century.

_Calumet_, No. 18. (Not properly an Indian word, but used to signify
the "Pipe of Peace") Mt. Sterling. Instituted 14th sun Hunting Moon,
405 with 35 charter members by Great Sachem J. R. McConnell. The tribe
has prospered from the start, and though once suffering the loss of
everything but its wampum belt by fire, and though now not having a
large membership, is healthy and vigorous.

_Osceola_, No. 19. (Name of a Chief of the Seminoles, signifying
"Plentiful drinker of the black drink.") Ashland. Instituted 14th
Hunting Moon, 399, with 15 charter members by Harry C. McKay, Great
Sachem of the Great Council of Ohio, and was under the jurisdiction of
that Great Council until transferred to the Great Council of Kentucky
at its institution.

_Choctaw_, No. 20. ("Charming Voice") Corbin. Instituted 22nd Plant
Moon, 406 by Great Sachem J. R. McConnell. Tribe lived but a short
time and was reported defunct in 407. Visited by Past Sachem M. M.
Redding in 413 in endeavor to relight its council brand but without
success.

_Mohawk_, No. 20. ("Men eaters") Shelbyville. Instituted 8th Beaver
Moon, 408 with 28 charter members by J. B. VanZandt. Reported defunct
in 410 and visited by Past Sachem W. A. Crader in attempt to relight
its council brand in Worm Moon, 411, but without success, that chief
taking possession of the visible effects of the defunct Tribe. The
Council Fire was rekindled by W. H. Gage on the 18th of Buck Moon,
415, and burned dimly for a season when it went out altogether. Was
once more revived by Past Sachem M. M. Redding, but the tribe finally
surrendered its charter in 417.

_Indianola_, No. 21. Minerva. Instituted 9th Buck Moon, 406 with 24
charter members by Great Sachem W. E. Fite assisted by the degree team
of No. 6. The council fire burned brightly for several great suns and
gave promise of becoming a strong and prosperous tribe, but reverses
came, interest was lost and its charter was surrendered to Great Chief
of Records Henry W. Ray in 416.

_Chippewa_, No. 22. (The proper spelling of this word is "Ojibway" a
numerous tribe of the Algonquin family and signifies "he surmounts
obstacles") Louisville. Instituted 16th Beaver Moon, 408 with 28
charter members by J. B. VanZandt. While this tribe has never had a
large membership it has always been successful.

_Delaware_, No. 23. (The Iroquois called this people "Sag-a-na-ga.")
Lebanon. Instituted 28th Beaver Moon, 408 with 28 charter members by
J. B. VanZandt. This tribe started out bravely and for a time did
well. Giving a big pow-wow at which some wampum was made, led to its
downfall, there being dissention concerning its disposal. Visited by
Bro. Crader in 411 and found to be defunct at that time, that chief
taking possession of its charter.

_Black Hawk_, No. 24. ("Muk-kud-da-ke-neu") Springfield. Instituted
8th Hunting Moon, 408 with 28 charter members by J. B. VanZandt. The
council fire burned dimly for some time and soon went out altogether.
Past Sachem Crader visited the tribe on the 28th of Snow Moon, 411 and
succeeded in relighting its council brand, but when visited by Bro.
Redding in 413 was found defunct and its affairs were wound up.

_Matamora_, No. 25. St. Matthews. Instituted 12th Hunting Moon, 408
by J. B. VanZandt with 20 charter members. This is one of the tribes
instituted by VanZandt that has been prosperous. It owns its own
wigwam, one of the most unique in the reservation, and its chiefs are
active and vigorous.

_Wyoming_, No. 26. ("Large" or "extensive") Danville. Instituted 21st
Hunting Moon, 408 with 48 charter members, by J. B. VanZandt. For
several great suns the tribe flourished and entertained the Great
Council in 410, but soon after began to wane. In 413 its council fire
was relighted by Past Sachem M. M. Redding, but it did not thrive, and
in 415 it surrendered its charter.

_Seneca_, No. 27. ("Great hill people") Stanford. Instituted 3rd
Cold Moon, 409, with 63 charter members by J. B. VanZandt. The tribe
prospered for a time, but in 411 was reported defunct. Past Sachem F.
L. Smith visited Stanford on the 14th of Snow Moon, 412 and endeavored
to relight the council brand but without success, and the charter and
effects of the Tribe were surrendered to him on that sun. The Council
brand was relighted by Past Sachem M. M. Redding in 413, but shortly
after surrendered again.

_Dakota_, No. 28. ("Leagued, or United People") Junction City.
Instituted 23d Cold Moon, 409, with 26 charter members, by J. B.
VanZandt. There have been ups and downs in this Tribe, and its council
fire has burned dimly at times, but it now burns brightly.

_Tippecanoe_, No. 29. ("At the great clearing") Louisville. Instituted
in Cold Moon, 409, with 54 charter members by Great Sachem W. C.
Diederich. Consolidated with Cherokee Tribe, No. 8.

_Onondaga_, No. 30. ("On the hills") Lancaster. Instituted 30th Cold
Moon, 409 with 23 charter members, by J. B. VanZandt. Tribe was
defunct in 411 and surrendered its charter to M. M. Redding in 413.

_Manitou_, No. 31. ("Spirit") Eminence. Instituted 16th Snow Moon,
409, with 32 charter members by J. B. VanZandt. The tribe lived but
a short time and surrendered its charter to Past Sachem Morris, of
LaGrange.

_Iroquois_, No. 32. (The name applied to the "Six Nations") Pittsburg.
Instituted 19th Snow Moon, 409, with 23 charter members by J. B.
VanZandt. The tribe has been prosperous from the start and is numbered
among the strong tribes in the reservation.

_Massasoit_, No. 33. (Name of a noted chief of the Wampanoags.)
LaGrange. Instituted 26th Snow Moon, 409 with 18 charter members by
J. B. VanZandt. While a large majority of the Tribes instituted by
VanZandt have gone to the bad, in this instance he "builded better
than he knew" and old Massasoit stands among the leaders.

_Ononga_, No. 34. Covington. Instituted on the 26th Worm Moon, G. S.
D. 409 by W. C. Peay. Lived but a short time. There is no record of
its charter ever having been taken up.

_Montauk_, No. 35. ("The island country") East Bernstadt. Instituted
3d Plant Moon, 409 by J. B. VanZandt, with 26 charter members.
Consolidated with Iroquois Tribe, No. 32 on the 20th of Hot Moon, 409.

_Cataraugus_, No. 36. ("Bad smelling shore") Livingston. Instituted
31st Flower Moon, 409 by J. B. VanZandt, with 17 charter members.
Tribe was defunct in 411. Council brand was relighted by F. L. Smith
on the 13th Cold Moon, 412. Charter surrendered to M. M. Redding in
Sturgeon Moon, 413.

_Oswego_, No. 37. ("Where the valley widens.") Dry Ridge. Instituted
4th Plant Moon, 409 by W. C. Peay. The tribe has been successful and
now owns its own wigwam, being the first in the Reservation to have
its own wigwam dedicated by the Great Sachem.

_Irondequoit_, No. 38. ("A bay") Hardinsburg. Instituted in 409 by J.
B. VanZandt. The tribe has weathered the blighting influence of its
organizer and is thrifty.

_Choctaw_, No. 39. ("Charming voice") Bardstown. Instituted by J. B.
VanZandt. Visited by W. A. Crader in Plant Moon, 411, who found the
tribe had been defunct since 6th Hunting Moon, 410.

_Red Hawk_, No. 40. Somerset. Instituted by J. B. VanZandt in 409.
Reported defunct in 410. Council fire revived on the 26th Sturgeon
Moon, 413 and on that date consolidated with Shabbona, No. 46.

_Petewa_, No. 41. Central City. Instituted by F. W. Jones in 410. The
Tribe has had its share of reverses, labor troubles in the Hunting
Grounds being mainly responsible, but is yet a loyal tribe.

_Pawnee_, No. 42. Buechel. Instituted in 410 by F. W. Jones. At one
time it seemed certain this would be a banner tribe, but it gradually
declined and consolidated with Cherokee Tribe, No. 8 in Hunting Moon,
416.

_Narragansett_, No. 43. ("Other side river") Middlesboro. Instituted
22nd Hot Moon, 409 by J. B. VanZandt. Reported defunct in 411. Visited
by F. L. Smith on the 16th Cold Moon, 412, who arrested and took
possession of dispensation and supplies.

_Red Jacket_, No. 44. (Chief of the Senecas, his Indian name being
Sa-ga-ye-wat-ha, signifying "he keeps them awake") Louisville.
Instituted by F. W. Jones. Consolidated with Hiawatha Tribe.

_Osage_, No. 45. ("The strong") Lenoxburg. Instituted at Falmouth 28th
Hot Moon, 409 by J. R. McConnell and W. C. Peay. Reported defunct
in 411. Visited by Great Sachem W. C. Pelham 11th Hunting Moon, 411
who arrested charter and restored the same to petitioners, relighted
the counsel brand and granted dispensation to remove the wigwam to
Lenoxburg, from which hunting ground the tribe now hails. It owns a
fine wigwam, nearly free from debt.

_Shabbona_, No. 46. (The Indian pronunciation of the French word
"Shobonier") Somerset. Instituted in 409 by F. W. Jones. Soon after
was defunct. Revived and consolidated with Red Hawk No. 40. Again
became defunct. Council fire was relighted by M. M. Redding in
Sturgeon Moon, 413, but it never burned brightly and charter was
surrendered to M. M. Redding 23rd Sturgeon Moon, 416.

_Oconee_, No. 47. Instituted in 409 by F. W. Jones. Visited by W. A.
Crader in Plant Moon, 411 in endeavor to revive the council brand but
without success and he reported the tribe defunct.

_King Phillip_, No. 48. (Younger son of Massasoit) Hustonville.
Instituted in 409 by O. J. Minor. The council fire burned brightly for
a season, but gradually it smouldered and finally went out entirely,
and its charter was surrendered to M. M. Redding 20th Buck Moon, 413.

_Minnetonka_, No. 49. West Point. Instituted 409 by F. W. Jones, but
was soon defunct.

_Shingawassa_, No. 50. Bardfordsville. Instituted 31st Buck Moon, 409
by F. W. Jones with 24 charter members. Council Fire burned brightly
for a time and it practically owned its own wigwam, but members moving
away left it without quorum and it surrendered its charter in 416.

_Comanche_, No. 51. New Haven. Instituted 409 by F. W. Jones. Was
soon defunct and its council fire was revived by W. A. Crader, but it
burned but dimly and soon was extinct.

_Tawawa_, No. 52. Vine Grove. Instituted 11th Corn Moon, 409 by F.
W. Jones. Visited by Crader in 411 and found to be defunct and all
property was surrendered to him.

_Minnewah_, No. 53. (or "Menawa", Signifying "Great warrior") Beaver
Dam. Instituted 409 by F. W. Jones. Consolidated with Kentucky Tribe,
No. 54, at McHenry.

_Kentucky_, No. 54. ("At the head of the river" or "the dark and
bloody ground") McHenry. Instituted 8th Corn Moon, 409 by F. W.
Jones. Owns jointly with a Lodge of Odd Fellows a fine wigwam and is
prosperous in every respect.

_Tioga_, No. 55. ("Swift current") Sturgis. Instituted 16th Traveling
Moon, G. S. D. 409 by F. W. Jones. Has had a hard struggle, and its
council fire burned so dimly in 416 that it was rekindled by Past
Sachem David Moskovitz.

_Huron_, No. 56. (Name of a tribe of the Iroquois Nation. Wyandotte
is another name of the same tribe, both being derived from the same
Indian word "A-hon-an-dote". Wyandotte is the French Version and Huron
the English.) Instituted 16th Traveling Moon, G. S. D. 409 by F. W.
Jones, the Degree team of Miantonomo Tribe assisting. Its council
brand is still burning, though but feebly.

_Standwaitee_, No. 57. Earlington. Instituted 10th Beaver Moon, 409 by
F. W. Jones. The tribe has been vigorous from institution.

_Blazing Arrow_, No. 58. Madisonville. Instituted 10th Beaver Moon,
409 by F. W. Jones. Vigorous efforts were made to make this a strong
tribe but without avail and its charter was surrendered on the 8th of
Buck Moon, 412.

_Sagwa_, No. 59. Lawrenceburg. Instituted 15th Beaver Moon, 409, by F.
W. Jones, but never prospered and its council fire was out in 410, but
relighted in 413 by Past Sachem Julius Morris, but again went out. Was
again relighted in 415, and is now in prosperous condition with over
100 members.

_Otego_, No. 60. Paducah. Instituted by John M. Clifford and F. W.
Jones the 7th of Hunting Moon, 409. Several members of the Old Otego,
No. 15 became charter members, and it was practically the relighting
of the old council brand. The reorganization proved successful and the
tribe is one of the strongest in the Reservation.

_Wichita_, No. 61. ("White Man") Mayfield. Instituted 21st Beaver
Moon, 409 by J. M. Clifford, but its council fire soon went out. Was
visited by W. A. Crader, who attempted to relight it but without
success and he reported the tribe defunct in 411.

_Waukee_, No. 62. Fulton. Instituted 19th Beaver Moon, 409 by F.
W. Jones. Reported defunct in 410. Visited by Crader in attempt to
relight its council brand, but he reported it defunct in 411.

_Pequod_, No. 63. (Name of a Tribe of Indians in Connecticut)
Instituted by F. W. Jones in 409. Soon after consolidated with
Hiawatha Tribe, No. 7.

_Lotowana_, No. 64. Midway. Instituted 21st Snow Moon, 410 by Jones
and Clifford. Tribe has been successful.

_Maumee_, No. 65. (People who live in the peninsula) Paris. Instituted
1st Worm Moon, 410 by Jones and Clifford. Absorbed by Miantonomo, No.
1 in 414.

_Sagamore_, No. 66. (Same as Sachem--"Councellor of the People")
Hickman. Instituted by F. W. Jones in 410 with 25 charter members.
Visited by W. A. Crader in 411 who found the tribe had been defunct
since Buck Moon, 410, but he relighted the council brand on the 23rd
of Plant Moon, 411. Tribe soon after became defunct.

_Blackfoot_, No. 67. (A tribe of Indians, probably of Algonquin stock)
Frankfort. Instituted by F. W. Jones on 23rd Plant Moon, 410, with
57 charter members. Tribe has always been successful, and enjoys the
distinction of having entertained the Great Council three times.

_Otawa_, No. 68. ("Traders") Olive Hill. Instituted 12th Hot Moon, 410
by F. W. Jones, with 21 charter members. Started off well, but was
soon defunct. Council brand was relighted by M. M. Redding, and is now
burning brightly.

_Powhatan_, No. 69. (Name of a great Virginia Chief, said to signify
"at or near the falls of the stream"). Carrollton. Instituted 20th Hot
Moon, 410 by F. W. Jones, assisted by Nick Pomice, with 32 charter
members. Tribe was vigorous for a time, but lost many members by the
institution of another tribe in the vicinity, though its council brand
is still burning brightly.

_Sioux_, No. 70. (An abbreviation of the name given by the French
to the Tribes of the Dakota Nation "Nadouessioux" and signifies
"enemies"). Louisville. Instituted 21st Hot Moon, 410 by F. W. Jones
with 27 charter members.

_Little Ha-Ha_, No. 71. Owenton. Instituted 12th Buck Moon, 410 by F.
W. Jones, with 26 charter members. Consolidated with Big Eagle Tribe,
No. 86 in Hunting Moon, 416.

_Morning Star_, No. 72. Fordsville. Instituted 17th Buck Moon, 417 by
F. W. Jones with 20 charter members. Council fire revived by W. A.
Crader in 411, but in 412 it was reported defunct.

_Warsaw_, No. 73. ("Far") Rockport. Instituted 17th Sturgeon Moon, 410
by F. W. Jones, with 25 charter members.

_Nokomis_, No. 74. Franklin. Instituted 2nd Sturgeon Moon, 410 by F.
W. Jones with 20 charter members. Held but few councils. Rekindled by
F. L. Smith in Buck Moon, 411, but was shortly afterwards defunct.

_Silver Cloud_, No. 75. Glasgow. Was never instituted. In Buck Moon,
410, F. W. Jones attempted to institute on a properly filed petition,
but on account of a misunderstanding between Bro. Jones and the
charter petitioners it was not done. In Buck Moon, 411, F. L. Smith
visited Glasgow and returned charter fees to petitioners.

_Floating Canoe_, No. 76. Richmond. Instituted 2nd Corn Moon, 410
by F. W. Jones with 30 charter members. The tribe has thrived from
institution.

_Shawnee_, No. 77. ("Southerner") Georgetown. Instituted 21st Sturgeon
Moon, 410, by F. W. Jones, with 37 charter members. Charter was
surrendered to M. M. Redding, in 413. An entirely new tribe under the
same name and number was instituted 18th Sturgeon Moon, 414, by M. M.
Redding.

_Kabo_, No. 78. Petra. Instituted 15th Buck Moon, 411 by W. T. Abbott,
with 69 charter members. Organized by Chas. E. O'Neal.

_Grand Glaze_, No. 79. Monterey. Instituted 26th Corn Moon, 410, by
John M. Clifford, with 22 charter members. The tribe has had a hard
struggle, but its present 30 members are working hard to keep the
tribe from retrograding.

_Ptocawa_, No. 80. Louisville. Instituted 5th Cold Moon, 411, by F. W.
Jones, with 30 charter members. Tribe has from the start been vigorous
and now numbers 211 Chiefs.

_Yosemite_, No. 81. ("Grizzly bear"--properly spelled Yo-se-me-ty)
Louisville. Instituted 5th of Cold Moon, 411 by F. W. Jones, with 33
charter members. Another of the many thrifty Jefferson County Tribes,
now numbering 154 members.

_Appalachia_, No. 82. ("The people on the other side") Pineville.
Instituted 26th Snow Moon, 411 by F. W. Jones, with 52 charter
members. The tribe has prospered though it would have been better had
there not been so many charter members.

_Passyunk_, No. 83. Harrodsburg. Instituted 26th Worm Moon, 411 by F.
W. Jones with 48 charter members. Though its membership is not now as
large as formerly, it still is in healthy condition.

_Spotted Wolf_, No. 84. Coalton. Instituted 12th Plant Moon, 411 by
Past Great Sachem W. C. Diederich. Tribe composed largely of miners,
and has been and is a thrifty tribe.

_Red Cloud_, No. 85. (Head Chief of the Ogallala Sioux). Warsaw.
Instituted 30th Flower Moon, 411 by Nick Pomice, with 20 charter
members.

_Big Eagle_, No. 86. Sparta. Instituted at Sanders on 24th Flower
Moon, 411 by Nick Pomice. Moved by Dispensation to Sparta on the 27th
of Buck Moon, 411. Absorbed by consolidation Little Ha Ha Tribe, No.
71.

_Eyota_, No. 87. ("Greatest"). Balls Landing. Instituted 17th Buck
Moon, 411, by Forsee D. Lee with 25 charter members. Has had many
trials but weathered them all.

_Swift Foot_, No. 88. Campbellsburg. Instituted 22nd Buck Moon, 411
at Turner's Station, by Nick Pomice, with 23 charter members. Moved
by dispensation to Campbellsburg, and from there to English, but in
neither of these places did it thrive, and soon became defunct.

_Tallalu_, No. 89. (Probably intended for "Tallula", signifying
"leaping waters") Callaway. Instituted 20th Corn Moon, 411 by R. B.
Rice, of Appalachia Tribe, No. 82. Has had a struggle and its council
fire is not burning brightly, yet numbers among its members some
valiant chiefs who will not allow it to become extinct.

_War Eagle_, No. 90. (The Indian word for War Eagle is "Keneu")
Bedford. Instituted 11th Traveling Moon, 411, by Nick Pomice, with 22
charter members.

_Idaho_, No. 91. ("Sun-rise mountain") Fourmile. Instituted 15th
Traveling Moon, 411, by R. B. Rice, with 33 charter members. Organized
by J. G. Rollins.

_Tallapoosa_, No. 92. ("Stranger" or "New comer") Milton. Instituted
18th Traveling Moon, 411, by Nick Pomice, with 20 charter members.

_Mingo_, No. 93. (Not strictly an Indian word. The name was applied
by the English to a Tribe of Iroquois stock.) Newport. Instituted
11th Hunting Moon, 411, by Val. J. Baader, of Miami, No. 17, with 22
charter members. Organized by E. N. Miller.

_Sago_, No. 94. ("Welcome") Germantown. Instituted 30th Cold Moon,
412, by Ben Harbeson, of Paughcaughnaughsinque, No. 6, with 22 charter
members. Organized by Bros. Rigdon and Bell. Now kindles its council
fires in a wigwam near Stonewall.

_Wissahickon_, No. 95. ("Cat fish stream") Lockport. Instituted 1st
Plant Moon, 412, by Forsee D. Lee. A struggle was made for a time to
keep the council fire burning, but an unfortunate local occurrence
caused dissension, and it surrendered its charter.

_Niagara_, No. 96. ("The neck") Orangeburg. Instituted 6th Sturgeon
Moon, 412, by Henry W. Ray, with 48 members. Organized by W. C.
Wormald. First Prophet, W. W. Scott.

_Kanawha_, No. 97. ("River of the woods") Instituted 29th Traveling
Moon, 412, by Henry W. Ray, with 30 charter members. Organized by W.
C. Wormald. Instituted at Vanceburg, where it never got a foothold,
and its charter was transferred to Martin where it prospered
wonderfully.

_Pontiac_, No. 98. (Name of an Ottawa Indian Chief, the signification
of which is lost) Louisville. Instituted 18th Beaver Moon, 412, with
20 charter members at Highland Park. Tribe has never been vigorous and
for several great suns its council fire has burned fitfully.

_Wauneeka_, No. 99. (Also spelled "Waneka", signifying "the son")
Louisville. Instituted 9th Beaver Moon, 412, by W. A. Nash and J. R.
Garr, with 145 charter members. First Prophet, Dr. B. A. Garr.

_Buffalo_, No. 100. Sardis. Instituted 16th Hunting Moon, 412, by
Henry W. Ray, with 45 charter members. Organized by W. C. Wormald. The
Tribe prospered for a time, but its council fire began to burn dimly
in 416, and it surrendered its charter in 417.

_Raritan_, No. 101. ("Forked river") Worthville. Instituted 3d
Traveling Moon, 412, with 25 charter members, but never got a foothold
and soon after surrendered its charter.

_Modoc_, No. 102. Louisville. Instituted 17th Snow Moon, 413, by H. C.
Yunker, with 41 charter members. Organized by B. W. Conner, who was
its first Prophet.

_Ute_, No. 103. Zachariah. Instituted at Torrent 30th Worm Moon, 413,
by Frank L. Smith, with 20 charter members. Organized by J. W. Steger.
First Prophet Leonard Barnes.

_Lackawanna_, No. 104. ("The forked stream") Salt Lick. Instituted
11th Hot Moon, 413, by Frank L. Smith, with a small charter list. The
Tribe has tried valiantly to overcome the handicap, but its council
fire is about extinct.

_Catawba_, No. 105. Prestonville. Instituted 21st Plant Moon, 413.

_Tamina_, No. 106. (From "Tammany", the name given the Patron Saint of
America) Instituted 2nd Flower Moon, 413, by Julius Morris, with 20
charter members. First Prophet I. M. Jennings.

_Juanita_, No. 107. (Spanish spelling of "Wauneta", signifying "winter
camp". There is no such word as Ju-ni-a-ta, as it is a miss-spelling
of the word here given.) Ghent. Instituted 7th Hot Moon, 413, by Nick
Pomice with 20 charter members. First Prophet J. H. Raison.

_Kenton_, No. 108. Bell-Jellico. Instituted at Artemus on the 18th Hot
Moon, 413, by B. A. Thompson with 22 charter members. First Prophet W.
H. Souder. Absorbed by consolidation Kotanta Tribe, No. 153 in 415.

_Wautauga_, No. 109. ("The river of islands") Bosworth. Instituted
10th Hot Moon, 413 by Warren Wilson, with 39 charter members.
First Prophet E. T. Griffith. Tribe never prospered and soon after
surrendered its charter.

_Wabash_, No. 110. ("White water") Instituted 1st Buck Moon, 413 by
Frank L. Smith, with 21 charter members. Organized by M. M. Redding.
First Prophet G. S. Woodward. Absorbed by Miantonomo, No. 1, in 415.

_Tchoupitoulas_, No. 111. Barbourville. Instituted 16th Sturgeon Moon,
413 by Warren Wilson, with 27 charter members. Organized by W. H.
McDonald, who was its first Sachem. First Prophet, J. R. Smyth.

_Winnebago_, No. 112. ("People of the dirty water") Instituted 12th
Corn Moon, 413 by H. H. Denhardt, with 31 charter members. Organized
by H. W. Johnson. First Prophet J. A. Lyne.

_Ocono_, No. 113. Campton. Instituted 29th Corn Moon, 413 by Frank L.
Smith. Organized by Jos. C. Lykins, who was its first Prophet.

_Tonawanda_, No. 114. ("Swift water") Instituted 8th Corn Moon, 413,
by G. H. Wolfe, with 19 charter members. Organized by James Fitch.
First Prophet C. W. S. Clarke.

_Minnehaha_, No. 115. ("Laughing water") Cropper. Instituted 17th
Traveling Moon, 413 by Frank L. Smith, with 14 charter members.
Organized by M. M. Redding. First Prophet W. B. Pollard.

_Saco_, No. 116. ("Pouring out") West Liberty. Instituted 8th
Traveling Moon, 413, by Frank L. Smith, with 41 charter members.
Organized by M. M. Redding. First Prophet C. W. Womack.

_Neponset_, No. 117. ("He walks in his sleep") Jackson. Instituted
21st Cold Moon, 414, by Frank L. Smith, with 33 charter members.
Organized by C. T. Wilson. James Hargis was the first Sachem and J. S.
Head, Jr. the first Prophet. Tribe flourished for a time, but local
political dissensions caused it to surrender its charter to M. M.
Redding in 416.

_Akkeewassa_, No. 118. Cannel City. Instituted 28th Cold Moon, 414, by
Joseph C. Lykins, with 35 charter members. Organized by M. M. Redding.
First Prophet F. M. Lykins.

_Ganoga_, No. 119 ("Oil flowing on the waters") Gratz. Organized in
414 by Forsee D. Lee. Council Fire never burned brightly and in a few
seven suns went out forever.

_Navajo_, No. 120. (The name of a powerful Tribe of the Apache family)
Sandy Hook. Instituted 11th Snow Moon, 414, by F. L. Smith, with 29
charter members. Ransome Caskey, of West Liberty was the organizer. W.
M. Weddington, first Prophet. Charter surrendered in 416.

_Tacoma_, No. 121. ("Tall peak, almost to heaven") Hazel Green.
Instituted 18th Snow Moon, 414, by Joseph C. Lykins, who was also the
organizer. Wayne Long, first Prophet. Surrendered charter in 416.

_Oseetah_, No. 222. Redwine. Instituted 1st Worm Moon, 414, by F. L.
Smith, with 21 charter members. Organized by Ransome Caskey. W. S.
Thornberry, first Prophet.

_Penobscott_, No. 123. ("The Rocky or Stony place") Instituted 6th
Worm Moon, 414 by Joseph C. Lykins. M. M. Redding was the organizer.
The council brand was extinct in Worm Moon, 417, but was at that time
relighted by H. L. Wheeler.

_Tuscarora_, No. 124. ("Shirt wearing people") Tyrone. Instituted 4th
Sturgeon Moon, 414, by F. L. Smith, with 22 charter members. M. M.
Redding was the organizer. S. E. Booth, First Prophet.

_Kinniconick_, No. 125. ("Tobacco") Bowen. Instituted 6th Plant
Moon, 414, by O. R. King, of No. 1, with 39 charter members. Leonard
Barnes, of No. 103 was the organizer. Morton Faulkner, first Prophet.
The Tribe has met with many reverses, and surrendered its charter in
Hunting Moon, 417.

_Seminole_, No. 126. Denniston. Instituted 29th Plant Moon, 414.

_Apache_, No. 127. (Name of an Indian Tribe, and signified "men")
Robbins. Instituted 13th Plant Moon, 414, by J. C. Lykins, with 17
charter members. Organized by J. A. Oldfield. G. E. Neal, First
Prophet. Consolidated with Ekana No. 276 in Beaver Moon, 417.

_Antigo_, No. 128. Claysville. Instituted 1st Buck Moon, 414, by J.
T. Reed, of No. 78. Organized by W. E. Coleman of same Tribe, with 36
charter members. First Prophet, T. A. Clark.

_Chanzeck_, No. 129. Lee City. Instituted 2nd Sturgeon Moon, 414, by
J. C. Lykins. Organized by C. D. Arnett, of No. 121, with 17 charter
members. Council fire never burned brightly and was extinct in Worm
Moon, 415.

_Lechawa_, No. 130. Mize. No record is obtainable of the institution
of this Tribe. It became defunct almost immediately after its
institution.

_Mendota_, No. 131. ("The mouth of the River") Corinth. Instituted
27th Hot Moon, 414, by F. L. Smith. Organized by M. M. Redding, with
41 charter members. First Prophet, J. D. Davis.

_Oneida_, No. 132. ("Granite people", or "People of the beacon stone")
Cherokee. Instituted 26th Buck Moon, 414, by Henry W. Ray. Organized
by W. A. Conn, with 32 charter members. First Prophet, J. O. McNeil.

_Paduke_, No. 133. Murray. Instituted 24th Buck Moon, 414, by Great
Sachem L. L. Bebout. Organized by J. J. Freundlich, of No. 60, with
53 charter members. First Prophet, David L. Redden. The Tribe never
prospered and was defunct in 416.

_Logan_, No. 134. (or "Tah-gah-jute", the name of a Cayuga Chief)
Ewing. Instituted 2nd Sturgeon Moon, 414, by Henry W. Ray. Organized
by Louis Feneburg. First Prophet, J. D. Wyatt.

_Wahbee_, No. 135. ("White") Yocum. Instituted 29th Sturgeon Moon,
414, by Henry W. Ray. Organized by John D. Cruey, with 28 charter
members. First Prophet, J. D. Rose.

_Wamsutta_, No. 136. Dan. Instituted 17th Sturgeon Moon, 414.

_Tuscola_, No. 137. ("A level Plane") Warfield. Instituted 18th
Sturgeon Moon, 414, by H. W. Ray. Organized by W. A. Conn, with 32
charter members. First Prophet, W. M. Dawson.

_Connewago_, No. 138. ("A long strip" or "a long reach") Fallsburg.
Instituted 31st Sturgeon Moon, 414, by H. W. Ray. Organized by Frank
Witten, with 50 charter members. First Prophet C. W. Jones.

_Uppowoc_, No. 139. Maytown. Instituted 25th Traveling Moon, 414.

_Uchees_, No. 140. ("Corn") Rockdale. Instituted 17th Traveling Moon,
414, by F. L. Smith. Organized by M. M. Redding, with 25 charter
members. First Prophet, D. W. Jackson.

_Tonnuluka_, No. 141. ("United people") Irvine. Instituted at Millers
Creek, by F. L. Smith. Organized by John Watkins, of No. 103, with 25
charter members. First Prophet, Arkilles Kelley.

_Nevada_, No. 142. Flat Gap. Instituted 26th Traveling Moon, 414, by
Henry W. Ray. Organized by Frank Witten, with 29 charter members.
First Prophet, W. P. Williams.

_Chickasaw_, No. 143. (The name of a Tribe formerly in Alabama) Sitka.
Instituted at Paintsville by Henry W. Ray. Organized by Frank Witten,
with 25 charter members. First Prophet, I. H. Rowland.

_Algona_, No. 144. ("Algonquin waters") East Bernstadt. Instituted
31st Traveling Moon, 414, by F. L. Smith.

_Algonquin_, No. 145. ("People of the other side") Berry. Instituted
1st Hunting Moon, 414, by Henry W. Ray. Organized by M. M. Redding,
with 25 charter members. First Prophet, R. P. Blair. Tribe never got a
good start and surrendered its charter in 417.

_Shawneese_, No. 146. Cave City. Instituted 29th Cold Moon, 415, by
Past Great Sachem H. H. Denhardt. Organized by M. M. Redding, with 30
charter members. Charter surrendered in 416.

_Elkatawa_, No. 147. Ford. Instituted 12th Snow Moon, 415, by F. L.
Smith. Organized by M. M. Redding, with 17 charter members. First
Prophet, C. A. Hazelrigg.

_Natchez_, No. 148. ("A hurrying man") Glenwood. Instituted 2nd Worm
Moon, 415, by Henry W. Ray. Organized by E. G. Rook, with 36 charter
members. First Prophet, Wm. Brainard.

_Oniska_, No. 149. Middlesboro. Instituted 7th Worm Moon, 415, by W.
H. McDonald, by whom it was organized with 22 charter members. First
Prophet, A. M. DeBusk.

_Cohota_, No. 150. Louisa. Instituted 12th Plant Moon, 415, by Henry
W. Ray. Organized by J. H. Ekers, with 37 charter members. First
Prophet, R. B. Spencer.

_Minnewa_, No. 151. (Or "Menawa", signifying "great warrior")
Instituted 22nd Hot Moon, 415, by H. W. Ray. Organized by Bert Price,
with 33 charter members. First Prophet, Dave Osborne.

_Ontario_, No. 152. ("Beautiful prospect of rocks, hills and water")
Flat Lick. Instituted 17th Buck Moon, 415, by W. A. Crader. Organized
by R. B. Miller, with 41 charter members. First Prophet, Henry C.
Mills.

_Ko-tan-ta_, No. 153. Bell-Jellico. Instituted 1st Sturgeon Moon, 415,
by W. A. Crader. Organized by Warren Wilson, with 30 charter members.
First Prophet, J. C. Hembree. Consolidated with Kenton, No. 108. of
Artemus, which Tribe moved to Bell-Jellico.

_Black Eagle_, No. 154. Grays. Instituted as Ogeechee, No. 154, on the
2nd Sturgeon Moon, 415, by W. A. Crader. Organized by Chas. Davis,
with 31 charter members. First Prophet, John G. Stanberry.

_Rowena_, No. 155. Hopkinsville. Instituted 1st Sturgeon Moon, 415, by
Great Sachem D. H. Russell. Organized by W. H. Gage, with 21 charter
members. Charter revoked in Beaver Moon, 417.

_Stillwater_, No. 156. Russellville. Instituted 17th Sturgeon Moon,
415, by W. A. Crader. Organized by B. W. Conner, with 10 charter
members. Council fire never burned but dimly, and its charter was
revoked in Beaver Moon, 417.

_Delaware_, No. 157. (The Iroquois called this people "Sa-ga-na-ga")
Blanche. Instituted 27th Sturgeon Moon, 415, by C. F. Melton.
Organized by J. F. Slusher with 28 charter members. First Prophet G.
B. Hubbrad.

_Metacom_, No. 158. Corbin. Instituted 24th Sturgeon Moon, 415, by W.
H. McDonald. Organized by Chas. Davis, with 26 charter members. First
Prophet, H. E. Bradshaw.

_Shenandoah_, No. 159. ("The stream passing by or through
spruce-pines") Instituted 4th Corn Moon, 415, by W. H. McDonald.
Organized by Warren Wilson with 41 charter members. First Prophet,
Jacob Schultz.

_Saranac_, No. 160. Peach Orchard. Instituted 13th Corn Moon, 415, at
Richardson, by F. L. Smith. Organized by B. B. Rule. First Prophet, G.
W. Burton. Consolidated with Adirondack, No. 201, in Hunting Moon, 417.

_Iron Star_, No. 161. Trosper. Instituted 29th Traveling Moon, 415, by
W. H. McDonald. Organized by Warren Wilson, with 36 charter members.
First Prophet, Jas. Main.

_Yazoo_, No. 162. ("To blow on an instrument") Boston. Instituted 1st
Hunting Moon, 415, by George Brown. Organized by David Moskovitz,
with 21 charter members. First Prophet, J. D. Edwards. Surrendered its
charter in 417.

_Chicora_, No. 163. (Or "Che-curruh", last chief of the Pequakets.)
Shepherdsville. Instituted 6th Traveling Moon, 415, by W. A. Crader.
Organized by W. C. Wormald, with 22 charter members. First Prophet,
Thos. E. Cochran.

_Tuskeno_, No. 164. Hellier. Instituted 19th Traveling Moon, 415, at
Childers, by Henry W. Ray. Organized by W. E. Wiley, with 29 charter
members. First Prophet, Thos. J. Garner.

_Ouray_, No. 165. (Name of a chief of the Utes) Oakdale. Instituted
15th Traveling Moon, 415, by W. A. Crader. Organized by Chas. L.
Becker, with 24 charter members. First Prophet, J. W. DeHart.
Consolidated with Sioux Tribe, No. 70, in 417.

_Geronimo_, No. 166. (Name of a chief of the Apache) London.
Instituted 26th Traveling Moon, 415, by W. H. McDonald. Organized by
A. C. Jowdy, with 27 charter members. First Prophet, C. J. Litteral.

_Silver Arrow_, No. 167. Lebanon Junction. Instituted 1st Beaver Moon,
415, by W. A. Crader. Organized by David Moskovitz, with 15 charter
members. First Prophet, Thomas Snider.

_Susquehanna_, No. 168. ("The great bay river") Inez. Instituted 9th
Beaver Moon, 415, by Henry W. Ray. Organized by Jas. A. Hobbs, with 27
charter members. First Prophet, U. G. Johnson.

_Spotted Elk_, No. 169. Island. Instituted 28th Hunting Moon, 415, by
Ben C. Nunn. Organized by A. W. Oates, with 43 charter members. First
Prophet, Geo. W. Rone.

_White Bear_, No. 170. Williamsburg. Instituted 20th Hunting Moon,
415, by W. H. McDonald. Organized by Chas. Davis, with 28 charter
members. First Prophet, J. McKenzie Brown.

_Red Crow_, No. 171. Rockholds. Instituted 31st Hunting Moon, 415, by
W. H. McDonald. Organized by Chas. Davis, with 25 charter members.
First Prophet, W. E. Hemphill.

_Kill Buck_, No. 172. Elizabethtown. Instituted 15th Hunting Moon,
415, by E. D. Durham. Organized by W. C. Wormald, with 14 charter
members. First Prophet, R. L. Brown.

_Choctaw_, No. 173. ("Charming voice") Wilton. Instituted 18th Hunting
Moon, 415, by W. H. McDonald. Organized by Warren Wilson, with 55
charter members. First Prophet, S. McLemore.

_Washtella_, No. 174. Fonde. Instituted 29th Hunting Moon, 415, by W.
H. McDonald. Organized by L. E. Cline, with 27 charter members. First
Prophet, S. B. Bryant.

_Wanalanset_, No. 175. Sadieville. Instituted 27th Hunting Moon, 415,
by Frank L. Smith. Organized by M. M. Redding with 23 charter members.
First Prophet, A. B. Davis.

_Cheyenne_, No. 176. ("Speaking a different language". A tribe
speaking a different dialect from those around them.") Chenoa.
Instituted 28th Hunting Moon, 415, by Warren Wilson. Organized by J.
L. Riddle, with 23 charter members. First Prophet, Robt. Mason, Sr.

_Kiowa_, No. 177. ("The body") Osie. Instituted 8th Snow Moon, 416,
at Irad, by L. E. Bradley, by whom it was organized, with 44 charter
members. First Prophet, Andy Webb, Jr.

_Lackawaxen_, No. 178. ("Where the roads part") Borderland. Instituted
23d Snow Moon, 416, by L. E. Bradley. Organized by R. B. Parsley, with
29 charter members. First Prophet, Flem Kennard.

_Pewakee_, No. 179. Luzerne. Instituted 2nd Snow Moon, 416, by George
Brown. Organized by A. W. Oates, with 35 charter members. First
Prophet, W. M. Clark.

_Uncas_, No. 180. ("A war chief of the Mohicans") Bolts Fork.
Instituted 12th Snow Moon, 416, by L. E. Bradley, by whom it was
organized. First Prophet, C. H. Higgins.

_Piute_, No. 181. Culbertson. Instituted 13th Worm Moon, 416, by L.
E. Bradley, who organized the same with 35 charter members. First
Prophet, W. H. Rice.

_Maumee_, No. 182. ("People who live in the peninsula") Graham.
Instituted 9th Worm Moon, 416, by Geo. Brown. Organized by Geo. Brown
and R. W. Hooper, with 34 charter members. First Prophet, Ollis Hawes.

_Cahoosic_, No. 183. Leitchfield. Instituted 9th Worm Moon, 416, by
L. H. Roberts. Organized by David Moskovitz, with 23 charter members.
First Prophet, W. L. VanNorte.

_Scioto_, No. 184. Covington. Instituted 16th Worm Moon, by H. W. Ray,
assisted by F. L. Smith. Organized by H. J. Northcutt, with 20 charter
members. First Prophet, Jas. A. Brownfield.

_Kickapoo_, No. 185. ("Ghost of an otter". A branch of the Shawnee
Tribe.) Instituted 19th Worm Moon, 416, by George Brown. Organized
by David Moskovitz, with 15 charter members. First Prophet, John B.
Jeffries.

_Potomac_, No. 186. ("They are coming by water") Glasgow. Instituted
25th Worm Moon, 416, by M. M. Redding. Organized by W. J. Poynter,
with 24 charter members. First Prophet, W. J. Fisher.

_Sequepah_, No. 187. Drakesboro. Instituted 13th Plant Moon, 416, by
George Brown. Organized by A. W. Oates, with 27 charter members. First
Prophet, Chas. Green.

_Ohio_, No. 188. ("Beautiful river") Hartford. Instituted 6th Plant
Moon, 416, by D. Moskovitz, who also organized the same with 20
charter members. First Prophet, U. G. Ragland.

_Conanchet_, No. 189. (Oldest Son of Miantonomo) Halsey. Instituted
13th Plant Moon, 416, by W. H. McDonald. Organized by Warren Wilson,
with 29 charter members. First Prophet, J. W. Stillwell.

_Tawawa_, No. 190. ("People who are given to trading") Centertown.
Instituted 18th Plant Moon, 416, by George Brown, by whom it was
organized with 28 charter members. First Prophet, W. L. Richardson.

_Bogohama_, No. 192. Princeton. Instituted 10th Flower Moon, 416,
by N. G. Mothershead. Organized by David Moskovitz, with 25 charter
members. First Prophet, James W. Jewell.

_Mashingomisha_, No. 193. Blaine. Instituted 4th Flower Moon, 416,
by L. E. Bradley. Organized by J. W. Elkins and J. B. Large, with 24
charter members. First Prophet, A. T. Burton.

_Oklahoma_, No. 194. ("Home for all Indians") Chambers. Instituted
30th Plant Moon, 416, by J. H. Kemper. Organized by Roy L. Vice, with
18 charter members. First Prophet, Chas. Cartright. Charter revoked in
417.

_Tradewater_, No. 195. Dawson Springs. Instituted 1st Flower Moon,
416, by N. G. Mothershead. Organized by David Moskovitz, with 24
charter members. First Prophet, Joe Woodruff.

_Ogallala_, No. 196. ("Cast in"--name of a band of the Sioux)
Instituted 3d Buck Moon, 416, by J. W. Matthews. Organized by W. B.
Gordon, with 21 charter members. First Prophet, E. B. Moore.

_Nipsit_, No. 197. ("Simple") Pilgrim. Instituted 15th Hot Moon, 416,
by Henry W. Ray. Organized by Bertram Farley, with 22 charter members.
First Prophet, Wade Stepp.

_Suwanee_, No. 198. (The South, or Southern People.--From Shawnee)
Trinity. Instituted 6th Hot Moon, 416, by Henry W. Ray. Organized by
Jas. Waldren, with 22 charter members. First Prophet, James Waldren.

_Shawmut_, No. 199. ("Tri-mountain") Jattie. Instituted 8th Hot Moon,
416, by L. E. Bradley. Organized by Charley Rice, with 25 charter
members. First Prophet, J. F. Guinn.

_Merrimac_, No. 200. ("Cat-fish") Hammons. Instituted 6th Buck Moon,
416, by Warren Wilson. Organized by Dave Jones, with 20 charter
members. First Prophet, Wm. Cole.

_Adirondack_, No. 201. (Name of a tribe of Indians, signifying, "He
eats bark") Clifford. Instituted 6th Buck Moon, 416, by L. E. Bradley.
Organized by L. G. Wallis, with 27 charter members. First Prophet, A.
M. See.

_Walla Walla_, No. 202. Calhoun. Instituted 22nd Hot Moon 416, by
Ben C. Nunn. Organized by G. W. Rone, with 20 charter members. First
Prophet, E. R. Glenn. Charter revoked 18th Traveling Moon, 417.

_Creek_, No. 203. (Or Muskogee--a numerous tribe) Dayton. Instituted
10th Buck Moon, 416, by Val. J. Baader. Organized by Wm. F. Baader.
First Prophet, Harry C. Kohl.

_Arapahoe_, No. 204. (Name of an Indian tribe, signifying "tattooed
people") Providence. Instituted 17th Hot Moon, 416, by N. G.
Mothershead. Organized by David Moskovitz, with 21 charter members.
First Prophet, John H. Taylor. Charter revoked and surrendered in 417.

_Brule_, No. 205. (Name of a brand of Sioux Indians.) Clay. Instituted
9th Buck Moon, 416, by N. G. Mothershead. Organized by D. Moskovitz,
with 17 charter members. First Prophet, E. Blackwell.

_Naugatuck_, No. 206. ("One tree") West Naugatuck. Instituted 13th
Buck Moon, 416, by Henry W. Ray. Organized by J. R. Elliott, with 30
charter members. First Prophet, Henderson Burgett.

_Monon_, No. 207. Stamping Ground. Instituted 22nd Buck Moon, 416, by
Frank L. Smith. Organized by M. M. Redding, with 21 charter members.
First Prophet, J. T. True.

_Saginaw_, No. 208. ("At the mouth"--as of a river.) Denton.
Instituted 3d Sturgeon Moon, 416, by John G. Riley. Organized by C. W.
S. Clark, with 39 charter members. First Prophet, James O. Gallihugh.

_Pewawbeek_, No. 209. ("Iron") Hopper. Instituted 10th Sturgeon Moon,
416, by Warren Wilson. Organized by Dave Jones, with 23 charter
members. First Prophet, James Bailey.

_Sangamon_, No. 210. Manchester. Instituted 2nd Sturgeon Moon, 416, by
Warren Wilson. Organized by John F. Slusher with 20 charter members.
First Prophet, D. G. Roach.

_Emahaka_, No. 211. Morganfield. Instituted 5th Sturgeon Moon, 416, by
Nathan I. Oberdorfer. Organized by David Moskovitz, with 21 charter
members. First Prophet, A. W. Clements.

_Weshaway_, No. 212. ("Elk") Instituted 10th Sturgeon Moon, 416, by
Thos. McIlquham. Organized by Joseph Payne, with 33 charter members.
First Prophet, L. M. Davis.

_Agawam_, No. 213. (Contracted from "Agawawaum," signifying "around
the point") Catlettsburg. Instituted 10th Sturgeon Moon, 416, by L. E.
Bradley. Organized by Wm. Ashant, Ed Short and James Wittin, with 45
charter members. First Prophet, Jas. Hitchcock.

_Manhattan_, No. 214. ("The town of the island") Jellico. Instituted
14th Sturgeon Moon, 416, by Warren Wilson. Organized by John DeBoard,
with 44 charter members. First Prophet, John King, Jr.

_Wahnahton_, No. 215. ("He who charges on the enemy") McCarr.
Instituted 19th Sturgeon Moon, 416, by Henry W. Ray. Organized by J.
R. Elliott, with 31 charter members. First Prophet, J. E. Dean.

_Kearsarge_, No. 216. ("The notched or peaked mountain") Aberdeen.
Instituted 17th Sturgeon Moon, 416. Organized by Geo. W. Rone, with 48
charter members. First Prophet, P. W. Evans.

_Tuscahoma_, No. 217. Charley. Instituted 24th Sturgeon Moon, 416, by
L. E. Bradley. Organized by L. G. Wallis, with 23 charter members.
First Prophet, L. W. Spencer.

_Chicotah_, No. 218. Dekoven. Instituted 31st Sturgeon Moon, 416,
by Porter B. Graham. Organized by David Moskovitz, with 20 charter
members. First Prophet, J. P. Bishop.

_Incas_, No. 219. Fletcher. Instituted 2nd Corn Moon, 416, by J.
R. Smyth. Organized by Chas. Davis with 25 charter members. First
Prophet, John D. Stanberry.

_Petaluma_, No. 220. Lily. Instituted 6th Corn Moon, 416, by Warren
Wilson. Organized by John F. Slusher, with 20 charter members. First
Prophet, E. L. Harmon.

_Samoset_, No. 221. (Name of a chief noted in early New England
history) Majestic. Instituted 7th Corn Moon, 416, by J. P. Young.
Organized by R. B. Parsley, with 54 charter members. First Prophet, T.
K. Lambert.

_Canonicus_, No. 222. (Chief of the Narragansetts.) Gallup. Instituted
29th Corn Moon, 416, by L. E. Bradley. Organized by L. G. Waller, with
20 charter members. First Prophet, J. P. McClure.

_Kennebec_, No. 223. ("Long water") Instituted 27th Corn Moon, 416,
by L. E. Bradley. Organized by L. G. Waller, with 26 charter members.
First Prophet, G. S. Perry.

_Watstika_, No. 224. Marrion. Instituted 17th Traveling Moon, 416, by
Past Great Sachem L. L. Bebout. Organized by David Moskovitz, with 21
charter members. First Prophet, C. E. Weldon.

_Santana_, No. 225. Pikeville. Instituted 15th Beaver Moon, 416, by T.
J. Garner, who also organized the Tribe with 27 charter members. First
Prophet, J. S. Cline.

_Itaska_, No. 226. ("The source"--or "at the female breast") Rumsey.
Instituted 2nd Beaver Moon, 416, by Willie Vernon. Organized by G. W.
Rone, with 28 charter members. First Prophet, C. E. Bandy.

_Monadnock_, No. 227. ("The spirit's place") Slick Rock Creek.
Instituted 19th Beaver Moon, 416, by Thos. J. Garner. Organized by T.
M. Mounts, with 33 charter members. First Prophet Mattison Mounts.

_Ozark_, No. 228. Elkhorn City. Instituted 29th Beaver Moon, 416, by
Thos. J. Garner. Organized by Wm. Maynor, with 23 charter members.
First Prophet, Noah Mullins.

_Tuskaloosa_, No. 229. ("Black warrior") Benton. Instituted 14th
Beaver Moon, 416, by Past Great Sachem L. L. Bebout. Organized by
David Moskovitz, with 16 charter members. First Prophet, Clifton Treas.

_Ioka_, No. 230. ("Beautiful place") South Carrollton. Instituted 25th
Beaver Moon, 416, by Willie Vernon. Organized by Geo. W. Rone, with 25
charter members. First Prophet, J. F. Walcott.

_Ninegret_, No. 231. (Sachem of the Niantiks, sometimes called
"Nenekunat") Elk Lick. Instituted 11th Hunting Moon, 416, by Pat
Kennon. Organized by Ward Woodward, with 28 charter members. First
Prophet, H. N. Wagoner.

_Anawan_, No. 232. (From "awan", meaning "frog"--A Wampanoag chief.)
Big Creek. Instituted 7th Hunting Moon, 416, by Thos. McIlquham.
Organized by Hiram Hensley, with 25 charter members. First Prophet, L.
L. Britton.

_Napanee_, No. 233. Muddy Branch. Instituted 30th Beaver Moon, 416, by
L. E. Bradley. Organized by Manuel Salyer, with 22 charter members.
First Prophet, Ben Curnett.

_Pocasset_, No. 234. ("Where a strait widens out") Uniontown.
Instituted 10th Hunting Moon, 416, by A. C. Foster. Organized by M. M.
Redding, with 40 charter members. First Prophet A. E. Popham.

_Waco_, No. 235. ("A heron") Oneida. Instituted 25th Cold Moon, 417,
by E. W. Hackney. Organized by H. F. Farmer, with 16 charter members.
First Prophet, James Roberts.

_Kokomo_, No. 236. Danleyton. Instituted 25th Cold Moon, 417, by John
G. Riley. Organized by Pyrphus Mead, with 27 charter members. First
Prophet, J. B. Duncan.

_Tonkawa_, No. 237. Sebree. Instituted 24th Cold Moon, 417 by N. I.
Oberdorfer. Organized by David Moskovitz, with 26 charter members.
First Prophet, S. T. Sutton.

_Tecumseh_, No. 238. ("He who walks over water") Tannery. Instituted
25th Snow Moon, 417, by C. C. Irwin. Organized by C. N. Irwin, with 11
charter members. First Prophet, G. A. McCalley.

_Pokonoket_, No. 239. (Name of a Tribe of Algonquin stock in Rhode
Island) Bush. Instituted 15th Snow Moon, 417, by Thos McIlquham.
Organized by Geo. H. Vandeventer, with 25 charter members. First
Prophet, S. W. Brock.

_Erie_, No. 240. ("Wild cat") Fork Ridge. Instituted 8th Snow Moon,
417, by L. E. Cline. Organized by Lee A. Turner. Charter revoked and
surrendered in 417.

_Kiowon_, No. 241. Slaughtersville. Instituted 13th Snow Moon, 417,
by N. I. Oberdorfer. Organized by David Moskovitz, with 21 charter
members. First Prophet, A. A. Kenyon.

_Ramona_, No. 242. Sawyer. Instituted 5th Snow Moon, 417, by Chas.
Davis. Organized by A. C. Henson, with 23 charter members. First
Prophet, G. H. Earles.

_Chicopee_, No. 243. ("Birch bark tree") Bonanza. Instituted 13th Worm
Moon, 417, by L. E. Bradley. Organized by W. B. Hall, First Prophet,
A. B. Collins.

_Washoan_, No. 244. Onton. Instituted 16th Worm Moon, 417, by S. T.
Sutton. Organized by David Moskovitz, with 28 charter members. First
Prophet, E. T. Lewis.

_Horicon_, No. 245. ("The lake of silver water") Morgantown.
Instituted 27th Worm Moon, 417, by Past Great Sachem H. H. Denhardt.
Organized by J. C. Staten, with 35 charter members. First Prophet, W.
T. Howard.

_Alleghan_, No. 246. (The name of the oldest tribe of Indians in the
United States.) Burnwell. Instituted 7th Pant Moon, 417, by John
Young. Organized by R. B. Parsley, with 18 charter members. First
Prophet T. J. McCarty.

_Nokonan_, No. 247. Ashbyburg. Instituted 27th Worm Moon, 417, by S.
T. Sutton. Organized by David Moskovitz, with 20 charter members.
First Prophet, H. D. Hanna.

_Beaver_, No. 248. Allen. Instituted 24th Plant Moon, 417, by L. E.
Bradley. Organized by W. B. Hall, with 26 charter members. First
Prophet, M. L. Jones.

_Kewanee_, No. 249. ("Prairie hen") Greenville. Instituted 14th Plant
Moon, 417, by George Brown. Organized by Elmer McCracken, with 22
charter members. First Prophet, O. L. Roark. Charter revoked in 417.

_Genesee_, No. 250. ("The beautiful valley") Hunnewell. Instituted
17th Plant Moon, 417, by J. B. Duncan. Organized by B. M. Fannin, with
22 charter members.

_Chessapeake_, No. 251. ("The place where there is a great body of
water spread out") Dixon. Instituted 23d Plant Moon, 417, by N. I.
Oberdorfer. Organized by John Burgman, with 25 charter members. First
Prophet, J. A. Goodson.

_Tonikan_, No. 252. Madisonville. Instituted 28th Plant Moon, 417, by
John X. Taylor. Organized by David Moskovitz, with 26 charter members.
First Prophet, Henry Austin.

_Kenaway_, No. 253. ("Whirlpool") Harlan Town. Instituted 25th Plant
Moon, 417, by L. E. Cline. Organized by L. E. Cline, with 31 charter
members. First Prophet, W. J. R. Howard.

_Casco_, No. 254. ("The resting place") Instituted 24th Plant Moon,
417, by Chintz Royalty. Organized by Emmet Royalty, with 20 charter
members. First Prophet, S. D. Taylor.

_Canadawa_, No. 255. ("Running through the hemlocks.") Barnett's
Creek. Instituted 2nd Flower Moon, 417, by L. E. Bradley. Organized by
Manuel Salyer, with 24 charter members. First Prophet, Fred Meader.

_Atabaska_, No. 256. ("Place where there is an amount of high grass
here and there") Cromwell. Instituted and organized by A. C. Yeiser,
with 20 charter members. First Prophet, T. Wade Stratton.

_Waukesha_, No. 257. ("Fox River") Teague. Instituted 8th Flower
Moon, 417, by J. H. Gordon. Organized by Chas. Davis with 18 charter
members. First Prophet, W. M. Bryant.

_Cayuga_, No. 258. ("Long lake") Maplesville. Instituted 9th Flower
Moon, 417, by Thos. McIlquham. Organized by L. R. Oakley, with 25
charter members. First Prophet, L. R. Oakley.

_Dekorra_, No. 259. (Name of a Winnebago chief) Ingram. Instituted 9th
Flower Moon, 417, by Warren Wilson. Organized by W. P. Golden, with 26
charter members. First Prophet, Geo. W. Ingram.

_Catawissa_, No. 260. ("Growing fat") St. Charles. Instituted 21st
Flower Moon, 417, by John X. Taylor. Organized by C. S. Crenshaw, with
22 charter members. First Prophet, R. R. Sweeney.

_Katahdin_, No. 261. ("The highest place" or "chief mountain") Oil
Springs. Instituted 28th Flower Moon, 417, by L. E. Bradley. Organized
by Manuel Salyer, with 21 charter members. First Prophet, J. M.
Literal.

_Estaboga_, No. 262. ("Where people reside") Livingston. Instituted
27th Flower Moon, 417, by L. E. Cline, by whom it was organized with
16 charter members. First Prophet A. E. Reynolds.

_Makon_, No. 263. ("A feather") Mercer. Instituted 19th Hot Moon, 417,
by Willie Vernon. Organized by Geo. W. Rone with 24 charter members.
First Prophet, J. P. Bradley.

_Patoka_, No. 264. (The name by which the "Ponka" Indians designated
themselves) Beech Grove. Instituted 22nd Hot Moon 417, by S. T.
Sutton. Organized by David Moskovitz with 15 charter members. First
Prophet, E. T. Mitchell.

_Escanaba_, No. 265. ("Flat rock") Salyersville. Instituted 16th
Hot Moon, 417, by L. E. Bradley. Organized by Manuel Salyer with 26
charter members. First Prophet G. B. Elam.

_Roanoke_, No. 266. ("Sea shell" or "Wampum") Whitesburg. Instituted
18th Hot Moon, 417, by A. L. Adams. Organized by L. E. Cline, with 28
charter members. First Prophet, Joseph H. Gibson.

_Gowanda_, No. 267. ("A town among the hills by the waterside") Ivy.
Instituted 20th Hot Moon, 417, by Warren Wilson. Organized by W. P.
Golden, with 25 charter members. First Prophet, Marion Evans.

_Rappahannock_, No. 268. ("Where the tide water flows and ebbs")
Benge. Instituted 6th Sturgeon Moon, 417, by W. E. Begley. Organized
by H. F. Farmer, with 19 charter members. First Prophet, P. N. House.

_Equinunk_, No. 269. ("The place where the wearing apparel is
distributed") Denver. Instituted 2nd Buck Moon, 417, by L. E. Bradley.
Organized by Manuel Salyer, with 31 charter members. First Prophet, L.
F. Smith.

_Alabama_, No. 270. ("Here we rest") Hindman. Instituted 30th Hot
Moon, 417, by A. L. Adams. Organized by L. E. Cline with 20 charter
members.

_Tuscumbia_, No. 271. ("Grand Battle ground") Nero. Instituted 11th
Buck Moon, 417, by L. E. Bradley. Organized by Manuel Salyer, with 7
charter members. First Prophet, Jesse Burchmell.

_Swampscott_, No. 272. ("The pleasant water place") Hazzard.
Instituted 18th Buck Moon, 417, by H. F. Farmer. Organized by L. E.
Cline, with 28 charter members. First Prophet, John D. Ward.

_Abanaka_, No. 273. ("The east land") Bark Camp Mills. Instituted 7th
Sturgeon Moon, 417, by S. G. Edwards. Organized by A. C. Henson, with
22 charter members. First Prophet, G. H. Earls.

_Chautauqua_, No. 274. ("A pack tied in the middle") Pearl. Instituted
1st Sturgeon Moon, 417, by S. B. Bryant. Organized by W. P. Golden,
with 26 charter members. First Prophet, L. E. Hatfield.

_Housatonic_, No. 275. ("Stream beyond the mountains") Instituted
31st Buck Moon, 417, by K. P. Elam. Organized by L. E. Cline, with 23
charter members. First Prophet, R. B. Roberts.

_Ekana_, No. 276. ("Earth") Jackson. Instituted 18th Sturgeon Moon,
417, by Frank L. Smith. Organized by Geo. W. Johnson, with 17 charter
members. First Prophet, Wm. Hoskins.

_Menominee_, No. 277. ("The people who eat wild rice") Relief.
Instituted 22nd Sturgeon Moon, 417, by W. C. Hall. Organized by John
Sanders with 27 charter members. First Prophet, B. S. Williams.

_Pocahontas_, No. 278. ("Streamlet between two hills") Welchburg.
Instituted 12th Sturgeon Moon, 417, by Jos. C. Lykins. Organized by L.
E. Cline, with 22 charter members. First Prophet, J. M. Morris.

_Cohasset_, No. 279. ("Place of pines") East Point. Instituted 2nd
Corn Moon, 417, by L. E. Bradley. Organized by Manuel Salyer, with 16
charter members. First Prophet, Webster Greer.

_Weleetka_, No. 281. Bryant's Store. Instituted 11th Corn Moon, 417,
by Chas. Davis. Organized by James Henson, with 19 charter members.
First Prophet, Noah Lee.

_Winnipe_, No. 282. ("A Place of dirty waters") Brooklyn. Instituted
10th Corn Moon, 417, by P. W. Evans. Organized by Robert Neel with 22
charter members. First Prophet Adam R. Fleenor.

_Jamaica_, No. 283. ("A country abounding in springs") Caneyville.
Instituted 26th Traveling Moon, 417, by N. T. Howard. Organized by R.
A. Bostic with 22 charter members. First Prophet M. A. Taylor.

_Wewoka_, No. 285. ("Barking water") Barlow. Instituted 12th Beaver
Moon, 417, by L. L. Bebout. Organized by David Moskovitz with 18
charter members. First Prophet, J. S. Johnson.

_Onaway_, No. 286. ("Although") Kenwood. Instituted 20th Beaver Moon,
417, by Jos. C. Lykins. Organized by L. F. Smith, with 23 charter
members. First Prophet, D. M. Willimas.

_Atoka_, No. 287. ("In another place") Middlecreek. Instituted 4th
Hunting Moon, 417, by Sherman Rice. Organized by Willie Hall, with 21
charter members. First Prophet, Willie Hall.

_Tuskegee_, No. 288. (from "Taskialgi," signifying "Warrior")
LaCenter. Instituted 2nd Hunting Moon, 417, by D. A. Cross. Organized
by David Moskovitz with 16 charter members. First Prophet, John M.
Moore.




CHAPTER IX.

Roster of the Old Great Council of Kentucky.


=1852-1880.=

Chickasaw Tribe, No. 1, instituted 29th Hot Moon, G. S. 5612, (June
29, 1852), at Newport.

Black Hawk Tribe, No. 2, instituted G. S. 5612, (1852), at Covington.

Pocahontas, Tribe, No. 3, instituted G. S. 5613, (1853), at Newport.

Kentucky Tribe, No. 4, instituted G. S. 5614, (1854) at Louisville.

Choctaw, Tribe, No. 5. instituted G. S. 5615, (1855) at Alexandria.

Tecumseh Tribe, No. 6, instituted G. S. 5615, (1855) at Louisville.
Deserted to the Independent Order in 1870.

Delaware Tribe, No. 7, instituted 2nd Traveling Moon, G. S. 5617,
(1857) at Louisville. Deserted to the Independent Order in 1870.

Osceola Tribe, No. 8, instituted 29th Sturgeon Moon, G. S. D. 375,
(1866) at Lexington. Surrendered its Charter in 1874.

Seneca Tribe, No. 9, instituted 25th Traveling Moon, G. S. D. 375,
(1866) at Louisville. Surrendered its charter in 1873.

Minnehaha Tribe, No. 10, instituted 19th Flower Moon, G. S. D. 377,
(1868) at Newport.

Oswego Tribe, No. 11, instituted 12th Traveling Moon, G. S. D. 377,
(1868) at Bowling Green.

Metamora Tribe, No. 12, instituted 19th Cold Moon, G. S. D. 378,
(1869) at Hopkinsville.

Hiawatha Tribe, No. 13, instituted 12th Sturgeon Moon, G. S. D. 378,
(1869) at Hopkinsville.

Cherokee Tribe, No. 14, instituted 8th Hot Moon, G. S. D. 379, (1870),
at Paris.

Minneola, Tribe, No. 15, instituted 6th Hot Moon, G. S. D. 380, (1871)
at Murray or Kings Lodge.

Wyandotte Tribe, No. 16, instituted 10th Sturgeon Moon, G. S. D. 380,
(1871), at Maysville. Surrendered its charter July 8th, 1875.

Miami Tribe, No. 17, instituted 25th Buck Moon, G. S. D. 385, (1876)
at Newport. This Tribe was the result of the consolidation of
Pocahontas Tribe, No. 3 and Minnehaha Tribe, No. 10, and is still
working. It is the only connecting link between the old Great Council
and the present.

Shawnee Tribe, No. 18, at Winchester.

Osceola Tribe, No. 19, instituted 26th Buck Moon, G. S. D., 399,
(1880), at Ashland, with 15 charter members by Harry C. McKey, Great
Sachem of the Great Council of Ohio. This Tribe was never a member of
the Old Great Council.

Mohawk Tribe, No. 20, at Louisville.




CHAPTER X.

=ROSTER OF THE MEMBERS OF THE GREAT COUNCIL OF KENTUCKY.=


1854-1884.

The figures before the name indicate the date of admission, and
figures following, the number of the tribe to which the Past Sachem
belonged at that time.

  1870  Akermann, John, 3.
  1854  Allen, G. D., 1.
  1869  Altmann, A., 9.
  1855  Amann, Chas., 3.
  1857  Amann, Daniel, 3.
  1855  Amann, John, 3.
  1858  Amlmann, John, 3.
  1857  Andrews, H. O., 2.
  1867  Baas, Fred, 3.
  1855  Badgeley, S. I. B., 4.
  1871  Bamberger, L. S., 12.
  1856  Bardsley, J., 4.
  1854  Barlow, J. H., 1.
  1870  Beak, Alfred, 2.
  1872  Beaman, W. H., 13.
  1869  Beck, G., 7.
  1858  Berdue, Henry, 2.
  1865  Betz, Mathes, 3.
  1856  Bijur, Martin, 4.
  1875  Biltz, E., 10.
  1870  Bismark, Frederick, 3.
  1868  Bloomingfield, Geo. B., 4.
  1858  Boeger, John, 3.
  1866  Boehiem, G., 6.
  1858  Bolvn, Henry, 6.
  1861  Booth, Thos., 2.
  1858  Bornstraeger, Martin, 7.
  1859  Borshall, Wm., 4.
  1863  Bowen, Lewis, 2.
  1869  Bradford, Wm. W., 4.
  1859  Brank, Geo., 3.
  1869  Braun, Fred, 9.
  1859  Brenner, Henry, 6.
  1864  Brigmann, W., 4.
  1856  Britte, Henry, 3.
  1869  Bronk, John, 6.
  1867  Brown, Fred, 9.
  1855  Brown, John, 5.
  1860  Bruch, George, 3.
  1859  Buckland, Chas.
  1883  Buerger, Wm., 17.
  1858  Burckhardt, Chas., 6.
  1871  Burris, J. L., 13.
  1856  Butcher, John, 3.
  1856  Casey, L. E.
  1883  Christman, G., 17.
  1868  Chrystal, James, 8.
  1860  Clark, James, 2.
  1862  Clark, W. T., 2.
  1854  Coffin, D. H. B., 1.
  1870  Colb, Conrad, 7.
  1872  Conn, C. H., 10.
  1870  Covert, James, 10.
  1871  Danaher, Thos. J., 12.
  1856  Davies, John B., 6.
  1873  Davis, Thos. A., 16.
  1860  Dearnhoefer, Geo. C., 7.
  1870  Deckel, M., 7.
        Denhard, H.
  1873  DeMalmedy, C. B., 2.
  1875  Dempf, G. A., 4.
  1875  Dempf, W. A., 4.
  1855  Duckworth, Thos., 1.
  1857  Dunn, Martin, 1.
  1858  Dummermichael, J. A., 3.
  1859  Dutsch, Wm., 7.
  1857  Elsey, R. W., 4.
        Emig, John B.
  1862  Euler, Conrad, 4.
        Faass, Louis.
  1871  Farley, Wm., 8.
  1861  Fauss, Jacob, 3.
  1865  Faust, Jacob, 3.
  1866  Felsenthall, M., 4.
  1872  Fiehn, F., 9.
  1860  Fishe, Fred, 6.
  1874  Follett, J. F., 10.
  1854  Ford, Geo. W., 1.
  1854  Francis, A. J., 2.
  1865  Frier, Louis, 3.
        Frische, F.
  1866  Froehlick, M., 7.
  1859  Fry, Geo. J., 4.
        Funamichael, John A.
  1869  Gardner, V. N., 8.
  1862  Gelhaar, F., 7.
  1864  Gerlach, Gelhart G., 7.
  1872  Gideon, L., 4.
  1855  Gideon, Thos. W., 1.
  1879  Glick, J., 17.
  1872  Glore, C. O., 13.
  1867  Glore, Wm. H., 2.
  1875  Grapes, W., 3.
  1872  Grav, S. F., 8.
  1860  Grav, Stephen J., 4.
  1873  Grau, Michael, 3.
  1874  Greenwood, A. B., 16.
  1870  Griffith, J. L., 12.
  1883  Gross, A., 17.
  1857  Gross, Chas., 6.
  1857  Grubel, Albert, 3.
  1870  Gruneisen, Sebastian,
  1863  Gutjahr, N., 6.
  1873  Guy, G. Y., 10.
  1855  Hamilton, James, 4.
  1869  Hanlein, Frank, 6.
  1855  Harig, A. C., 6.
  1870  Hart, M. M., 11.
  1854  Harvey, Jonathan,
  1868  Haupt, Christ, 7.
  1865  Hansner, Henry, 3.
        Havelin, 2.
  1874  Hays, Thos., 10.
  1860  Hebel, Chas., 6.
  1861  Hisch, George, 3.
  1855  Heltimus, John B., 2.
  1878  Heppner, Wm., 3.
  1869  Heser, F., 7.
  1875  Hetch, J. J., 3.
  1857  Higbee, S., 2.
        Higby, James.
  1871  Hillburn, J. J., 11.
  1859  Hisp, A. B.
  1870  Hoagland, Julien, 8.
  1878  Hoffman, Geo. C., 17.
  1868  Hornsey, T. A., 8.
  1858  Howlin, Joseph, 2.
  1856  Hughes, John, 4.
  1858  Huzza, Robert H., 4.
  1866  Illig, F., 7.
  1856  Irving, J. B., 6.
  1858  Jackson, J. P., 1.
  1870  Jacobs, George, 3.
  1866  Jacobs, Ph., 7.
        Jansinger, G.
  1874  January, Horace, 16.
  1868  Jones, T. J., 4.
  1874  Kastle, Chas., 8.
  1862  Kaufman, John, 6.
  1873  Keister, Henry, 11.
  1854  Kemper, P. A. C., 1.
  1861  Kempler, Henry, 2.
  1857  Keyt, John C., 4.
  1868  King, D. A., 8.
  1870  Kinnaird, J. F., 11.
  1856  Kiteley, Gregory B., 4.
  1868  Kline, Herman, 9.
  1862  Knapp, A., 7.
  1871  Knorr, George, 2.
  1869  Kolb, C., 6.
  1857  Koch, Conrad, 6.
  1860  Kramm, Conrad, 6.
  1867  Kraus, Wm.
  1878  Lamb, John, 10.
  1866  Landsrath, H. J., 7.
  1865  Lang, John, 3.
  1869  Landsinger, Gustave, 6.
  1862  Lasch, Thos., 7.
  1873  Lee, I., 13.
  1858  Lehman, Joseph, 2.
  1871  Lenhard, 9.
  1858  Leonhardt, Philip, 6.
  1868  Lezinsky, Jacob, 9.
  1860  Lieber, Isaac, 6.
  1875  Luckert, I., 3.
  1859  McCracken, R. B., 3.
  1855  McDormant, Thos., 5.
  1857  McNeal, John, 4.
  1860  McNickell, Thos., 4.
  1855  Magerhaus, A. F., 3.
  1860  Maritz, George, 7.
  1871  Marsh, E. F., 8.
  1879  Marsh, W., 10.
  1867  Martin, Alfred, 2.
  1869  Mayflower, S. C., 9.
  1868  Maryland, Joseph, 2.
  1875  Massman, A., 2.
  1870  Mathews, A., 2.
  1877  Maunder, Chas., 10.
  1878  Maunder, Wm., 10.
  1873  Megerle, Chris, 3.
  1859  Merkel, Martin, 6.
  1857  Merkley, Edmund, 7.
  1859  Methina, Lewis, 2.
  1874  Meyers, E. H., 10.
  1875  Mirsbury, O. H. S., 13.
  1865  Moeller, Chas., 6.
  1866  Moeller, Christ., 6.
  1869  Moore, Thamson, 10.
  1879  Most, F., 3.
  1872  Mottley, E., 11.
  1855  Mounder, J. F., 1.
  1854  Murdock, C. J., 1.
  1880  Must, Fred, 3.
  1861  Nanz, Henry, 7.
  1865  New, Adolph, 3.
  1867  Niles, Wm. C., 2.
  1875  Noe, H. B., 13.
  1870  Nolloth, Wm., 2.
  1860  Normann, John, 7.
  1856  Ostenmeyer, 3.
  1854  Ostler, Wm., 1.
  1857  Painter, Jas. M., 1.
  1855  Painter, Samuel, 1.
  1855  Parker, J., 5.
  1856  Patten, W. H., 2.
  1858  Penny, W. F., 2.
  1854  Penny, Wm. H., 5.
  1855  Penny, R., 2.
  1866  Pfeiffer, Chas., 4.
  1874  Phister, J. P., 16.
  1873  Pierce, A., 13.
  1873  Porter, D. J., 10.
  1875  Puff, A., 3.
  1870  Pyle, Alexander, 11.
  1875  McQuierry, A. S., 13.
  1875  Reed, John, 10.
        Reese, A.
  1854  Reese, Elias, 2.
  1869  Reese, Geo. W., 10.
  1870  Reese, Thos., 2.
  1869  Rehm, H., 7.
  1869  Ried, J. N., 8.
  1859  Reinshaw, 7.
  1862  Reitz, Phil., 6.
  1858  Remme, B. H. D., 1.
  1858  Rice, Glancey, 2.
  1874  Ritte, Henry, 3.
  1859  Robinson, G. C.
  1859  Robinson, J., 4.
  1858  Rohrhuber, Christopher, 3.
  1879  Roth, John, 17.
  1860  Rothschield, G., 7.
  1869  Rothweiler, C., 7.
  1867  Rude, Wm., 2.
  1855  Ruhl, Peter, 6.
  1860  Sanders, W. H., 4.
  1870  Sauer, Anton, 6.
  1869  Schell, Samuel F., 10.
  1857  Schenk, Jacob, 7.
  1858  Schenk, W., 6.
  1861  Schmidt, Chas., 6.
  1862  Schmidt, Chris.
  1854  Schmidt, Geo. W., 3.
  1857  Schneider, Andrew, 7.
  1858  Schneider, Christopher, 4.
  1872  Schneider, D., 3.
  1861  Schneider, George, 3.
  1863  Schoenfield, B., 4.
  1879  Schorle, F., 3.
  1872  Schroder, John, 4.
  1855  Schultz, Chas., 3.
  1875  Seinsheimer, O., 3.
  1873  Shields, V. T., 13.
  1875  Shippman, G. W., 10.
  1854  Shinkle, Uriah, 2.
  1854  Shinkle, Vincent, 2.
  1858  Shoemaker, G. E., 1.
        Siegel, F. S.
  1875  Smidt, C., 2.
  1865  Smith, Charles, A., 4.
  1856  Smith, William, 6.
  1870  Spaeth, Samuel, 3.
  1855  Spillman, Frank, 5.
  1867  Spitznagel, Anton, 3.
  1860  Springer, John, 6.
  1860  Stacey, Henry, 2.
  1870  Stahel, Jacob, 8.
  1877  Staunder, J. W., 17.
  1865  Steinhauer, John, 3.
  1883  Stepp, C., 10.
  1870  Stone, W. G., 13.
  1860  Strube, Bernhard, 7.
  1880  Suitzer, C., 10.
  1860  Sutton, Isaac, 2.
  1856  Thompson, D. L., 1.
  1870  Thompson, Edmond, 10.
  1855  Todd, John, 2.
  1865  Trommer, Chas., 3.
  1857  Turner, W. D., 4.
  1858  Tuttle, Alex., 1.
  1857  Tyrack, Jas. N., 2.
  1877  Vickery, J., 10.
  1855  Vight, Christian, 3.
  1871  Vogel, J., 11.
  1869  Vohringer, 7.
  1868  Watkins, B. P., 8.
  1873  Watherman, 2.
  1873  Weaver, John, 2.
  1858  Weidler, Benj. B., 2.
  1860  Weiger, Joseph, 3.
  1878  Wendworth, Val., 17.
  1856  Williamson, John A., 1.
  1860  Willing, Geo., 2.
  1861  Wolfhardt, John, 3.
  1871  Wood, A., 11.
  1872  Wood, O. S., 8.
  1859  Young, Reinhard.
  1855  Zimmer, M., 6.
  1875  Zuber, A., 3.
  1861  Zuefle, David, 6.




ROSTER OF THE MEMBERS OF THE GREAT COUNCIL OF KENTUCKY

1895-1908


The figures before the name indicate the date of admission, and the
figures following, the number of the Tribe to which the Past Sachem
belonged at that time.

* Before a name indicates the Past Sachem is deceased.

** Before a name indicates Past Sachem is no longer in the Order.

*** Before A name indicates the Past Sachem is now affiliated with some
other Tribe, but not in Kentucky.

  1897      Abbott, W. T., 6.
  1903      Adams, A. L., 32.
  1903      Adams, Geo. R., 69.
  1901    **Adams, J. B., 48.
  1903      Adams, John H., 83.
  1904    **Adams, Lawrence, 69.
  1908      Adcock, Orvill, 106.
  1904      Ahl, Wm., 38.
  1901    **Ammer, John N., 21.
  1906      Allen, A. S., 81.
  1907      Allen, J. Embry. 1.
  1906      Anderson, T. T., 106.
  1895     *Armstrong, John, 1.
  1901      Arnett, R. F., 1.
  1906      Arnold, Stanley, 18.
  1904      Ash, David, 5.
  1908      Asher, W. M., 82,
  1907      Aswerus, Leo, 37.
  1902      Auckerman, J. B., 19.
  1905      Ayler, J. A., 105.
  1903      Baader, Val. J., 17.
  1908      Baader, Wm. F., 17.
  1906      Back, W. O., 126.
  1907      Bailey, H. W., 118.
  1905    **Bailey, J. R., 123.
  1902      Bailey, L. E., 11.
  1907      Baker, Harlan, 64.
  1905      Baker, K. D., 64.
  1907      Ball, Cleveland, 87.
  1906      Ball, Jacob, Jr., 87.
  1898      Ballard, Ed., 19.
  1905      Bane, G. H., 96.
  1897      Bandle, Geo. H., 6.
  1908      Bandy, C. E., 226.
  1902      Barkhaus, Win. P., 14.
  1904    **Barnes, Leonard, 103.
  1902      Barnes, W. K., 38.
  1902    **Barnhill, J. E., 72.
  1903      Barton, Chas., 79.
  1908      Bartholomew, Robt., 70.
  1908      Bastin, W. J., 77.
  1901    **Bateman, C. H., 50.
  1906      Bauer, Albert W., 25.
  1905      Bauer, Wm., 5.
  1902    **Baughman, J. O., 48.
  1905      Baxter, L. J., 32.
  1904      Baxter, W. S.,32.
  1902      Beard, S. R., 14.
  1902      Bebout, Lewis L., 60.
  1906      Becher, W. M., 8.
  1902      Bedford, S. W., 14.
  1907      Bell, G. W., 140.
  1903      Bell. T. H., 94.
  1901      Benedict, J. W., 19.
  1898      Bennett, E. E., 11.
  1901      Bent, Chas. R., 12.
  1907      Bergin, Wm., 69.
  1898      Bierbaum, B. W., 9.
  1896      Bierle, P. G., 8.
  1906      Bierley, Jos., 25.
  1902      Bierman, Nathan, 7.
  1905      Bilyen, Calvin, 106.
  1900    **Bishop, Ed., 30.
  1908      Bishop, J. P., 218.
  1901      Bishop, Lee, 38.
  1907      Biven, B. R., 97.
  1906      Black, John, 18.
  1903      Blades, H. S., 78.
  1908      Blaine, A. D., 37.
  1906      Blitz, Sam S., 99.
  1899      Boardman, J. C., 9.
  1899      Bohmer, H. W., 9.
  1906      Boone, J. A., 2.
  1902      Booth, J. E., 28.
  1908      Booth, S. E., 124.
  1900      Bornwasser, Chas. W., 5.
  1908      Bowling, W. M., 164.
  1906      Bradley, L. E., 138.
  1901     Bradley, S. J., 2.
  1906     Brainerd, Wm., 148.
  1900     Bramlett, E. L., 18.
  1908     Branhauer, Wm., 114.
  1908     Braun, E. B., 175.
  1901   **Breeding, D. R., 50.
  1899    *Brehme, A. M., 7.
  1903     Bridgeford, W. B., 67.
  1905     Bridgeford, W. H., 67.
  1905   **Briggs, Guy H., 67.
  1902     Brodie, Jas. G., 38.
  1903   **Broomhall, A. R., 65.
  1897     Bromley, Frank H., 3.
  1902   **Brooks, R. N., 21.
  1902     Brooks, Sol J., 8.
  1907     Brown, Geo., 70.
  1907   **Brown, Jas. M., 170.
  1907     Brown, R. L., 172.
  1907     Brownfield, J. A., 184.
  1898   **Brunner, J. H., 18.
  1906     Bryant, A. F., 115.
  1907     Bryant, S. B., 174.
  1904     Buck, W. E., 60.
  1907     Buckman, J. R., 163.
  1896     Buerger, Richard, 17.
  1908     Bullock, E. H., 189.
  1908     Burch, W. D., 8.
  1902     Burkenberger, Joe., 14.
  1904     Burwinkle, W., 42.
  1903     Buschemeyer, J. H. 8.
  1908     Calhoun, W. C., 227.
  1905     Campbell, Geo., 19.
  1906   **Campbell, J. H., 104.
  1902     Carrico, C. C., 69.
  1908     Cart, Wm., 56.
  1903     Case, McAtee, 3.
  1902     Case, O. H., 6.
  1897     Cassida, Thos. F., 19.
  1907     Chamberlain, W. D., 111.
  1904   **Chambers, R. O., 100.
  1903     Chandler, B. B., 19.
  1908     Chapman, Geo. F., 190.
  1901     Chase, H. S., 28.
  1897     Chasteen, C. M., 4.
  1898     Chiles, R. A., 18.
  1901     Chowning, M. L., 59.
  1905     Chowning, R. W., 56.
  1907     Clark, Ben., 32.
  1905     Clark, C. W. S., 114.
  1906     Clark, D. W., 111.
  1906     Clark, G. Garner, 99.
  1907     Clark, Wm., 179.
  1908     Claxon, G. B., 79.
  1908     Clements, A. W., 211.
  1906     Clere, R. D., 84.
  1900     Clifford, John M., 15.
  1908     Cline, L. E., 149.
  1901     Clutts, Frank, 32.
  1907     Cochran, Thos. E., 163.
  1906     Coffman, R. D., 77.
  1902     Coghill, James, 69.
  1897     Cohn, Herman V., 8.
  1903     Cole, Edw., 5.
  1903     Coleman, W. E., 78.
  1905     Collett, J. S., 89.
  1908     Colvin, John, 128.
  1903     Colvin, Thos. L., 32.
  1904     Conner, W. B., 102.
  1908     Conyers, D. V., 37.
  1907     Cornell, Robt., 70.
  1906     Corum, J. L., 108.
  1908     Coulter, Wallace, 8.
  1901     Crader, W. A., 8.
  1900   **Cramer, W. S., 1.
  1908     Cranor, Felix, 205.
  1900   **Craycroft, R. C., 24.
  1906     Crockett, T. Miter, 67.
  1906     Cross, D. A., 60.
  1907     Crossfield, J. L., 59.
  1908     Crowder, Wm., 25.
  1907     Crowe, Robt. T., 33.
  1905     Crowley, M. A., 1.
  1903   **Crumbaugh, F. S., 77.
  1895     Crumbaugh, J. W., 6.
  1892     Cull, E. H., 92.
  1905     Cull, Harrison, 92.
  1908     Dahlenberg, H. F., 184.
  1898     Daniel, H. A., 1.
  1908     Daubs, E. A., 33.
  1906     Davis, Chas., 111.
  1900     Davis, H. F., 15.
  1908     Davis, L. M., 212.
  1901     Davis, Thos. A., 3.
  1900     David, Ed. L., 5.
  1895   **Davidson, J. H., 4.
  1906     Dean, E. E., 10.
  1908     Dean, W. H., 108.
  1908     Deeter, Roy, 73.
  1907     DeHart, J. W., 167.
  1896     Dehler, Geo. J., 8.
  1905     Dehoney, W. S., 67.
  1907     Delaney, J. W., 99.
  1907     Demaree, J. A., 115.
  1906     Dempsey, John, 137.
  1899     Denhart, H. H., 11.
  1906     DeTemple, Mat, 7.
  1897     Deupree, W. S., 1.
  1903     Doll, P. P., 8.
  1901     Domeck, A. J., 16.
  1899    *Dorr, Samuel, S., 11.
  1908     Downey, Clarence, 196.
  1907     Downing, W. A., 3.
  1907     Downs, Martin L., 69.
  1895     Diederich, W. C., 19.
  1901     Dillon, W. B., 36.
  1908     Ditsch, Edw. J., 70.
  1908     Duncan, L. O., 56.
  1905     Dundon, Jas. H., 14.
  1908     Durham, E. D., 172.
  1907     Earls, Ben B., 19.
  1908     Earls, G. H., 242.
  1895   **Eason, R., 1.
  1897     Eason, W. B., 1.
  1908     Eckel, Adam, 17.
  1900     Edinger, F., 25.
  1906     Elam, J. G., 116.
  1907     Elkins, J. W., 138.
  1899     Ellerkamp, G. A., 9.
  1908     Ellingsworth, E. B., 10.
  1907     Elzey, Ed., 10.
  1907     England, L. C., 128.
  1908     Engleman, H. A., 90.
  1905     Englehard, A., Jr. 8.
  1908     Eiglebach, Mark, 102.
  1905     Ernst, Carl J., 45.
  1908     Estep, Jesse, 233.
  1908     Etheridge, L. O., 99.
  1908     Evans, P. W., 216.
  1899     Evans, W. M., 9.
  1903    *Fahrenberg, A. C., 10.
  1902     Falk, Geo., 7.
  1908     Farley, Bertram, 197.
  1895   **Farnsworth, P. T., 1.
  1907     Fath, Jos., 80.
  1900   **Faulkner, Chas., 26.
  1907   **Faulkner, Morton, 125.
  1896     Feagan, N., 6.
  1901     Fegenbush, W. F., 42.
  1907     Ferguson, Geo. T., 8.
  1908     Fichter, Chas., 6.
  1898   **Finnigan, J. J., 4.
  1907     Fisher, I. D., 10.
  1907     Fisher, W. J., 186.
  1907     Fitch, Jas. A., 84.
  1895  ***Fite, W. E., 186.
  1908     Fitzgerald, J. M., 33.
  1900   **Flaig, R., 26.
  1903     Flaugher, F. B., 45.
  1904     Foley, M. J., 7.
  1908     Frankmann, S., 6.
  1900   **Freeman, V., 26.
  1901     Frederick, Emil, 18.
  1906     Frehling, Sam., 22.
  1902     Freundlich, J. J., 60.
  1904     Frevert, F. W., 25.
  1908     Frost, Jas. L., 154.
  1905     Faulkner, S. A., 73.
  1901     Garr, J. Robin, 7.
  1907     Garner, Thos. J., 164.
  1900    *Gast, Joe, 18.
  1897   **Gay, Wat M., 18.
  1904     Geisler, John, 82.
  1896     Gensler, Conrad, 19.
  1895   **German, A. F., 7.
  1906     Gill, John T., 102.
  1908     Goetz, Chas., 17.
  1908     Goldstein, H. L., 22.
  1895     Gordon, Geo. F., 41.
  1907     Gordon, Wm. B., 67.
  1901     Gould, Fred A., 10.
  1904     Gould, W. C., 7.
  1896     Grau, Michael, 17.
  1902     Graves, W. L., 11.
  1907     Gray, Arthur, 73.
  1896     Gray, Thos. M., 6.
  1907     Greene, John M., 82.
  1907     Green, W. H., 11.
  1897   **Griffith, A., 1.
  1899     Griffith, G. W., 11.
  1908     Grimes, Dan., 105.
  1900     Grissom, S. B., 11.
  1902     Gross, Jacob, 5.
  1900     Grubbs, W. E., 28.
  1900     Gruber, J. L., 15.
  1901   **Grundy, H. M., 24.
  1908     Guinn, J. F., 199.
  1904     Gundolf, Henry F., 16.
  1907     Hackney, E. W., 166.
  1905     Hadfield, Harry H., 99.
  1897     Hafendorfer, John, 14.
  1908     Haffler, John C., 33.
  1907     Hainline, Virgil M., 18.
  1908     Hall, C. B., 82.
  1907     Hall, W. C., 142.
  1896     Hamilton, W. E., 6.
  1907     Hammonds, C. O., 134.
  1903     Hancock, Frank, 71.
  1906     Hancock, Lee, 1.
  1899   **Harbinson, M. M., 7.
  1900     Harding, C. P., 5.
  1908     Hardy, Chas., 5.
  1907     Harlan, C. M., 28.
  1905     Harper, John, 18.
  1907     Harper, J. M., 166.
  1903     Harris, Chas. M., 56.
  1902   **Harris, J. E., 26.
  1900   **Harrison, W. M., 20.
  1904     Hartman, Frank, 5.
  1907     Hattic, Geo., 80.
  1906   **Hauchins, J. H., 100.
  1903     Haucke, Geo. M., 3.
  1897     Haucke, Lee, 3.
  1903     Hansen, C. N., 85.
  1897     Hawes, Frank, W., 6.
  1907     Hawes, Ollie, 182.
  1898   **Hawes, Thos., 21.
  1903   **Hawes, W. H., 21.
  1900   **Hayes, E. L., 26.
  1896     Hazelrigg, C. A., 147.
  1901     Heart, Wm., 19.
  1907     Hembree, Jas. C., 108.
  1904     Hendrickson, E. L., 97.
  1899     Hero, J. C., 8.
  1902     Herrel, L. E., 54.
  1899    *Hespen, Fred, 11.
  1900     Hess, Chas. A., 10.
  1902     Hewes, G. M., 8.
  1901     Higgins, W. F., 2.
  1898     Hinesley, Geo, W., 8.
  1906     Hoefflin, Chas. A., 80.
  1908     Hoffman, Frank J., 70.
  1906     Hoffmann, L., 102.
  1908     Holbrook, N. F., 132.
  1906   **Hollan, W. J., 139.
  1895     Hollar, J. W., 2.
  1905     Hollis, Harry F., 5.
  1907     Hollis, Wm. J., 5.
  1906     Hollman, Chas, A., 92.
  1901     Holstner, J. M., 63.
  1907     Holton, G. A., 37.
  1900     Hommel, J. B., 1.
  1904     Hopkins, W. B., 7.
  1903     Hooper, R. W., 73.
  1902     Horn, C. E., 19.
  1895    *Hornsey, T. A., 1.
  1897     Horrocks, C. E., 19.
  1908     Horsefield, Geo., 182.
  1897     Horstman, F. J., 19.
  1908     Hoskins, Geo., 82.
  1908     Howard, E., 89.
  1907     Howard, Elijah G., 89.
  1906     Howard, Jas. E., 89.
  1906     Howard, J. G., 82.
  1908     Howard, N. T., 245.
  1905   **Howard, W. H., 100.
  1907     Howard, W. J., 10.
  1907     Hubbard, G. B., 157.
  1905   **Hudson, Wm., 46.
  1908     Huff, A. T., 223.
  1902     Hugger, C. H., 14.
  1908     Hunt, Geo., 5.
  1903     Hunter, David, 87.
  1908     Hunter, Geo. W., 73.
  1907     Hunter, R. S., 11.
  1904     Hunter, S. C., 73.
  1907     Hurst, Hohn H., 111.
  1902     Ingram, A. R., 33.
  1906     Ingram, Geo. O., 60.
  1908     Irwin, Cecil C., 97.
  1906     Irwin, C. H., 97.
  1908     Isaacs, Jacob, 8.
  1907     Jackson, C. W., 97.
  1903     Jacobs, F. W., 10.
  1898     Jarboe, J. W., 10.
  1904     Jennings, I. M., 106.
  1905     Jett, Garrett, 94.
  1906     Jett, Lovell, 94.
  1908     Jeunesse, Jas. F., 10.
  1908     Jobe, Harvey, Jr., 177.
  1907     Johnson, C. C., 144.
  1903     Johnson, Frank, 17.
  1908     Johnson, G. W., 118.
  1902     Johnson, Hugh, 81.
  1907     Johnson, Jesse, 114.
  1906     Johnanneman, H. B., 70.
  1906     Jones, C. W., 138.
  1900  ***Jones, F. W., 14.
  1904     Jones, H. W., 54.
  1908     Jones, M. L., 248.
  1895    *Jones, R. W., 2.
  1908     Jones, W. F., 32.
  1903     Jones, Willie T., 87.
  1903     Jordan, Howard, 86.
  1908     Jordan, M. F., 148.
  1903     Judd, Harry A., 19.
  1903     Kaufman, D. Z., 22.
  1905     Kelly, A. E., 86.
  1906     Kelly, Archiles, 141.
  1908     Kemmis, J. H., 184.
  1902     Kemper, J. H., 18.
  1906     Kennon, Pat., 128.
  1908     Kentrup, Harry, 184.
  1908     Kenyon, A. A., 241.
  1908     Kerby, Frank, 68.
  1902     Kiefer, Frank J., 25.
  1905     King, Jas. F., 82.
  1895     King, Oscar R., 1.
  1908     Klein, A. J., 70.
  1904     Klein, N., 22.
  1899     Knocke, S. O., 7.
  1906     Knoblock, Wm., 99.
  1898     Knoedler, W. G., 6.
  1906     Knox, M. L., 103.
  1908     Kohl, Harry C., 203.
  1906     Koster, Wm. F., 8.
  1908     Kouns, W. H., 19.
  1897     Kramer, F. J., 19.
  1904     Kraus, Nick, 16.
  1900   **Krauth, Geo. W., 31.
  1907     Kremer, Eugene H., 99.
  1904     Kunk, A. B., 76.
  1906     Lancaster, J. J., 124.
  1906     Lancaster, J. S., 77.
  1901   **Lancaster, M. P., 56.
  1896     Lang, Chas. A., 8.
  1905   **Lang, Wayne, 121.
  1907     Langston, J. C., 1.
  1901   **Latham, A. P., 52.
  1896   **Leaming, F. C., 1.
  1906     Leatherman, C. E., 8.
  1899     Leatherman, W. B., 7.
           Lee, Forsee D., 71.
  1903     Leeman, T. M., 3.
  1902     Leingang, Jas. M., 14.
  1907     Leonhardt, A. H., 8.
  1899     Leopold, L. S., 8.
  1903     Levin, M. L., 22.
  1908     Levitan, M., 22.
  1908     Levy, Alfred, 22.
  1902     Levy, Lee, 14.
  1908     Lewis, E. T., 244.
  1905     Ligon, Andy, 87.
  1907     Litteral, C. J., 166.
  1908   **Lochry, F. A., 202.
  1903     Logan, Geo. F., 7.
  1905     Lohrisch, E. G., 76.
  1902     Long, Thomas C., 57.
  1902     Lots, Fred, 16.
  1898     Lozier, H. B., 19.
  1907     Lucas, Maury E., 98.
  1908     Luke, Geo. Jr., 159.
  1907     Luke, Thos. H., 159.
  1898     Lundburg, H., 2.
  1887     Lusby, W. J., 87.
  1903     Lusk, A. J., 84.
  1907     Luster, Henry, 152.
  1897     Lyddane, C. E., 2.
  1907     Lykins, A. D., 113.
  1906     Lykins, Curtis B., 113.
  1905     Lykins, Jos. C., 113.
  1906     Lykins, Malone, 118.
  1905     Lyne, John A., 112.
  1908     Lyons, Henry, 166.
  1903     McAnley, Chas., 64.
  1900   **McCabe, J. J., 24.
  1907     McCall, W. M., 8.
  1906     McCann, T., 8.
  1908     McCarty, Chas., 45.
  1908     McClure, J. P., 222.
  1907     McClure, M. E., 37.
  1901     McCorkle, M. H., 43.
  1895  ***McConnell, J. R., 1.
  1906     McCormick, Hugh, 86.
  1902   **McCoy, Porter, 4.
  1905     McDonald, W. H., 111.
  1901     McFarlan, H. J., 33.
  1907     McGuire, J. K., 136.
  1906     McIlquham, Thos., 32.
  1907     McIlvain, W. W., 3.
  1896     McKibben, J. W., 6.
  1908     McMichael, J. B., 18.
  1908     McNally, G. A., 238.
  1908     McNamare, J. W., 209.
  1906     McNeill, J. O., 132.
  1898   **McNutt, W. A. B., 21.
  1898     Maddox, C. C., 73.
  1902    *Madden, M. J., 5.
  1907     Maher, W. P., 1.
  1899     Malone, Chester A., 8.
  1906     Malott, Benj. F., 8.
  1908     Mann, N. B., 136.
  1902     Marcus, Sam, 8.
  1903     Markley, I. L., 45.
  1907     Marks, A., 22.
  1900  ***Marks, Julius, 1.
  1899     Marshall, W. S., 8.
  1902     Martin, Jas. F., 3.
  1899     Martin, Jas. H., 2.
  1908     Masherdic, Wm., 25.
  1908     Mason, Nelson, 176.
  1907     Mason, R. L., 176.
  1906     Masters, G. H., 144.
  1905     Matthews, L. G., 107.
  1908     Matthews, L. G., 1.
  1904     Matthews, J. W., 67.
  1907     May, Charlie, 175.
  1902     May, John T., 41.
  1902     Melton, C. F., 70.
  1901     Melton, Jesse L., 29.
  1895   **Mendenhall, J. B., 1.
  1895    *Metcalf, William, 1.
  1897    *Meyer, Chas. D., 8.
  1902     Myer, Jacob C., 42.
  1900     Meyers, S. L., 4.
  1904     Michael, G., 22.
  1904     Miller, Albert, 1.
  1900   **Miller, Aug., 21.
  1899     Miller, E. M., 9.
  1902     Miller, Earnest L., 10.
  1907     Miller, Fred A., 76.
  1907     Miller, H. A., 32.
  1898     Miller, H. W., 14.
  1904     Miller, L. C., 5.
  1906     Miller, R. B., 91.
  1901   **Miller, N. W., 50.
  1907     Mills, H. C., 152.
  1908     Minks, O. L., 220.
  1900     Minor, O. J., 28.
  1903     Mischel, Geo. N., 14.
  1908     Mitchell, Cleon, 94.
  1908     Mitchell, Harvey, 166.
  1902     Mitchell, J. C., 7.
  1900     Mobley, R. G., 28.
  1902     Moessner, Wm., 14.
  1899     Moore, G. W., 19.
  1902     Moore, J. K., 32.
  1899    *Moore, S. C., 7.
  1904     Moore, T. J., 60.
  1908     Moot, Simon, 22.
  1903     Morgan, C. T., 87.
  1903     Morgan, W. C., 90.
  1905     Morris, Chas. H., 33.
  1903     Morris, G. S., 33.
  1902     Morris, Julius, 33.
  1901   **Morrisy, J. C., 26.
  1903     Moskovitz, David, 10.
  1908     Moss, E., 22.
  1901     Mothershead, N. G., 57.
  1908     Murphy, Jos., 206.
  1903     Myers, Jno. W., 1.
  1905     Nash, Wm. A., 99.
  1901  ***Nichols, Boyle, 26.
  1906     Nichols, Geo., 80.
           Nickles, Chas., 42.
  1905     Nickell, H. V., 116.
  1908     Nix, Geo., 5.
  1908     Nixon, N. B., 179.
  1906     Neal, S. B., 141.
  1903     Nelligan, P. J., 80.
  1908   **Nelson, A. A., 229.
  1901   **Noe, S. T., 24.
  1902     Northcutt, H. J., 37.
  1907     Northcutt, Jas. E., 37.
  1908     Nowacki, Alex. A., 81.
  1898     Nunn, Ben. C., 14.
  1898     Pace, M. E., 2.
  1902     Page, Robert L., 80.
  1908     Palen, W. R., 33.
  1906     Parker, Jas. W., 64.
  1904     Parker, W. T., 64.
  1908     Parsley, E. E., 168.
  1907     Passamaneck, A., 22.
  1908     Passamaneck, J., 10.
  1908     Patrick, Dan, 201.
  1907     Payne, Joseph, 171.
  1896   **Pearce, L. E., 4.
  1900   **Peay, W. C., 34.
  1896     Pelham, W. C., 3.
  1908     Pell, W. A., 10.
  1896     Penick, W. B., 7.
  1908     Penman, Jas. K., 54.
  1907     Perry, Fred, 160.
  1902     Phillips, Harry J., 10.
  1906     Plaetner, Emil., 81.
  1908     Pierce, Jesse, 102.
  1900     Pierman, J., 9.
  1906     Pindar, L. Otley, 124.
  1907     Pitan, R. E., 165.
  1908     Pollard, E. T., 115.
  1905     Pollard, W. B., 115.
  1902   **Pomice, Nick, 69.
  1906     Pontrich, Frank, 25.
  1908     Popham, A. E., 234.
  1905     Porter, G. C., 84.
  1896     Porter, Geo. C., 19.
  1908     Porter, Tandy, 73.
  1907     Powell, Thos. A., 1.
  1907     Power, T. M., 126.
  1906     Powers, J. T., 136.
  1906     Poynter, W. Y., 146.
  1905     Probasco, Homer, 55.
  1903     Prewitt, A. C., 33.
  1905     Purcell, W. J., 97.
  1906     Quick, J. C., 10.
  1903     Rabe, Wm., 25.
  1904     Rabold, S. T., 11.
  1908     Railey, J. W., 11.
  1899     Ramers, L. P., 8.
  1906     Ramsey, E. F., 143.
  1900     Ramsey, J. M., 2.
  1902     Rankins, A. E., 6.
  1902     Ratican, E. E., 14.
  1899     Ray, Henry Wood, 3.
  1905     Redding, M. M., 64.
  1905   **Redwine, L. Y., 117.
  1905     Reed, J. T., 78.
  1907     Rees, Jesse O., 5.
  1907     Renaker, C. L., 37.
  1904     Renaker, J. G., 37.
  1901     Render, John B., 54.
  1903     Renneisen, Geo., 25.
  1901     Reno, E. E., 41.
  1908     Renfro, B. F., 152.
  1896     Renshaw, H. S., 7.
  1908     Resch, C. W., 184.
  1906     Resch, Geo. P., 81.
  1898     Rhodes, H. C., 7.
  1908     Rice, E., 99.
  1908     Rice, Jas. B., 195.
  1907     Rice, R. M., 152.
  1898     Richardson, J. H., 3.
  1900     Richman, A., 22.
  1908     Rieder, Chas. P., 17.
  1901   **Riggin, A. H., 58.
  1906     Riley, John G., 114.
  1899     Riley, J. W., 11.
  1908     Roach, D. G., 210.
  1902     Roberts, L. H., 10.
  1898     Roberts, W. S., 7.
  1907     Robinson, S. B., 85.
  1897     Rodgers, M. A., 19.
  1906     Rohrman, John, 8.
  1907     Rone, Geo. W., 169.
  1903     Roniger, H., 22.
  1899     Ropke, John, 8.
  1900     Rosenfield, L., 15.
  1898     Rosenfield, Louis, 98.
  1905     Rosenfield, Wm., 98.
  1908     Rosenham, C. P., 3.
  1899     Rosenthal, B., 14.
  1908     Ross, Henry Jay, 180.
  1908     Rostetter, Thomas, 25.
  1903     Royalty, Chintz, 38.
  1898     Rupard, T. N., 2.
  1903     Russell, D. H., 10.
  1895     Russell, T. M., 3.
  1902     Russman, C. G., 8.
  1903     Russman, Reuben, 22.
  1899   **Ryan, E. B., 4.
  1905     Sandmann, J. J., 70.
  1903     Sanders, H. S., 54.
  1906     Sanders, Theo. H., 99.
  1908     Satterfleld, P. E., 186.
  1908     Savage, W. M., 138.
  1902     Scheree, John, 17.
  1903     Schatzmann, A. L., 3.
  1905     Schmitt, Christ, 81.
  1905     Schmidt, John E., 25.
  1907     Schneider, C. J., 8.
  1908     Schneider, Henry J., 80.
  1903     Schott, Chris A., 93.
  1900     Schott, C. W., 16.
  1903     Schooler, Walter, 91.
  1899     Schrader, Ben H., 5.
  1907     Schultz, Jacob, 159.
  1901     Schultz, H., 25.
  1906     Schwartz, John, 8.
  1907     Schweitzer, Chris, 17.
  1901     Schwieters, Henry A., 8.
  1896     Scobee, J. W., 2.
  1895     Scott, Charles, 4.
  1908     Scott, Evan B., 172.
  1905     Scott, Roy C., 18.
  1907     Scott, W. W., 96.
  1903     Selden, Charles, 55.
  1904     Sencur, A. K., 71.
  1897     Sewell, J. G., 7.
  1903     Sexton, J. E., 76.
  1905     Shackleford, Jas., 67.
  1907     Shackleford, J. W., 67.
  1906     Shannon, Bert, 150.
  1897     Shearer, J. W., 2.
  1899    *Shely, John M., 1.
  1905     Sheridan, Bernard, 80.
  1907     Sheridan, B., 80.
  1897     Shrepper, Jas., 8.
  1809     Shroufe, Geo., D., 98.
  1906     Sikking, W. A., 7.
  1903   **Sillman, W. H., 26.
  1903     Siltman, Henry, 16.
  1908     Simpson, A., 70.
  1907     Skinner, Taylor, 131.
  1903    *Sledd, C. E., 18.
  1907     Slusher, John H., 152.
  1899     Small, J. L., 11.
  1902   **Smith, A. E., 72.
  1908     Smith, Chas. L., 67.
  1895     Smith, Frank L., 1.
  1901     Smith, Jas. R. W., 63.
  1908     Smith, L. Oscar, 171.
  1908     Smith. T. P., 11.
  1907     Smithers, R. A., 141.
  1905     Smythe, J. R., 111.
  1907     Snider, Thos., 167.
  1904     Snodgrass, J. A., 87.
  1906     Sonneman, C. W., 17.
  1906     Sousley, R. J., 134.
  1907     Sparks, G. M., 132.
  1900   **Spaulding, C. C., 23.
  1907     Speckman, C. W., 93.
  1907     Speer, A. D., 168.
  1898     Spencer, Enos, 8.
  1908     Spencer, Elias, 204.
  1905     Spencer, John, 103.
  1908     Spencer, L. W., 217.
  1908     Spencer, R. B., 150.
  1907     Spencer, W. J., 103.
  1906     Spicer, P. M., 78.
  1897     Spies, Albert, 8.
  1899     Springer, W. F., 19.
  1908     Stacey, B. J., 152.
  1908     Stanberry, Jno. D., 219.
  1901     Steel, A. J., 8.
  1904     Steele, J. R., 28.
  1902     Steger, J. W., 68.
  1904     Steger, W. C., 68.
  1896     Stemler, Chas., 17.
  1900     Stewart, S. H., 15.
  1907     Stilwell, J. W., 189.
  1903     Stivers, H. P., 42.
  1899     Stockoff, H. W., 8.
  1904     Stockton, W. F., 98.
  1905     Stoeckel, Wm. C., 93.
  1905     Stoesser, L., 70.
  1907     Stokely, J. F., 2.
  1902     Stone, Sebastian, 56.
  1906     Stout, G. E., 149.
  1904   **Stout, J. S., 101.
  1906     Stout, M., 19.
  1903     Stratton, Ira, 82.
  1904     Straub, Jos. F., 5.
  1906   **Suit, E. P., 100.
  1908     Sullivan, Michael, 93.
  1900     Sutherland, E. G., 2.
  1908     Swarts, J. H., 157.
  1908     Swetnam, T. S., 79.
  1906     Tate, Jas. L., 55.
  1898     Taylor, Frank M., 4.
  1903     Taylor, John X., 57.
  1908     Taylor, L. D., 254.
  1903     Terry, A. W., 3.
  1904     Terrell, Claud B., 90.
  1908     Theurer, Geo. P., 80.
  1904     Thomas, C. F., 18.
  1905     Thomas, C. T., 18.
  1908     Thomas, W. Fred, 3.
  1903     Thompson, B. A., 89.
  1907     Thompson, C. H., 1.
  1906     Thompson, W. C., 140.
  1907     Tharpe, Andrew, 54.
  1905     Tice, F. G., 108.
  1904     Tierney, T. J., 80.
  1900     Tittlebaum, J., 7.
  1905     Tinsley, E. C., 1.
  1908     Tolle, J. W., 3.
  1904     Toomey, W. M., 83.
  1901     Trauth, Con., 63.
  1907     Trosper, J. B., 161.
  1908     True, J. T., 207.
  1900     Turner, C. W., 6.
  1904     Turnipseed, G. H., 96.
  1908     Umstattd, E. W., 134.
  1907     Vance, Wm., 64.
  1906     Vaughn, Fred A., 142.
  1908     Vaughn, W. N. Jr., 102.
  1903     VanBuren, C. E., 92.
  1908     VanHoose, John, 213.
  1907     VanNort, Wm. L., 183.
  1895   **VanZandt, E. G., 7.
  1897   **VanZandt, J. B., 9.
  1908     Vernon, Willie, 73.
  1897     Vissman, Louis, 9.
  1895     Vogt, Henry, 1.
  1908     Volmerhausen, Wm., 17.
  1904     Wagner, Frank, 14.
  1906     Wagner, Paul, 81.
  1908     Wagoner, W. N., 231.
  1908     Waldren, James, 198.
  1908     Walker, Fred W., 143.
  1895     Walker, John D., 4.
  1895     Walker, Willie, 1.
  1906     Walker, W. A., 38.
  1908     Walls, Wm. R., 191.
  1904     Wallerstein, M. B., 60.
  1902     Wasserboehr, Geo. N., 2.
  1900   **Waters, W. A., 24.
  1908     Watkins, Luther, 196.
  1904     Watson, W. H., 99.
  1907     Watts, Benj. B., 8.
  1907   **Webb, Andy, Jr., 177.
  1908     Webb, Jas. H., 187.
  1905     Webb, Wm. Jr., 32.
  1908     Weber, Henry, 70.
  1905   **Weddington, Wm., 120.
  1904     Weemer, J. H., 60.
  1900     Wehrle, L. H., 33.
  1903     Weimer, Geo. S., 6.
  1905     Wells, J. H., 126.
  1907     Wells, R. T., 18.
  1903     West, C. T., 3.
  1905     Westfall, R. R., 70.
  1906     Wetherell, L. S., 105.
  1908     Wheeler, C. C., 193.
  1901   **Wheeler, Chas., 48.
  1905     White, Duke, 3.
  1907     White, D. M., 188.
  1904     Whitesides, C. E., 60.
  1908     Whitlock, W. A., 215.
  1908     Whittington, Miles, 56.
  1907     Widener, G. A., 154.
  1908     Wiener, Sterling, 112.
  1895   **Wilkerson, W. B., 4.
  1906     Wiles, John C., 137.
  1907     Willett, C. B., 96.
  1898     Willett, J. C., 11.
  1906     Willhoit, L. C., 79.
  1901     Williams, Ben., 55.
  1908     Williams, John C., 158.
  1906     Williams, Z. H., 133.
  1906    *Wilson, Clyde E., 7.
  1907     Wilson, F. M., 148.
  1896     Wilson, H. H., 1.
  1902     Wilson, James, Sr., 73.
  1906     Wilson, Jas. M., 111.
  1906     Wilson, Jas. Jr., 73.
  1903   **Wilson, J. G., 50.
  1906     Wilson, L. T., 76.
  1904     Wilson, N. R., 86.
  1905     Wilson, Warren, 91.
  1895     Winter, John I., 6.
  1908     Wolf, John, 84.
  1884     Wolfe, G. H., 84.
  1902     Wolfe, Geo. C., 77.
  1906     Wood, Ed., 87.
  1907     Woodruff, Joe., 195,
  1902     Woolfolk, Chas. A., 7.
  1896   **Wooley, J. D., 4.
  1904     Wormald, Walter C., 3.
  1897   **Worsham, I. S., 4.
  1897     Wright, T. B., 11.
  1908     Yates, Richard, 1.
  1908     Yeiser, A. C., 188.
  1895     Young, J. H., 7.
  1908     Young, John, 137.
  1903     Young, W. L., 25.
  1900     Young, W. J., 16.
  1901     Yunker, H. C., 7.
  1905     Zehnder, J. L., 42.
  1908     Zimmermann, Dave, 22.
  1900     Zimmermann, D. N., 4.
  1901     Zweydorf, L. W., 7.




CHAPTER XI.

BIOGRAPHIES OF PAST GREAT SACHEMS OF KENTUCKY.

       *       *       *       *       *

=PAST GREAT SACHEM THOMAS ALDEN HORNSEY.=

1874.

Thomas Alden Hornsey was a native of New York State, and on his
grandfather's side was of colonial stock, being a lineal descendant of
John Alden and Priscilla, and was a member of the John Alden Society,
the motto of which was, "Why don't you speak for yourself, John?"
His grandmother was a full-blooded Indian, of the Mohawk Tribe. For
many years he conducted a unique business in Lexington under the sign
of the "Wun Hos Hardwair Stor." Brother Hornsey became a charter
member of Osceola Tribe, No. 8, at its institution in Lexington in
1866, and was its first Senior Sagamore, succeeding to the stump of
Sachem at the next election. He was admitted to the Great Council
of Kentucky in 1873, and was at that time elected Prophet, it not
then being necessary that one be a Past Great Sachem to be eligible
to that stump. The following Great Sun he was chosen Great Sachem,
and performed the duties of that chieftaincy with marked ability.
Shortly after the expiration of his term, his Tribe, Osceola, No. 8,
became defunct, but before its demise he asked for and was granted a
withdrawal card. Twenty years later, at the institution of Miantonomo
Tribe, No. 1, he became a charter member by depositing his card, and
his honors gained in the old Great Council were recognized. He was
a charter member of the present Great Council and was twice raised
to the stump of Great Prophet of that great body, thus having the
distinction of having served three terms as Great Prophet. No Red Man
was held in greater veneration in this Reservation, and when the Great
Spirit called him on the 12th of Beaver Moon, G. S. D. 413, the Order
lost one of its most valued counselors and the members of his Tribe a
true brother, who never wearied in well doing.

[Illustration: THOMAS ALFRED DAVIS]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM THOMAS ALFRED DAVIS=

1875

Brother Davis was born in Maysville, Ky., January 17, 1840, and was
educated in the public schools of that city, with one term in the old
Maysville Seminary, leaving that institution at the age of fourteen.
He learned the printing business in Louisville and Memphis, Tenn.,
from 1855 to 1858, when he went to Philadelphia, where he enlisted
in 1861 in the famous Pennsylvania Reserve Corps, from which he was
discharged for disability. Subsequently he became war correspondent
with the Army of the Potomac for the Philadelphia "Enquirer." Later he
rejoined the army as private in Company L, 20th Pennsylvania Cavalry,
serving under General Sheridan, and was mustered out in 1865, then
being adjutant of that regiment. He returned to Maysville in 1866,
where he founded the Maysville Republican, which later became the
Daily Public Ledger, which publication he edited for forty-two years.

At the institution of Wyandotte Tribe, No. 16, in 1871, he became a
charter member, and was immediately elected Sachem. He was admitted
to the Great Council of Kentucky in 1874 and was elected Great Sachem
in 1875. Unfortunately, his Tribe surrendered its charter before the
expiration of his term, and though he did not transfer his membership
to another Tribe, he ranked as a Past Great Sachem of the old Great
Council. At the institution of the present Wyandotte Tribe, No. 3,
he became a charter member, and his honors were recognized. He was
admitted to the present Great Council in G. S. D. 412 (1903).

Brother Davis was Postmaster of Maysville under the Harrison
administration, 1891-5, and is now State Labor Inspector for Kentucky.
Besides his affiliation with the Red Men, he is a valued member of
the Masonic Orders, Knights of Pythias, Odd Fellows, G. A. R., Elks,
Maccabees, etc.


=PAST GREAT SACHEM J. HULL DAVIDSON=

1895

Brother Davidson was a native of Lexington, and was interested in
many merchantile enterprises. At the time of the renaissance of
Redmanship in Kentucky he was proprietor of a daily newspaper called
the "Argonaut." He was a charter member of Winona Tribe, No. 4, which
was instituted in Hot Moon, G. S. D., 404, and was its first Sachem,
which stump he filled with marked ability, and with such zeal, that
at the institution of the Great Council of Kentucky he was selected
as its first Great Prophet, retiring at the end of his term as Past
Great Sachem. Shortly afterward Brother Davidson moved from Lexington
to embark in the hotel business in New York City, where he is at the
present time. Unfortunately for him and for the Order, his interest
waned, and when Winona Tribe consolidated with No. 1, he not being
present, lost his membership.


=PAST GREAT SACHEM JOHN B. MENDENHALL=

1895-6

Nothing is known of the nativity of John B. Mendenhall. During
the summer of 1894 he came to Lexington and occupied the position
of operator with the Postal Telegraph Company. Several great suns
previous he had been adopted into Ninegret Tribe, of Connecticut, and
there received the degrees. Shortly after arriving at Lexington he
was appointed Deputy Great Incohonee for the Reservation of Kentucky
by Andrew H. Paton, of Massachusetts, Great Incohonee of the Great
Council of the United States, the hope being that there might be
a Renaissance in Redmanship in "the dark and bloody ground." The
hope was fully realized. Mendenhall was an organizer, and with the
assistance of several local palefaces he soon had a petition for a
charter for Miantonomo Tribe, No. 1, bearing 121 accepted signatures.
The Tribe was instituted on the sleep of the 5th of Hunting Moon, G.
S. D. 403, by Great Incohonee Paton. During the ensuing great sun
seven other Council Brands were lighted, and pursuant to Deputy Great
Incohonee Mendenhall's call the Past Sachems of the nine Tribes then
in Kentucky assembled in Lexington on the 27th of Hunting Moon, G. S.
D. 404, and the Great Council of Kentucky was instituted, Mendenhall
being chosen as its first Great Sachem. He served his term as Great
Sachem and was elected Great Prophet and Great Representative to the
Great Council of the United States, but before the lighting of the
council brand of that Great Council in the Corn Moon following, he was
tried on charges in Paughcaughnaughsinque Tribe, No. 6, of Augusta, to
which Tribe he had transferred his membership, preferred by Tribes he
had instituted at Louisville for obtaining wampum from the said Tribes
fraudulently and under false pretenses, and being found guilty, was
expelled from the Order. He soon after left the Reservation, and his
whereabouts at the present time are unknown.

[Illustration: JAMES R. McCONNELL]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM JAMES R. McCONNELL=

1896-7

James R. McConnell came to this country when about ten years of age,
having been born in Belfast, Ireland, April 3, 1847. He received a
common school education and taught for several terms. With his brother
he was engaged in the dry goods business for several years in Aurora,
Indiana, where he resided for many years, returning to Aurora in 1890,
since when he has been living upon the farm where his wife was born.

Brother McConnell was a noted ritualist in Masonry, and while in
Lexington was elected Master of Lexington Lodge, No. 1, and at about
the time of the Renaissance of Redmanship in this Reservation. When
Mendenhall began his canvass for charter members of Miantonomo Tribe,
No. 1, Brother McConnell was one of the first approached, and the
lending of his name and influence to the movement assisted in no
small degree in the establishment of the Order in Kentucky. At the
institution of Tribe No. 1 he was elected its first Senior Sagamore,
and succeeded to the stump of Sachem one month later, the Tribe having
been instituted on the 5th of Cold Moon, G. S. D. 403, just prior to
the close of the term.

A charter member of the Great Council, he was elected its first
Great Senior Sagamore, and was raised to the stump of Great Sachem
at the second session of the Great Council, held at Augusta in 1896,
and was the first Great Sachem to serve a full great sun. During his
administration several new Tribes were added to the roster of the
Great Council, and he visited nearly every Tribe in the Reservation.
At the expiration of his term as Sachem, he was elected Great Prophet,
and served in that capacity the full term, and afterwards served upon
several important committees, attending every Great Council until his
removal to Indiana. He is now a member of Walla Walla Tribe, No. 229,
of Aurora, Indiana, and ranking as a Past Great Sachem in the Great
Council of that Reservation.

[Illustration: WILLIAM EDWIN FITE]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM WILLIAM EDWIN FITE=

1897-8

Brother Fite was born October 20, 1867, near Rome, Adams County,
Ohio. He was educated in the public schools and at the National
Normal University, Lebanon, Ohio. His early life was spent on the
farm. He has been a teacher of much ability, and has been principal
of schools at Wheelersburg and Bethel, Ohio. He was granted a State
Life Certificate by the Ohio Board of School Examiners in 1890; was
employed as Superintendent of Schools of Augusta, Kentucky, in 1893,
and was granted State Certificate in Kentucky in 1894. Was principal
of Minerva Male and Female Academy 1896-1898, when he gave up teaching
to enter the insurance business, in which he has been engaged to the
present time.

Brother Fite was a charter member of Rising Sun Tribe, No. 161, of
Bethel, Ohio, instituted in May, 1893, in which Tribe he gained the
honors of a Past Sachem. While engaged at teaching in Augusta he
assisted at the institution of Paughcaughnaughsinque Tribe, No. 6,
and became a charter member of that Tribe, aiding materially in its
progress. He was a charter member of the Great Council of Kentucky
and was elected its first Great Junior Sagamore, succeeding as Great
Senior Sagamore, and was elected Great Sachem at Ashland, serving
the Great Council with distinction, and at the close of his term was
elected Great Prophet. Having moved from the Reservation before the
expiration of his term in the latter chieftaincy, he was succeeded by
Past Great Sachem Thos. A. Hornsey. He was a member of the Committee
on Laws which formulated the first code adopted by the Great Council,
and served at times on various other important committees. He was
appointed by Great Sachem Winter as a Special Deputy for the purpose
of visiting various Tribes in the Reservation, and through his
instrumentality many weak Tribes were made strong and placed upon the
highway to success.

Brother Fite now resides in Jackson, Ohio, and is engaged in the
insurance business. He is an active member in the Knights of Pythias,
Odd Fellows, Masons, as well as the Improved Order of Red Men.

[Illustration: JOHN ISAAC WINTER]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM JOHN ISAAC WINTER=

1898-9

John Isaac Winter was born at Germantown, Bracken County, Kentucky,
February 20, 1870, and was educated at the Bracken Academy, Augusta.
At the early age of sixteen he entered business in that city, at which
he was successful, and continued there until December, 1897, when he
moved to Maysville, Kentucky, where he opened up one of the largest
furniture stores in the State, known as "The White Palace," which he
continues to conduct with marked success.

Brother Winter was made a Red Man at the institution of
Paughcaughnaughsinque Tribe, No. 6, at Augusta, and was its first
Sachem, filling that stump with distinguished ability, and to his
energy and zeal is due in a large measure the firm establishment of
that Tribe at its inception. As a ritualist he excelled, and one who
has ever seen "John Ike," as he is familiarly called, as Sachem in the
Adoption Degree will never forget it. He was a charter member of the
Great Council of Kentucky and a moving spirit at its founding, being
appointed its first Great Sannap, succeeding as Great Junior Sagamore,
Great Senior Sagamore, and was elected Great Sachem at Winchester in
1898.

Much constructive work was accomplished during his administration,
the "newness" of things having somewhat disappeared, the superficial
giving place to the real, and the actual foundation was laid for the
solid structure afterwards erected.

He is actively identified with the Odd Fellows, Knights of Pythias,
Elks, the Blue Lodge, Chapter and Commandery in Masonry, a deacon
in the Central Presbyterian Church of Maysville, and is actively
interested in church work.

[Illustration: W. C. DIEDERICH]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM W. C. DIEDERICH.=

1899-1900

W. C. Diederich was born in Old Hanover, Germany, November 26, 1849.
At an early age he came to this country and was educated in the common
schools. He was adopted into the Improved Order of Red Men in Huron
Tribe, No. 19, of Ashland, which Tribe he served as Sachem, having
been one of its promoters and most enthusiastic members.

Brother Diederich was a charter member of the Great Council of
Kentucky, and having been previously admitted to the Great Council
of Ohio, was appointed by the Great Incohonee as Great Guard of the
Wigwam. He served as a member of the first Committee on Law and
Usage, was appointed Great Michinewa by Great Sachem McConnell, at
Augusta in 1896, and at the third session of the Great Council, held
in the wigwam of his own Tribe at Ashland, in 1897, he was elected
Great Junior Sagamore, succeeding as Great Senior Sagamore in 1898,
and at Louisville, in 1899, he was elected Great Sachem. During his
administration the first great increase in the number of Tribes was
brought about, he having appointed as Organizer J. B. VanZandt, who
was successful in getting Tribes, though for some reason but few
Tribes instituted by him are alive and working at this day. Brother
Diederich was at one time claimed to be accountable for the misdeeds
of his deputy, but upon investigation it was clearly shown he was
in no manner responsible, and he was completely exonerated. Brother
Diederich was and is of sterling integrity, sound and honest to the
core, and this matter is here mentioned simply as a matter of history,
and in no way should reflect upon his honor.

Brother Diederich is now engaged in the grocery business in Ashland,
and attends the sessions of the Great Council with regularity,
enjoying the marked prosperity of the Order, though he has
relinquished the active work to younger heads.

[Illustration: WILLIE WALKER]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM WILLIE WALKER=

1900-1

Willie Walker was born in Ohio County, Kentucky, on Rough Creek, near
a small postoffice at that time called Pattysville, but now called
Shreve. He worked on a farm until past twenty-one, receiving only the
country common school education. Later he attended Hartford College
for a term, and afterward taught school in Ohio County in 1883. In
1884-86 he attended the State A. & M. College (now State University),
at Lexington, and between sessions sold books to obtain money to
pursue his studies, and a part of the time worked on the State College
farm to pay board.

In 1891 he accepted a position as bookkeeper with the firm of DeLong
& Co., Lexington, with whom, and succeeding firms, he remained for
five years, when in 1895 he engaged in the implement business,
where he continued until 1900, when he became Manager of the Huber
Manufacturing Co. for Central and Eastern Kentucky, which position he
now holds.

Brother Walker was adopted into Miantonomo Tribe, No. 1, on the
sleep of December 6th, 1894, was elected Junior Sagamore a few suns
later, receiving his Past Sachem's Certificate in April, 1895, and
was admitted to the Great Council of Kentucky the following month
at Ashland, when he was appointed a member of the Committee on
Returns and Reports. The following great sun, at Winchester, he was
elected Great Junior Sagamore, succeeding as Great Senior Sagamore in
1899, and was elected Great Sachem at Lexington in 1900. During his
administration there was a great revival in Redmanship, thirty-two
new Tribes having been instituted, and it was many great suns later
before the feat was equaled. At the close of his administration he was
elected Great Prophet and Great Representative to the Great Council of
the United States for two great suns, and was the first retiring Great
Sachem to be thus honored.

Brother Walker was always an enthusiast regarding a Widows' and
Orphans' Home, and the first mention of such a project was made by him
in his Long Talk as Great Sachem, he at that time recommending that a
committee be appointed to devise ways and means for the establishment
of such an institution.

[Illustration: GUSTAV AUGUST ELLERKAMP]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM GUSTAV AUGUST ELLERKAMP=

1901-2

The subject of our sketch was born September 30, 1858, at Hoom,
Kingdom of the Netherlands. Upon the death of his father in 1868 he
moved to Hanover, Germany, where he attended the public schools,
emigrating to this country in 1873, landing in Louisville July 30th of
that year, unacquainted with the English language and the customs of
the people. He was engaged in the grocery business until 1892, when he
took a position with C. F. Vissman Co., where he remained fifteen and
a half years, and rose to be manager of their branch house, making it
a success. He attended the Jefferson School of Law during the winters
of 1905-6 and 1906-7, graduating with honors in May, 1907. He was
admitted to the bar April 23, 1907, at Brandenburg, Meade County.

Brother Ellerkamp was a charter member of Shawnee Tribe, No. 9, at
Louisville, and was one of the few faithful members of that Tribe to
hold out against the desertion of nearly 150 members, leaving about 18
to shoulder a debt of several hundred fathoms which was finally paid
off. Later Brother Ellerkamp became a member of Cherokee Tribe, No. 8,
when the Tribes consolidated. While a member of No. 9 he was admitted
to the Great Council of Kentucky in 1899, and at the same session was
elected Great Junior Sagamore, being advanced to the stump of Great
Senior Sagamore the following great sun, and was elected Great Sachem
at Danville in 1901. During his administration great work was done
for the uplifting of the Order, and while he had much to contend with
he made for himself an enviable reputation, even though he was sick a
large portion of the year, and could only direct the action of able
lieutenants. At the conclusion of his term as Great Sachem he was
elected Great Prophet and Great Representative to the Great Council
of the United States for two great suns. He was elected again for two
great suns in 1905, and re-elected in 1907, where he is now serving.
He has served upon many important committees in the Great Council of
the United States, and was a member of the Committee on Permanent Long
House, and to his good offices on that committee is largely due the
selection of Louisville as the permanent location of that building.
He was a member of the Committee on Law and Usage that edited and
arranged the present code of laws of the Great Council of Kentucky.

Brother Ellerkamp is now practicing law in the hunting grounds of
Louisville, and is as ardent a Red Man as ever, attending the councils
of his Tribe and never missing a session of the Great Council of
Kentucky.

[Illustration: JOHN D. WALKER]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM JOHN D. WALKER=

1902

The subject of our sketch was born in Brooksville, Bracken County,
Kentucky, and lived there for thirty years. He attended the public
schools, and at an early age learned the carpenter's trade with his
father. He enlisted in the Confederate army during the Civil War, and
at its close returned to Brooksville and again took up carpentering,
but shortly afterwards engaged in a manufacturing enterprise that
proved profitable for a time. In 1870 he bought out the drug store
of Dr. J. D. Wallins, and conducted that business for several years,
when he attended the Ohio Medical College at Cincinnati, from which
institution he was graduated and returned to his drug business,
practicing medicine in connection with the same. At that time
Bracken County produced large quantities of tobacco, and he became
interested in buying tobacco together with his other duties, becoming
so much interested in this latter enterprise that he devoted his
whole energies to this industry. Becoming interested in politics, he
was elected chief of police for a term of two years, at the end of
which time he was elected sheriff, and served as such for two years,
continuing all the time to handle leaf tobacco. Being successful,
he sought a larger field and went to Cincinnati, where he conducted
a leaf tobacco brokerage business, and while meeting with success,
he was induced to take the road for a large plug and twist tobacco
manufacturer. While on the road he was induced to move to Lexington,
where he organized the Blue Grass Tobacco Company in 1886, and for
about eighteen years he superintended that business, until recently he
established the White Plume Tobacco Company at Lexington, of which he
is now the manager.

Brother Walker was a charter member of Winona Tribe, No. 4, of
Lexington, and received the honors of a Past Sachem by virtue of
being its first Keeper of Wampum, which position he held during the
existence of the Tribe. He was admitted to the Great Council in 1895,
and was elected Great Keeper of Wampum in 1897, serving as such for
five consecutive great suns, and in 1892 was granted the honors of
a Past Great Sachem and elected Great Representative to the Great
Council of the United States for two great suns. He is now a member of
Miantonomo Tribe, No. 1, is a regular attendant at the sessions of the
Great Council, and has the good will and confidence of every member of
that Great Body.

[Illustration: WILLIAM CREERE PELHAM]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM WILLIAM CREERE PELHAM=

1902-3

Brother Pelham was born December 2, 1846, at New Harmony, Indiana,
and was educated at the "Maysville Literary Institute," a preparatory
school. His parents died before he was three years of age, and his
family moved to Maysville, Ky., where he resided until September,
1893, when he moved to Knoxville, Tenn., where he is now connected
with A. Greenwood & Co., an incorporation, as Secretary-Treasurer.
Brother Pelham was a civil engineer and surveyor of wide reputation
while residing in Maysville. He was a charter member of Wyandotte
Tribe, No. 3, and one of its early Sachems, yielding the tomahawk with
remarkable dexterity. Bro. Pelham was one of those rare characters
that is never "rattled," no matter how aggravating the occasion.

He was admitted to the Great Council of Kentucky at Augusta in
1896. He served as chairman of the Committee on Law and Usage during
1897-8, making many important rulings that have stood as law until
this day, and was appointed chairman of the same committee for the
year 1898-9, and again for 1899-1900. He was unable to attend the
session of the Great Council held at Lexington in 1900, nevertheless
he was then elected Great Junior Sagamore, and was raised to his stump
in the wigwam of his own Tribe the next day. The following great sun
he was elected Great Senior Sagamore, and was elected Great Sachem
at Owensboro in 1902. During his administration he made but little
effort to institute new Tribes, preferring to bend his energies
toward building up those already existing. To this end he appointed
an exemplifier, and for three moons kept him on the road, making a
tribal visit nearly every sleep, during that time visiting more than
forty hunting grounds. The experiment was costly, but exceedingly
profitable, and many of the Tribes then visited have been anxiously
awaiting its repetition, but in vain. At the close of his term he was
elected Great Prophet and Great Representative to the Great Council
of the United States for two great suns, but his removal from the
Reservation disqualified him from serving more than one year, and
the Great Council of Kentucky has been deprived of his wise counsel
since. Brother Pelham is still a member of Wyandotte Tribe, No. 3, of
Maysville. He says of himself that he is a "Democrat by conviction, a
Methodist by choice, and a Red Man by adoption."

[Illustration: CHARLES E. LYDDANE]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM CHARLES E. LYDDANE=

1903

The subject of this sketch was born in Clark County, Kentucky,
December 26, 1852, where he has ever lived. He was raised on a farm,
and at the age of twenty years began teaching in the country schools,
and continued in this work twelve years. He began reportorial work in
1884 on the Winchester Democrat, and has been with that paper ever
since, having been editor-in-chief since 1890.

He was twice elected County Superintendent of Schools and served in
that capacity eight years; also served eight years more as member of
the County Board of Examiners.

Brother Lyddane was a charter member of Shawnee Tribe, No. 18,
organized at Winchester in 1887, under the jurisdiction of the Great
Council of Ohio, and was the first Sachem of the Tribe. This Tribe
became defunct, and he became a charter member of Miantonomo Tribe,
No. 1, of Lexington, withdrawing a few suns later to become a charter
member of Onequa Tribe, No. 2, of Winchester, which was instituted the
29th of Cold Moon, G. S. D. 404. and has served that Tribe as Chief of
Records for many great suns, being still in the harness.

He was admitted to the Great Council of Kentucky in 1898, at
Winchester, and was then elected Great Chief of Records, which
position he held for the next five consecutive great suns, when he
retired with the honors of Past Great Sachem. For the past few great
suns he has not been in robust health, and has attended but few
sessions of the Great Council.

Brother Lyddane believes in fraternities, and besides his connection
with the Red Men, he is a Past Master of the Masonic Order, Past Grand
of the Odd Fellows, Past Regent of the Royal Arcanum, and is a high
private in the ranks of the Knights of Pythias. He is a Democrat in
politics and a Baptist in religion.

He was married in 1890 to Miss Fannie Bailey, of Winchester, and has
a happy home, but no children.

[Illustration: HENRY HERMAN DENHARDT]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM HENRY HERMAN DENHARDT=

1904-5

Brother Denhardt was born March 8, 1876, at Bowling Green, Kentucky,
and received his early education in the public schools of that city,
later attending Ogden College, and was graduated from Cumberland
University, Lebanon, Tenn., with the degree of LL. B.

Since his graduation he has been practicing law in his native city,
and for the past eight great suns has been prosecuting attorney.

He became a member of Mohican Tribe, No. 11, by adoption, in April,
1896, and soon after he was advanced to the stump of Sachem. He has
also served his Tribe as Chief of Records for several great suns.

Brother Denhardt was admitted to the Great Council of Kentucky at
Lexington in 1900, and has attended every session of the Great Council
since. He was elected Great Junior Sagamore at Owensboro in 1902,
serving as Great Senior Sagamore in 1903, and at Paducah in 1904 he
was elected Great Sachem. Five great suns prior to his being raised to
the Great Sachem's stump a movement had been started looking towards a
Widows' and Orphans' Home, but no decisive action had been taken, and
Brother Denhardt warmly espoused this cause, and through his ardent
efforts a law was finally adopted creating a fund for this purpose. At
the close of his term as Great Sachem he was elected Great Prophet and
Representative to the Great Council of the United States for two great
suns, and at the expiration of his term in 1907 he was re-elected for
another two great suns.

At the session of the Great Council of the United States, held at
Bridgeport, Conn., in Cold Moon, G. S. D. 417, Brother Denhardt
was appointed by Great Incohonee Farrar a member of the Judiciary
Committee, one of the most important standing committees of the Great
Council of the United States.

While Great Sachem of the Great Council of Kentucky, Brother Denhardt
became a Benedict, and his charming wife is a regular attendant at the
sessions of the Great Council of Kentucky and of the Great Council of
the United States.

[Illustration: LEWIS L. BEBOUT]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM LEWIS L. BEBOUT=

1905-6

The subject of this sketch was born October 6, 1874, at Smithland,
Kentucky, and when twelve years old removed with his parents to
Crittenden County, near Marion. He received a common school education
in Crittenden and Marion County schools, and became editor, owner
and publisher of the "Marion Monitor," a weekly newspaper at Marion,
Ky., at the age of nineteen. He continued in this business but a few
months, when he sold out the entire plant and moved to Paducah in 1894.

Enlisting as private in Co. K, 3rd Ky. U. S. V. Infty. during the
Spanish-American War, he was made 1st Sergeant of his company, and
was commissioned 2d Lieutenant in October, 1898, at Lexington. He
commanded the company longer than either of the other officers and was
in sole command, and remained so, while the company was in Cuba. At
the close of this service he returned to Paducah and engaged in the
insurance business, which he is most successfully conducting at the
present time.

He was a charter member of Otego Tribe, No. 60, and its first C. of
W., and afterwards Chief of Records. When Otego Tribe gave a pow-wow
and incurred a debt of several hundred fathoms, he with nine other
brothers borrowed the necessary money and paid off the entire debt,
in the face of the predicted collapse of the Tribe. Nothing daunted,
he with other faithful brothers inaugurated a hunt for palefaces,
with the result that 106 were captured and adopted at one time, thus
equaling the work of Miantonomo Tribe, No. 1, which accomplished the
same feat in 1895.

He was admitted to the Great Council of Kentucky at Owensboro in
1902, and was at once put forward as a candidate for Great Junior
Sagamore, but without immediate success. He was, however, at this
Council appointed chairman of the Committee on State of the Order,
and at the following session of the Great Council, at Maysville, he
was successful and was raised to the stump of Great Junior Sagamore,
succeeding the following great sun as Great Senior Sagamore, and in
1905, at Frankfort, he was elected Great Sachem. His administration
was conservative and the Order prospered under his judicious rulings.

He was elected Great Prophet at the close of his term as Great Sachem,
and was also elected Great Representative to the Great Council of the
United States for two great suns, at the close of which term he was
returned for another term of like duration.

Brother Bebout married during his chieftaincy of Great Sachem and the
presence of his fair lady adds a charm to the social feature of the
Great Council.

[Illustration: DAN H. RUSSELL]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM DAN H. RUSSELL=

1906-7

Dan H. Russell was born April 7, 1873, at Springfield, Ohio, and was
given a liberal education, graduating from college with high honors.
A young man of remarkable pluck and push, through trials that would
have discouraged any but one of such indomitable will, he "made good,"
and is the president of one of the large corporations of the city of
Louisville, where he has resided for many years.

Brother Russell became a Red Man by adoption into Wahoo Tribe in 1900,
and was immediately put in line for the Sachem's stump, which position
he filled with great success, and piloted the Tribe through perilous
times. He was admitted to the Great Council of Kentucky in 1903, at
Maysville, and the same spirit that prompted him in his business
relations to forge to the front urged him to seek preferment in the
Great Council. Like many of his predecessors, he was not successful
the first time trying, but in 1904, at Paducah, he was elected Great
Junior Sagamore, the following great sun being promoted to the stump
of Great Senior Sagamore, and in 1906, at Frankfort, was elected Great
Sachem. His administration was noted for exceeding vigor, giving much
of his valuable time to the interests of the Order. He inaugurated an
active canvass for new Tribes, and Kentucky, under his leadership,
made a record for new Tribes instituted in one great sun, 45 Tribes
having been added to the roster of the Great Council.

At the close of his term he was accorded the usual honor of being
elected Great Prophet and Great Representative to the Great Council of
the United States for two great suns, where he is now serving.

[Illustration: ROBERT LEE PAGE]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM ROBERT LEE PAGE=

1907-8

Robert Lee Page was born in Allen County, Kentucky, August 18, 1879.
His maternal and paternal ancestors were natives of Virginia, and he
is of the celebrated Page family of that Commonwealth.

He was educated in the public schools of Louisville and a graduate
of the Louisville Male High School and the Louisville Normal School.
After completing his academic course he entered the law department of
the University of Louisville, graduating with the highest honor of a
class of thirty-five.

Shortly after starting the practice of law Brother Page was appointed
Assistant County Attorney of Jefferson County. In June, 1907, he
was appointed County Attorney and served in that capacity until the
general election, when he declined to be a candidate to succeed
himself, preferring to devote his entire time to his private practice.
At the time he was County Attorney of Jefferson County he was the
youngest official ever holding that office in the county.

Brother Page was a charter member of Ptocawa Tribe, No. 80, of
Louisville, and the peculiar spelling of the name is accounted for
from the fact that superfluous letter "P" was prefixed as a compliment
to him. He served as the first Sachem of the Tribe, and was admitted
to the Great Council of Kentucky in 1902, at Owensboro, and was
appointed chairman of the Committee on Returns and Reports by Great
Sachem Pelham, and the following great sun he was appointed to the
same position by Great Sachem McFarlan. At Owensboro, in 1904, he was
elected Great Representative to the Great Council of the United States
for two great suns. At Frankfort, in 1905, he was elected Great Junior
Sagamore, the following great sun being advanced to the stump of Great
Senior Sagamore, and at Lexington, in 1907, he was elected Great
Sachem. During his term the record was broken for the number of new
Tribes instituted during one great sun, 65 standing to his credit. At
the time of his election as Great Sachem he was but 27 years of age,
and he was doubtless the youngest Great Sachem in the United States.
At the close of his term as Great Sachem he was accorded the usual
honors of being elected Great Prophet and Great Representative to the
Great Council of the United States for two great suns.

[Illustration: HENRY WOOD RAY]


=PAST GREAT SACHEM HENRY WOOD RAY=

1908

Brother Ray was born February 10, 1866, at Bowling Green, Kentucky,
and when but four months old his father died, his mother then moving
to Maysville. His schooling was very limited, as at an early age he
felt called upon to help maintain his mother by learning the drug
business. He entered the employ of J. Chenoweth, at Maysville, in
1880, and remained with the same house sixteen years, at the end of
which time he bought out a drug store in the same city, and remained
in business for himself until 1907, when he was compelled to retire on
account of failing health, caused by close attention to his business,
coupled with his arduous duties as Great Chief of Records. He had for
years the largest and best equipped drug store in Maysville.

Brother Ray was adopted into Wyandotte Tribe, No. 3, in March, 1896,
and served in various chieftaincies, earning his honors as a Past
Sachem. He was admitted to the Great Council of Kentucky in 1899 at
Louisville, serving then as representative of his Tribe. At Lexington,
in 1900, he was appointed by Great Sachem Willie Walker chairman of
the Committee on Returns and Reports, and the following great sun
by Great Sachem Ellerkamp a member of the Finance Committee, and at
Owensboro, in 1902, he was made chairman of that committee by Great
Sachem Pelham.

At the Great Council held in Maysville, 1903, he was, on the
retirement of C. E. Lyddane, unanimously elected Great Chief of
Records, and he served in that capacity for five consecutive great
suns, being accorded the honors of a Past Great Sachem at Frankfort,
in 1908, when he was elected Great Representative to the Great Council
of the United States for two great suns.

During the five great suns of his administration of the chieftaincy
of Great Chief of Records he managed the business end of the Order
in the Reservation in the same methodical way that characterized his
private affairs, and saw the Order grow from a membership of 5,089
to 11,950: from 65 Tribes to 182 Tribes. The lay member of the Order
has no conception of the vast labors performed by a faithful Great
Chief of Records, but a small portion of his duties being apparent to
the casual observer. Brother Ray was ever faithful to every duty, and
earned the soubrequet of "The Minute Man." The whole may be summed up
in the words, "He was always there with the goods."

Brother Ray is now filling a position as clerk in the State Auditor's
office at Frankfort.


HORACE J. McFARLAN

=PAST GREAT SACHEM HORACE J. McFARLAN=

1903-4

As a young man, Brother McFarlan was deeply interested in base
ball, and made it a profession. For quite a number of years he was
a favorite umpire in the National League. Prior to his activity in
base ball circles he had received a liberal education, and tiring of
the nomadic life consequent upon following the National game for a
livelihood, he studied law, was admitted to the bar, married and began
practice of his profession at Lagrange, where for some time he was
County Attorney.

Brother McFarlan was adopted into Massasoit Tribe, No. 33, of
Lagrange, and was one of its early Sachems. He was admitted to the
Great Council of Kentucky in 1901, at Danville, and at the same
session was put forward as a "dark horse" for Great Junior Sagamore,
winning the race against a large field. He served as Great Senior
Sagamore in 1902, and at Maysville, in 1903, he was elected Great
Sachem. During his chieftaincy he had the distinction of dedicating
the first wigwam owned by a Tribe of the Improved Order of Red Men in
the Reservation of Kentucky, that of Oswego Tribe, No. 37, hunting
grounds of Dry Ridge. This took place on 18th of Traveling Moon, G.
S. D. 412, and was made the occasion of a great pow-wow, in which the
citizens of the little town most heartily joined. At the close of his
term as Great Sachem he was elected Great Prophet and Representative
to the Great Council of the United States for two great suns. In
consequence of the death of his estimable wife during the great sun of
414 he was unable to attend the Great Council of the United States,
and another was appointed in his stead, but in G. S. D. 415 he was
returned for an additional two great suns.

Brother McFarlan is at present practicing law in the hunting grounds
of Louisville.




CHAPTER XII.


Roster of Chiefs of the Old Great Council.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------
  Year | Great Sachem               | Great Senior Sagamore
  ----------------------------------------------------------------
       |                    | Tribe |                    | Tribe
       |                    |  No.  |                    |  No.
  1854 | George W. Ford     |   1   | E. Reese           |   2
  1855 | Elias Reese        |   2   | S. I. B. Badgley   |   4
  1856 | A. J. Francis      |   2   | John Hughes        |   4
  1857 | John Hughes        |   4   | Gregory B. Kiteley |   4
  1858 | John B. Davis      |   6   | A. C. Herig        |   7
  1859 | A. C. Herig        |   7   | Jacob Schenk       |   7
  1860 | Chas. Amann        |   3   | C. Rice            |   2
  1861 | W. D. Turner       |   4   | John B. Heltimus   |   2
  1862 | Gregory B. Kiteley |   4   | M. Borntraeger     |   7
  1863 | M. Borntraeger     |   7   | B. B. Weidler      |   2
  1864 | B. B. Weidler      |   2   | R. B. McCrackin    |   3
  1865 | Jacob Schenk       |   7   | R. B. McCrackin    |   3
  1866 | R. B. McCrackin    |   3   | Geo. J. Fry        |   7
  1867 | Andrew Schneider   |   7   | Joseph Havlin      |   2
  1868 | Thos. W. Giedeon   |   3   | John Steinhauer    |   3
  1869 | Edw. Merkly        |   7   | Fred Braun         |   9
  1870 | John Steinhauer    |   3   | G. W. Reese        |  10
  1871 | Jacob Lizinsky     |   9   | S. F. Schell       |  10
  1872 | W. H. Glore        |  13   | John Vogle         |  11
  1873 | Thos. A. Hornsey   |   8   | C. H. Conn         |  10
  1874 | Thos. A. Davis     |  16   | J. T. Follett      |  10
  1875 | G. W. Reese        |  10   | J. J. Hetch        |   3
  1876 | C. H. Conn         |  10   | Geo. Knorr         |   2
  1877 | George Brunk       |   3   | J. N. Staunder     |  17
  1878 | J. N. Staunder     |  17   | F. Bismark         |   3
  1879 | Chas. Maunder      |  10   | F. Schorle         |   3
  1880 | Val. Wendworth     |  17   | Fred Must          |   3
  1881 | J. Reed            |  10   | John Roth          |  17
  1882 | G. W. Reese        |  10   | John Roth          |  17
  1883 | G. W. Reese        |  10   | John Roth          |  17
  1884 | G. W. Reese        |  10   | John Roth          |  17
   ---------------------------------------------------------------

  ----------------------------------------------------------------
  Year | Great Junior Sagamore      | Great Prophet
  -----|----------------------------------------------------------
       |                    | Tribe |                    | Tribe
       |                    |  No.  |                    |  No.
  1854 | P. A. C. Kemper    |   1   | U. Shinkle         |   2
  1855 | Chas. Amann        |   3   | I. B. Monder       |   1
  1856 | John Ammon         |   3   | Wm. Schmidt        |   6
  1857 | John B. Davis      |   6   | W. D. Turner       |   4
  1858 | J. Schenk          |   7   | G. Rice            |   2
  1859 | W. H. Patton       |   2   | John B. Heltimus   |   2
  1860 | John B. Heltimus   |   2   | Richard W. Ellsy   |   4
  1861 | Isaac Sutton       |   2   | Chas. Hebel        |   6
  1862 | W. T. Clark        |  ...  | F. Frische         |   6
  1863 | R. B. McCrackin    |   3   | A. Schneider       |   7
  1864 | A. Schneider       |   7   | Gregory B. Kiteley |   4
  1865 | G. J. Fry          |   7   | B. B. Weidler      |   2
  1866 | Edw. Merkly        |   7   | Jacob Schenk       |   7
  1867 | John Wohlfart      |   3   | Thos. W. Giedeon   |   3
  1868 | James Chrystal     |   8   | M. Betz            |  ...
  1869 | D. A. King         |   8   | G. W. Reese        |  10
  1870 | Samuel Spaeth      |   3   | J. Lizinsky        |   9
  1871 | D. A. King         |   8   | W. H. Glore        |  13
  1872 | J. J. Hillburn     |  11   | T. A. Hornsey      |   8
  1873 | Thos. A. Davis     |  16   | E. H. Mottley      |  11
  1874 | J. P. Phister      |  16   | C. H. Conn         |  10
  1875 | J. Reed            |  10   | O. Seinsheimer     |   3
  1876 | G. A. Dempf        |   4   | G. A. Kiteley      |   4
  1877 | James Vickers      |  10   | C. H. Conn         |  10
  1878 | C. Maunder         |  10   | No election.       |  ...
  1879 | V. Wendworth       |  17   | No election.       |  ...
  1880 | John Lamb          |  16   | C. Maunder         |  10
  1881 | G. Brunk           |   3   | Ch. Clinthworth    |  17
  1882 | C. Switzer         |  17   |      ...           |  ...
  1883 | E. H. Meyers       |  16   | G. Christman       |  17
  1884 | Wm. Maunders       |       | G. Christman       |  17
  ----------------------------------------------------------------

  ----------------------------------------------------------------
  Year | Great Chief of Records     | Great Keeper of Wampum
  ----------------------------------------------------------------
       |                    | Tribe |                    | Tribe
       |                    |  No.  |                    |  No.
  1854 | A. J. Francis      |   2   | V. Shinkle         |   2
  1855 | A. J. Francis      |   2   | V. Shinkle         |   2
  1856 | Peter Ruhl         |   6   | V. Shinkle         |   2
  1857 | Peter Ruhl         |   6   | A. J. Francis      |   2
  1858 | Jas. N. Tyrack     |   2   | A. J. Francis      |   2
  1859 | Jas. N. Tyrack     |   2   | A. J. Francis      |   2
  1860 | Jas. N. Tyrack     |   2   | W. D. Turner       |   4
  1861 | B. Strube          |   7   | A. J. Francis      |   2
  1862 | B. Strube          |   7   | A. J. Francis      |   2
  1863 | B. Strube          |   7   | A. J. Francis      |   2
  1864 | W. Brigmann        |   4   | A. J. Francis      |   2
  1865 | W. Brigmann        |   4   | A. J. Francis      |   2
  1866 | W. Brigmann        |   4   | A. J. Francis      |   2
  1867 | Chas. Hebel        |   9   | A. J. Francis      |   2
  1868 | Chas. Hebel        |   9   | A. J. Francis      |   2
  1869 | G. B. Kiteley      |   4   | W. D. Turner       |   4
  1870 | G. B. Kiteley      |   4   | W. D. Turner       |   4
  1871 | G. B. Kiteley      |   4   | W. D. Turner       |   4
  1872 | G. B. Kiteley      |   4   | W. D. Turner       |   4
  1873 | E. H. Meyers       |  10   | W. D. Turner       |   4
  1874 | E. H. Meyers       |  10   | W. G. Stone        |  13
  1875 | E. H. Meyers       |  10   | W. G. Stone        |  13
  1876 | W. G. Stone        |  13   | John Wolfhardt     |   3
  1877 | W. G. Stone        |  13   | John Wolfhardt     |   3
  1878 | S. F. Schell       |  10   | John Wolfhardt     |   3
  1879 | S. F. Schell       |  10   | John Wolfhardt     |   3
  1880 | S. F. Schell       |  10   | John Wolfhardt     |   3
  1881 | S. F. Schell       |  10   | John Wolfhardt     |   3
  1882 | S. F. Schell       |  10   | J. Glick           |  17
  1883 | S. F. Schell       |  10   | J. Glick           |  17
  1884 | E. H. Meyers       |  10   | J. Glick           |  17
   ---------------------------------------------------------------




CHAPTER XIII.

Roster of Chiefs of the Present Great Council.


G. S. D. 404-418.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------
    Date | Great Sachem             | Great Senior Sagamore
  ------------------------------------------------------------------
         |                  | Tribe |                     |  Tribe
         |                  |  No.  |                     |   No.
  404-405| J. B. Mendenhall |   1   | J. R. McConnell     |    1
  405-406| J. R. McConnell  |   1   | W. E. Fite          |    6
  406-407| W. E. Fite       |   6   | John I. Winter      |    6
  407-408| John I. Winter   |   3   | W. C. Diederich     |   19
  408-409| W. C. Diederich  |  19   | Willie Walker       |    1
  409-410| Willie Walker    |   1   | G. A. Ellerkamp     |    9
  410-411| G. A. Ellerkamp  |   8   | W. C. Pelham        |    3
  411-412| W. C. Pelham     |   3   | H. J. McFarlan      |   33
  412-413| H. J. McFarlan   |  33   | H. H. Denhardt      |   11
  413-414| H. H. Denhardt   |  11   | L. L. Bebout        |   60
  414-415| L. L. Bebout     |  60   | D. H. Russell       |   10
  415-416| D. H. Russell    |  10   | R. L. Page          |   80
  416-417| R. L. Page       |  80   | J. H. Kemper        |   18
  417-418| J. H. Kemper     |  18   | W. H. McDonald      |  111
  ------------------------------------------------------------------
  ------------------------------------------------------------------
    Date | Great Junior Sagamore      | Great Prophet
  ------------------------------------------------------------------
         |                  | Tribe |                     |  Tribe
         |                  |  No.  |                     |   No.
  404-405| W. E. Fite       |   6   | J. Hull Davidson    |    4
  405-406| John I. Winter   |   6   | Thos. A. Hornsey    |    1
  406-407| W. C. Diederich  |  19   | J. R. McConnell     |    1
  407-408| Willie Walker    |   1   | Thos. A. Hornsey    |    1
  408-409| G. A. Ellerkamp  |   9   | John I. Winter      |    6
  409-410| W. C. Pelham     |   3   | W. C. Diederich     |   19
  410-411| H. J. McFarlan   |  33   | Willie Walker       |    1
  411-412| H. H. Denhardt   |  11   | G. A. Ellerkamp     |    9
  412-413| L. L. Bebout     |  60   | W. C. Pelham        |    3
  413-414| D. H. Russell    |  10   | H. J. McFarlan      |   33
  414-415| R. L. Page       |  80   | H. H. Denhardt      |   11
  415-416| J. H. Kemper     |  18   | L. L. Bebout        |   60
  416-417| W. H. McDonald   | 111   | D. H. Russel        |   10
  417-418| H. J. Northcutt  | 184   | R. L. Page          |   80
  ------------------------------------------------------------------
  ------------------------------------------------------------------
    Date | Great Chief of Records   |  Great Keeper of Wampum
  ------------------------------------------------------------------
         |                  | Tribe |                      | Tribe
         |                  |  No.  |                      |  No.
  404-405| Frank L. Smith   |   1   | A. F. German         |   8
  405-406| Frank L. Smith   |   1   | John Armstrong       |   1
  406-407| Chas. D. Meyer   |   8   | John D. Walker       |   4
  407-408| C. E. Lyddane    |   2   | John D. Walker       |   4
  408-409| C. E. Lyddane    |   2   | John D. Walker       |   4
  409-410| C. E. Lyddane    |   2   | John D. Walker       |   4
  410-411| C. E. Lyddane    |   2   | John D. Walker       |   4
  411-412| C. E. Lyddane    |   2   | S. C. Moore          |   7
  412-413| Henry Wood Ray   |   3   | S. C. Moore          |   7
  413-414| Henry Wood Ray   |   3   | S. C. Moore          |   7
  414-415| Henry Wood Ray   |   3   | S. C. Moore          |   7
  415-416| Henry Wood Ray   |   3   | H. V. Cohn           |   8
  416-417| Henry Wood Ray   |   3   | H. V. Cohn           |   8
  417-418| Frank L. Smith   |   1   | H. V. Cohn           |   8
  ------------------------------------------------------------------


[Transcriber's Note:

Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation are as in the original.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Redmanship in Kentucky for Fifty Great
Suns, by Frank L. Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REDMANSHIP IN KENTUCKY ***

***** This file should be named 46275.txt or 46275.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/2/7/46275/

Produced by David Garcia and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Kentuckiana Digital Library)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
