Project Gutenberg's Germany's Dishonoured Army, by Prof. J.H. Morgan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Germany's Dishonoured Army
       Additional records of German atrocities in France

Author: Prof. J.H. Morgan

Release Date: July 15, 2014 [EBook #46293]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GERMANY'S DISHONOURED ARMY ***




Produced by Giovanni Fini, Brian Coe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)







                          TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


-Obvious print and punctuation errors fixed.

-The only Greek word in this text has been rendered as #...#.




                               GERMANY'S
                           DISHONOURED ARMY.

                     ADDITIONAL RECORDS OF GERMAN
                         ATROCITIES IN FRANCE.

                                  BY
                        PROFESSOR J. H. MORGAN.

            (Late Home Office Commissioner with the British
                         Expeditionary Force.)

                                 1915.

                THE PARLIAMENTARY RECRUITING COMMITTEE,
                       12, DOWNING STREET, S.W.




               (M 3942) Wt. w. 8147-565 500M 8/15 H & S




A DISHONOURED ARMY.


 _In November, 1914, Professor Morgan was commissioned by the Secretary
 of State for Home Affairs to undertake the investigation in France
 into the alleged breaches of the laws of war by the German troops.
 His investigations extended over a period of four or five months.
 The first six weeks were spent in visiting the base hospitals and
 convalescent camps at Boulogne and Rouen, and the hospitals at
 Paris; during the remaining three months he was attached to the
 General Headquarters Staff of the British Expeditionary Force.
 Professor Morgan orally interrogated some two or three thousand
 officers and soldiers, representing almost every regiment in the
 British armies and all of whom had recently been engaged on active
 service in the field. The whole of these inquiries were conducted by
 Professor Morgan personally, but his inquiries at headquarters were
 of a much more systematic character. There, owing to the courtesy
 of Lieutenant-General Sir Archibald Murray, the late Chief of the
 General Staff, he had the assistance of the various services--in
 particular the Adjutant-General, the Provost-Marshal, the Director
 of Military Intelligence, the Director of Medical Services and their
 respective staffs--and also of the civil authorities, within the area
 at present occupied by the British armies, such as the sous-prefets,
 the procureurs de la Republique, the commissaires de police, and the
 maires of the communes. In this way he was enabled not only to obtain
 corroboration of the statements taken down at the base in the earlier
 stages, but also to make a close local study of the behaviour of the
 German troops towards the civil population during their occupation of
 the districts recently evacuated by them. The following is extracted
 (by permission of the Editor) from statements by Professor Morgan
 which appeared in the "Nineteenth Century" for June, 1915_:--


 [BY PROFESSOR J. H. MORGAN.]

 A German military writer (von der Goltz) of great authority predicted
 some years ago that the next war would be one of inconceivable
 violence. The prophecy appears only too true as regards the conduct of
 German troops in the field; it has rarely been distinguished by that
 chivalry which is supposed to characterise the freemasonry of arms.
 One of our most distinguished Staff officers remarked to me that the
 Germans have no sense of honour in the field, and the almost uniform
 testimony of our officers and men induces me to believe that the
 remark is only too true.

 Abuse of the white flag has been very frequent, especially in the
 earlier stages of the campaign on the Aisne, when our officers,
 not having been disillusioned by bitter experience, acted on the
 assumption that they had to deal with an honourable opponent. Again
 and again the white flag was put up, and when a company of ours
 advanced unsuspectingly and without supports to take prisoners,
 the Germans who had exhibited the token of surrender parted their
 ranks to make room for a murderous fire from machine-guns concealed
 behind them. Or, again, the flag was exhibited in order to give
 time for supports to come up. It not infrequently happened that
 our company officers, advancing unarmed to confer with the German
 company commander in such cases, were shot down as they approached.
 The Camerons, the West Yorks, the Coldstreams, the East Lancs, the
 Wiltshires, the South Wales Borderers, in particular, suffered heavily
 in these ways. In all these cases they were the victims of organised
 German units, _i.e._, companies or battalions, acting under the orders
 of responsible officers.

 There can, moreover, be no doubt that the respect of the German troops
 for the Geneva Convention is but intermittent. Cases of deliberate
 firing on stretcher-bearers are, according to the universal testimony
 of our officers and men, of frequent occurrence. It is almost certain
 death to attempt to convey wounded men from the trenches over open
 ground except under cover of night.

 _=Killing the Defenceless Wounded.=_--A much more serious offence,
 however, is the deliberate killing of the wounded as they lie helpless
 and defenceless on the field of battle. This is so grave a charge that
 were it not substantiated by the considered statements of officers,
 non-commissioned officers, and men, one would hesitate to believe
 it. But even after rejecting, as one is bound to do, cases which
 may be explained by accident, mistake, or the excitement of action,
 there remains a large residuum of cases which can only be explained
 by deliberate malice. No other explanation is possible when, as
 has not infrequently happened, men who have been wounded by rifle
 fire in an advance, and have had to be left during a retirement for
 reinforcements, are discovered, in our subsequent advance, with nine
 or ten bayonet wounds or with their heads beaten in by the butt-ends
 of rifles. Such cases could not have occurred, the enemy being present
 in force, without the knowledge of superior officers. Indeed, I have
 before me evidence which goes to show that German officers have
 themselves acted in similar fashion.

 Some of the cases reveal a leisurely barbarity which proves great
 deliberation; cases such as the discovery of bodies of despatch-riders
 burnt with petrol or "pegged out" with lances or of soldiers with
 their faces stamped upon by the heel of a boot, or of a guardsman
 found with numerous bayonet wounds evidently inflicted as he was in
 the act of applying a field dressing to a bullet wound. There also
 seems no reason to doubt the independent statements of men of the
 Loyal North Lancs, whom I interrogated on different occasions, that
 the men of one of their companies were killed on the 20th of December
 after they had surrendered and laid down their arms. To what extent
 prisoners have been treated in this manner it is impossible to
 say--dead men tell no tales--but an exceptionally able Intelligence
 Officer at the headquarters of the Cavalry Corps informed me that it
 is believed that when British prisoners are taken in small parties
 they are put to death in cold blood. Certain it is that our men when
 captured are kicked, robbed of all they possess, threatened with death
 if they will not give information, and in some cases forced to dig
 trenches....


 THE PROOFS OF POLICY.

 The question as to how far these outrages are attributable to policy
 and superior orders becomes imperative. It was at first difficult to
 answer. For a long time I did not find, nor did I expect to find, any
 documentary orders to that effect. Such orders, if given at all, were
 much more likely to be verbal, for it is extremely improbable that the
 German authorities would be so unwise as to commit them to writing.
 But the outrages upon combatants were so numerous and so collective in
 character that I began to suspect policy at a very early stage in my
 investigations....

 _=Frenzy against British Troops.=_--On the 3rd of May I visited the
 Ministry of War in Paris at the invitation of the French military
 authorities, and was received by M. le Capitaine Rene Petit, Chef de
 Service du Contentieux, who conducted me to the department where the
 diaries of German prisoners were kept. I made a brief preliminary
 examination of them, and discovered the following passage (which I
 had photographed) in the diary of a German N.C.O., Goettsche, of the
 85th Infantry Regiment (the IXth Corps), fourth company detached for
 service, under date "Okt. 6, 1914, bei Antwerpen":--

 The Captain called us to him and said: "In the fortress [_i.e._
 Antwerp] which we have to take there are in all probability
 Englishmen. But I do not want to see any Englishmen prisoners in the
 hands of this company." A general "Bravo" of assent was the answer.

This malignant frenzy against British troops, so carefully instilled,
is borne out by a passage in another diary, now in the possession of
the French Ministry of War, which was found on the 22nd of April on
the body of Richard Gerhold, of the 71st Regiment of Infantry of the
Reserve, Fourth Army Corps, who was killed in September at Nouvron:--

 Here also things occur which should not be. Great atrocities are of
 course committed upon Englishmen and Belgians; every one of them is
 now knocked on the head without mercy. But woe to the poor German who
 falls into their hands.

As regards the last sentence in this diary, which is one long chapter
of horrors and betrays a ferocious credulity, it is worthy of remark
that I have seen at the French Ministry of War the diary of a German
N.C.O. named Schulze, who, judging by internal evidence, was a man
of exceptional intelligence, in which the writer refers to tales of
French and Belgian atrocities circulated among the men by his superior
officers. He shrewdly adds that he believes the officers invented these
stories in order to prevent him and his comrades from surrendering.

A less conclusive passage, but a none the less suspicious one, is
to be found in a diary now in my possession. It is the diary of an
Unteroffizier, named Ragge, of the 158th Regiment, and contains (under
date October 21) the following:--

 We pursued the enemy as far as we saw him. We "knocked out" many
 English. The English lay on the ground as if sown there. Those of the
 Englishmen who were still alive in the trenches were stuck or shot.
 Our company made 61 prisoners.

_=Damning Brigade Order.=_--So far I have only dealt with the acts
of small German units--_i.e._, companies of infantry. I now come to
the most damning proofs of a policy of cold-blooded murder of wounded
and prisoners, initiated and carried out by a whole brigade under the
orders of a Brigadier-General. This particular investigation took
me a long time, but the results are, I think, conclusive. It may
be remembered that some months ago the French military authorities
published in the French newspapers what purported to be the text of an
order issued by a German Brigadier-General, named Stenger, commanding
the 58th Brigade, in which he ordered his troops to take no prisoners
and to put to death without mercy every one who fell into their
hands, whether wounded and defenceless or not. The German Government
immediately denounced the alleged order as a forgery. I determined to
see whether I could establish its authenticity, and in February last
I obtained a copy of the original from M. Mollard, of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, who is a member of the Commission appointed by the
French Government to inquire into the alleged German atrocities. The
text of that order was as follows:--

 Army Order of 26 Aug., 1914, about 4 p.m., such as was given to his
 troops as a Brigade or Army Order by the leader of the 7th Company of
 the 112th Regiment of Infantry at Thionville, at the entrance of the
 wood of Saint Barbe.

 To date from this day no prisoners will be made any longer. All the
 prisoners will be executed. The wounded, whether armed or defenceless,
 will be executed. Prisoners, even in large and compact formations,
 will be executed. Not a man will be left alive behind us.

Taking this alleged order as my starting-point, I began to make
inquiries at British Headquarters as to the existence of any
information about the doings of the 112th Regiment. I soon found that
there was good reason to suspect it. Our Intelligence Department placed
in my hands the records of the examination of two men of this regiment
who had been captured by us. One of them volunteered a statement to
one of our Intelligence Officers on the 23rd of November to the effect
that his regiment had orders to treat Indians well, but were allowed to
treat British prisoners as they pleased. This man's testimony appeared
to be reliable, as statements he made on other points, _i.e._, as to
the German formations, were subsequently found to be true, and his
information as to discrimination in the treatment of Indians entirely
bore out the conclusions I had already arrived at on that particular
point. The German witness in question further stated that 65 out of 150
British prisoners were killed in cold blood by their escort on or about
the 23rd of October on the road to Lille, and that the escort were
praised for their conduct. Other German prisoners have, I may add, also
made statements that they had orders to kill all the English who fell
into their hands....

At the end of April--too late, unfortunately, for use by Lord Bryce's
Committee--one of our Intelligence Officers placed before me the
following entry in the field note-book of a German prisoner, Reinhart
Brenneisen[1], reservist, belonging to the 4th Company, 112th Regiment,
and dated in August (the same month as appears on the face of the order
in question):

 Then came a brigade order that all French, whether wounded or not, who
 fell into our hands were to be shot. No prisoners were to be made.

This, I think, may be said to put the reality of the brigade order in
question beyond doubt.

The cumulative effect of this evidence, coupled with the statements of
so many of our men who claim to have been eye-witnesses of wholesale
bayoneting of the wounded, certainly confirms suspicions of the
gravest kind as to such acts having been done by authority. Neither
the temperament of the German soldier nor the character of German
discipline (_furchtbar streng_--"frightfully strict"--as a German
prisoner put it to me) makes it probable that the German soldiers acted
on their own initiative. It would, in any case, be incredible that so
many cases of outrage could be sufficiently explained by any law of
averages, or by the idiosyncrasies of the "bad characters" present in
every large congregation of men....


TREATMENT OF CIVIL POPULATION.

It is clear that the treatment of civilians is regulated by no more
rational or humane policy than that of intimidation or, even worse, of
sullen vindictiveness. As the German troops passed through the communes
and towns of the arrondissements of Ypres, Hazebrouck, Bethune, and
Lille, they shot indiscriminately at the innocent spectators of their
march; the peasant tilling his fields, the refugee tramping the roads,
and the workman returning to his home. To be seen was often dangerous,
to attempt to escape being seen was invariably fatal. Old men and boys
and even women and young girls were shot like rabbits. The slightest
failure to comply with the peremptory demands of the invader has been
punished with instant death.

The cure of Pradelle, having failed to find the key of the church
tower, was put against the wall and shot; a shepherd at a lonely
farmhouse near Rebais who failed to produce bread for the German troops
had his head blown off by a rifle; a baker at Moorslede who attempted
to escape was suffocated by German soldiers with his own scarf; a
young mother at Bailleul who was unable to produce sufficient coffee
to satisfy the demands of twenty-three German soldiers had her baby
seized by one of the latter and its head dipped in scalding water; an
old man of seventy-seven years of age at La Ferte Gaucher who attempted
to protect two women in his house from outrage was killed with a rifle
shot.

=_No Value on Human Life._=--I select these instances from my notes
at random--they could be multiplied many times--as indications of the
temper of the German troops. They might, perhaps, be dismissed as the
unauthorised acts of small patrols were it not that there is only too
much evidence to show that the soldiers are taught by their superiors
to set no value upon human life, and things have been done which could
not have been done without superior orders.

For example, at Bailleul, La Gorgue, and Doulieu, where no resistance
of any kind was offered to the German troops, and where the latter were
present in force under the command of commissioned officers, civilians
were taken in groups, and after being forced to dig their own graves
were shot by firing parties in the presence of an officer. At Doulieu,
which is a small village, eleven civilians were shot in this way; they
were strangers to the place, and it was only by subsequent examination
of the papers found on their bodies that some of them were identified
as inhabitants of neighbouring villages. If these men had been guilty
of any act of hostility it is not clear why they were not shot at once
in their own villages, and inquiries at some of the villages from which
they were taken have revealed no knowledge of any act of the kind.
It is, however, a common practice for the German troops to seize the
male inhabitants (especially those of military age) of the places they
occupy and take them away on their retreat. Twenty-five were so taken
from Bailleul and nothing has been heard of them since. There is only
too much reason to suppose that the same fate has overtaken them as
that which befell the unhappy men executed at Doulieu.

=_A Possible Explanation._=--I believe the explanation of these
sinister proceedings to be that the men were compelled to dig trenches
for the enemy, to give information as to the movement of their own
troops, and to act as guides (all clearly practices which are a
breach of the laws of war and of the Hague Regulations), and then,
their presence being inconvenient and their knowledge of the enemy's
positions and movements compromising, they were put to death. This is
not a mere surmise. The male inhabitants of Warneton were forced to
dig trenches for the enemy, and an inhabitant of Merris was compelled
to go with the German troops and act as a guide; it is notorious
that the official manual of the German General Staff _Kriegsbrauch
im Landskriege_ condones, and indeed indoctrinates, such breaches of
the laws of war. British soldiers who were taken prisoners by the
Germans and subsequently escaped were compelled by their captors to dig
trenches, and in a field note-book found on a soldier of the 100th
Saxon Body Grenadiers (XIIth Corps) occurs the following significant
passage:--

 My two prisoners worked hard at digging trenches. At midday I got the
 order to rejoin at village with my prisoners. I was very glad, as I
 had been ordered to shoot them both as soon as the French attacked.
 Thank God it was not necessary....


OUTRAGES UPON WOMEN.

When life is held so cheap, it is not surprising that honour and
property are not held more dear. Outrages upon the honour of women by
German soldiers have been so frequent that it is impossible to escape
the conviction that they have been condoned and indeed encouraged by
German officers. As regards this matter I have made a most minute
study of the German occupation of Bailleul. This place was occupied
by a regiment of German Hussars in October for a period of eight
days. During the whole of that period the town was delivered over
to the excesses of a licentious soldiery and was left in a state of
indescribable filth.

There were at least thirty cases of outrages on girls and young married
women, authenticated by sworn statements of witnesses and generally by
medical certificates of injury. It is extremely probable that, owing to
the natural reluctance of women to give evidence in cases of this kind,
the actual number of outrages largely exceeds this. Indeed, the leading
physician of the town, Dr. Bels, puts the number as high as sixty.
At least five officers were guilty of such offences, and where the
officers set the example the men followed. The circumstances were often
of a peculiarly revolting character; daughters were outraged in the
presence of their mothers, and mothers in the presence or the hearing
of their little children. In one case, the facts of which are proved by
evidence which would satisfy any court of law, a young girl of nineteen
was violated by one officer while the other held her mother by the
throat and pointed a revolver, after which the two officers exchanged
their respective roles. After the outrage they dragged the girl outside
and asked if she knew of any other young girls ("jeunes filles") in the
neighbourhood, adding that they wanted to do to them what they had done
to her.

=_No use appealing to German Officers._=--The officers and soldiers
usually hunted in couples, either entering the houses under pretence of
seeking billets, or forcing the doors by open violence. Frequently the
victims were beaten and kicked, and invariably threatened with a loaded
revolver, if they resisted. The husband or father of the women and
girls was usually absent on military service; if one was present he was
first ordered away under some pretext; and disobedience of civilians to
German orders, however improper, is always punished with instant death.
In several cases little children heard the cries and struggles of
their mother in the adjoining room to which she had been carried by a
brutal exercise of force. No attempt was made to keep discipline, and
the officers, when appealed to for protection, simply shrugged their
shoulders. Horses were stabled in salons; shops and private houses were
looted (there are nine hundred authenticated cases of pillage)....

The German troops were often drunk and always insolent. But
significantly enough, the bonds of discipline thus relaxed were
tightened at will and hardly a single straggler was left behind.

Inquiries in other places, in the villages of Meteren, Oultersteen,
and Nieppe, for example, establish the occurrence of similar outrages
upon defenceless women, accompanied by every circumstance of disgusting
barbarity. No civilian dare attempt to protect his wife or daughter
from outrage. To be in possession of weapons of defence is to be
condemned to instant execution, and even a village constable found in
possession of a revolver (which he was required to carry in virtue
of his office) was instantly shot at Westoutre. Roving patrols burnt
farmhouses and turned the women and children out into the wintry
and sodden fields with capricious cruelty and in pursuance of no
intelligible military purpose.


PRIVATE PROPERTY.

As regards private property, respect for it among the German troops
simply does not exist. By the universal testimony of every British
officer and soldier whom I have interrogated the progress of German
troops is like a plague of locusts over the land. What they cannot
carry off they destroy. Furniture is thrown into the street, pictures
are riddled with bullets or pierced by sword cuts, municipal registers
burnt, the contents of shops scattered over the floor, drawers rifled,
live stock slaughtered and the carcases left to rot in the fields.
This was the spectacle which frequently confronted our troops on the
advance to the Aisne and on their clearance of the German troops out of
Northern France. Cases of petty larceny by German soldiers appear to
be innumerable; they take whatever seizes their fancy, and leave the
towns they evacuate laden like pedlars. Empty ammunition waggons were
drawn up in front of private houses and filled with their contents for
despatch to Germany.

=_Robbery--pure and simple._=--I have had the reports of the local
commissaires of police placed before me, and they show that in smaller
villages like those of Caestre and Merris, with a population of about
1,500 souls or less, pillaging to the extent of 4,000_l._ and 6,000_l._
was committed by the German troops. I speak here of robbery which does
not affect to be anything else. But it is no uncommon thing to find
extortion officially practised by the commanding officers under various
more or less flimsy pretexts. One of these consists of holding a town
or village up to ransom under pretence that shots have been fired at
the German troops. Thus at the village of Merris a sum of 2,000_l._
was exacted as a fine from the Mayor at the point of a revolver under
this pretence, this village of 1,159 inhabitants having already been
pillaged to the extent of some 6,000_l._ worth of goods. At La Gorgue,
another small village, 2,000_l._ was extorted under a threat that if
it were not forthcoming the village would be burnt. At Warneton, a
small village, a fine of 400_l._ was levied. These fines were, it must
be remembered, quite independent of the requisitions of supplies. As
regards the latter, one of our Intelligence officers, whose duty it has
been to examine the forms of receipt given by German officers and men
for such requisitions, informs me that, while the receipts for small
sums of 100 francs or less bore a genuine signature, those for large
sums were invariably signed "Herr Hauptmann von Koepenick," the simple
peasants upon whom this fraud was practised being quite unaware that
the signature has a classical fictitiousness in Germany....

=_German Officers' Bestial Ways._=--Before I leave the subject of the
treatment of private property by the German troops, I should like to
draw the attention of the reader to some unpleasant facts which throw
a baneful light on the temper of German officers and men. If one thing
is more clearly established than another by my inquiries among the
officers of our Staff and divisional commands, it is that chateaux
or private houses used as the headquarters of German officers were
frequently found to have been left in a state of bestial pollution,
which can only be explained by gross drunkenness or filthy malice.
Whichever be the explanation, the fact remains that, while to use
the beds and the upholstery of private houses as a latrine is not an
atrocity, it indicates a state of mind sufficiently depraved to commit
one. Many of these incidents, related to me by our own officers from
their own observations, are so disgusting that they are unfit for
publication. They point to deliberate defilement.

=_Methods of Savages._=--The public has been shocked by the evidence,
accepted by Lord Bryce's Committee as genuine, which tells of such
mutilations of women and children as only the Kurds of Asia Minor had
been thought capable of perpetrating. But the Committee were fully
justified in accepting it--they could not do otherwise--and they
have by no means published the whole. Pathologists can best supply
the explanation of these crimes. I have been told by such that it is
not at all uncommon in cases of rape or sexual excess to find that
the criminal, when satiated by lust, attempts to murder or mutilate
his victim. This is presumably the explanation--if one can talk of
explanation--of outrages which would otherwise be incredible. The
Committee hint darkly at perverted sexual instinct. Cases of sodomy
and of the rape of little children did undoubtedly occur on a very
large scale. Some of the worst things have never been published.
This is not the time for mincing one's words but for plain speech.
Disgusting though it is, I therefore do not hesitate to place on record
an incident at Rebais related to me by the Mayor of Coulommiers in the
presence of several of his fellow-townsmen with corroborative detail. A
respectable woman in that town was seized by some Uhlans who intended
to ravish her, but her condition made rape impossible. What followed is
better described in French.

 Mme. H----, cafetiere a Rebais, mise nue par une patrouille allemande,
 obligee de parcourir ainsi toute sa maison, chassee dans la rue et
 obligee de regarder les cadavres de soldats anglais. Les allemands lui
 barbouillent la figure avec le sang de ses regles.

It is almost needless to say that the woman went mad. There is very
strong reason to suspect that young girls were carried off to the
trenches by licentious German soldiery, and there abused by hordes of
savage and licentious men. People in hiding in the cellars of houses
have heard the voices of women in the hands of German soldiers crying
all night long until death or stupor ended their agonies.

One of our officers, a subaltern in the sappers, heard a woman's
shrieks in the night coming from behind the German trenches near
Richebourg l'Avoue; when we advanced in the morning and drove the
Germans out a girl was found lying naked on the ground "pegged out" in
the form of a crucifix. I need not go on with this chapter of horrors.
To the end of time it will be remembered, and from one generation to
another, in the plains of Flanders, in the valleys of the Vosges, and
on the rolling fields of the Marne, the oral tradition of men will
perpetuate this story of infamy and wrong....

=_Insolence which Knows no Pity._=--Although I have some claims to
write as a jurist I have here made no attempt to pray in aid the Hague
Regulations in order to frame the counts of an indictment. The Germans
have broken all laws, human and divine, and not even the ancient
freemasonry of arms, whose honourable traditions are almost as old as
war itself, has restrained them in their brutal and licentious fury.
It is useless to attempt to discriminate between the people and their
rulers; an abundance of diaries of soldiers in the ranks shows that all
are infected with a common spirit. That spirit is pride, not the pride
of high and pure endeavour, but that pride for which the Greeks found
a name in the word #hybris#  the insolence which knows no pity and which
feels no love. Long ago Renan warned Strauss of this canker which was
eating into the German character. Pedants indoctrinated it, Generals
instilled it, the Emperor preached it. The whole people were taught
that war was a normal state of civilisation, that the lust of conquest
and the arrogance of race were the most precious of the virtues. On
this Dead Sea fruit the German people have been fed for a generation
until they are rotten to the core.




                               FOOTNOTE

[1] Brenneisen is now a prisoner in England. The diary was a most
    carefully kept one.








End of Project Gutenberg's Germany's Dishonoured Army, by Prof. J.H. Morgan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GERMANY'S DISHONOURED ARMY ***

***** This file should be named 46293.txt or 46293.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/2/9/46293/

Produced by Giovanni Fini, Brian Coe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
