The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Silent Rifleman, by 
Henry William Herbert and James Jackson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Silent Rifleman
       A tale of the Texan prairies

Author: Henry William Herbert
        James Jackson

Release Date: July 16, 2014 [EBook #46304]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SILENT RIFLEMAN ***




Produced by Jana Palkova, sp1nd and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)





Transcriber's Notes:

Punctuation errors have been repaired by the transcriber.

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

Text enclosed by plus signs is in small caps (+small caps+).

The following changes have been made by the transcriber:

  steal replaced with steel
  trongs replaced with strong
  ordours replaced with odours
  delated replaced with dilated
  nigh replaced with neigh




JACKSON'S NOVELS.

THE SILENT RIFLEMAN!

A TALE OF THE TEXAN PRAIRIES.




CHAPTER I.

THE HORSE AND THE RIDER.


It wanted an hour or two of sunset on a lovely evening in the latter
part of September, when a single horseman might have been seen making
his way to the westward, across the high dry prairie land, which lies
between the upper portion of the river Nueces and the Bravo del Norte.

He was a small, spare man, of no great personal power, but of a figure
which gave promise of great agility and capability of enduring fatigue,
the most remarkable feature of which was the extraordinary length of
his arms.

His countenance, without being in the least degree handsome, was
pleasing and expressive.

A short, heavy English rifle, carrying a ball of twelve to the pound,
was slung by a black leather belt across his shoulder, the braided
strap which supported his large buffalo-horn powder flask and bullet
pouch of otter skin crossing it on his breast. From a leather girdle,
which was buckled about his waist, he had hung a long, straight,
two-edged sword in a steel scabbard with a silver basket hilt on the
left side, which was counterbalanced by a long, broad-bladed hunting
knife with a buck-horn hilt, resting upon his right hip. There were
holsters at the bow of his large Mexican saddle, containing a pair of
fine duelling pistols with ten inch barrels; and in addition to these,
there was suspended from the pummel a formidable hatchet with a bright
steel head and a spike at the back, like an Indian tomahawk, but in all
respects a more ponderous and superior instrument.

On the croupe of his horse, and attached to the cantle of the saddle,
he carried a small valise of untanned leather, with a superb Mexican
blanket of blue and scarlet strapped upon it, and a large leathern
bottle with a horn drinking-cup swinging from it on one side; while to
the other was fastened a portion of the loin of a fat buck, which had
fallen in the course of the morning by the rifle of the traveller.

The horse which carried this well-appointed rider was a dark-brown
thorough-bred.

At length, when the sun was no longer above three times the width of
his own disc from the level line of the lowest plain, he set his spurs
to his horse, and put him from the high slashing trot which he had
hitherto maintained, into a long slinging gallop, which carried him
over the ground at the rate of some sixteen miles the hour.

After he had ridden at this rate for thirty or forty minutes, he
reached the brow of one of the low rolling waves of earth, which
constitute the surface of the prairie, and thence saw the land falling
away in a long gentle slope for some six miles toward the west, at
which distance it was bounded by a long continuous line of hills,
whose range seemed interminable. At the base of this range appeared
a dense line, looking sombre enough at that distance, but which the
experienced eye of the horseman well knew indicated a heavy growth of
timber--perhaps a deep forest, and, within its shadowy depths, a wide
and never-failing stream.

A short half-hour brought them to the forest just as the sun was
setting.

Through this wild paradise the mighty river rolled its pellucid waves,
rapid, and deep, and strong, and as transparent as the purest crystal.

Galloping his horse joyously over the rich green turf, the traveller
soon reached the river, at a spot where it was bordered by a little
beach or margin of pure white sand, as firm, and almost as hard as
marble; and springing into the cool clear water till it laved the
heaving flanks of his charger he suffered it to drink long and deep of
the pure beverage, which had not touched its thirsty lips since the
early morning.

This duty done, he returned to the shore, and, selecting an oak tree
about two feet in girth, around which the grass grew unusually tall
and luxuriant, tied his companion to its stem by the lasso, or cord of
plaited hide which was coiled at his saddle-bow.

Then, after polishing his accoutrements, as if for parade, he hung
his rifle and his broad-sword from the fork of a stunted oak tree,
collecting some dry leaves and branches, and, striking a light from
the ready flint and steel, soon had a clear bright fire glancing and
flashing in a sheltered nook surrounded on all sides but one, that
where his horse was tethered, by a dense and impenetrable thicket of
bays, prickly pear and holly.

Within a few minutes, half a dozen twigs, fixed in the ground about
the blazing fire, supported as many steaks of fat venison, each with a
biscuit under it imbibing the delicious gravy, and a second with salt
and pepper, all of which unusual dainties were supplied from the small
valise of the provident and epicurean frontiers-man.

While his supper was cooking thus, and sending forth rich and unwonted
odours through the forest, our traveller had prepared his simple couch,
spreading his handsome poncho on the deep herbage, with his saddle
arranged for his pillow.

If, however, he had hoped to enjoy his coming meal and his night's
repose without interruption, he had reckoned without his host; for, at
the same instant in which his charger ceased from feeding, snuffed the
air eagerly, and uttered a low whining; the traveller started to his
feet and listened anxiously for a moment, although there were so sounds
which could have been distinguished by any human ear unsharpened by the
necessities and habits of a woodman's life.

Satisfied apparently that something was at hand which might mean
mischief, he quietly took up his pistols and thrust them into his
girdle, reached down his rifle from the branch on which it hung,
loosened his wood-knife in its scabbard, and passed the handle of the
hatchet through a loop in his sword-belt, so that the head rested in
a sort of fold or pocket in the leather, evidently prepared for its
reception, and the haft lay close on his left thigh.

These preparations made silently, promptly, yet deliberately, he
stooped and laid his ear to the ground; nor did he raise himself to his
full height for several minutes.

"Two, four, six, eight," he muttered to himself at intervals. "Yes,
there are eight of them."

Again he laid his ear to the ground and listened.

"Yes, there are eight of them, sure enough," he again muttered; and
then, after a pause, he added: "But two of them are mules, I think; and
they are coming right down hitherward."

Then he looked to his rifle lock, and cocked his piece.

"Unless they turn aside when they reach the timber, they will be on
me in five minutes; and if they know the forest, they will not turn,
that's certain; for here's the only place where you can find hard
bottom to ride in and out of the old Bravo, for ten miles up and down."

He paused from his soliloquy, listened again, and then a smile crept
across his intelligent face.

"Bah!" he said, "I have been disquieting myself for nothing--they are
dragoon horses; I can tell their managed pace; though, what the devil
brings dragoons hither, the devil himself best knows."

Then he hung up his arms as before, again removed saddle and bridle
from his horse, threw down his pistols and his hatchet on the grass,
and, instead of concealing himself in ambush, unarmed, except his
wood-knife, stepped quite at his ease forth from the cover of his
thicket, and strode boldly forward to meet the new-comers.

He had not advanced above a hundred yards from the spot where his horse
was tethered and his fire burning, before he discovered the little band
of travellers just entering the belt of timber, at not above a hundred
yards distance from the point where he himself had ridden into it from
the open prairie.

That, however, which instantly caught the eye of the rover, was the
form of a female--and a female, evidently, of the superior classes,
forming one of the party, which, beside herself, consisted, as he saw
at half a glance, of an officer and four privates of dragoons, or
mounted riflemen.

"Precious lads, truly, these," he muttered through his teeth, "to
be travelling the prairies, and not see my trail at a short hundred
yards. By Jove! I believe they will cross it without notice. However,
I'll give them a fright anyhow--so here goes," and with the words, he
clapped his hand to his mouth, and uttered a long-drawn Indian yell,
which made the arches of the forest echo and re-echo its cadences, till
it died quavering in the far distance.

The rifles of the little party were cocked in an instant, and two or
three were instinctively cast up, and levelled in the direction whence
the sound proceeded.

But the woodman did not wait for any further demonstrations of
hostility, but stepped calmly forth from his covert, calling out, as he
did so, in a loud, clear voice:

"Whither, and whence, friends, so carelessly this bright evening?"

But ere his words were half out of his lips, he was interrupted by the
sharp crack of a rifle, discharged at him within twenty paces, the
ball of which sang past his head, perhaps at a foot's distance. But,
entirely unmoved by the assault or by the peril he had run, he finished
his sentence quietly, and then added:

"A miserably bad shot that, my lad; and a most unsoldierly act to fire
a shot at all, without waiting orders. Do not you say so, lieutenant?"

"You are very much to blame yourself, fellow; first, for yelling in
that wild fashion, for the purpose of creating an alarm, and then for
approaching a command so rashly. Who are you, fellow, speak?"

"Fellow! fellow!" replied the other, half soliloquizing, "and a
command, hey! command, truly; a couple of camaudus, or one of Jack
Hays' men would make an end of such a command, before it had seen where
to throw away one bullet."

"Well, sir, and who are you, then, I pray?"

"Pierre Delacroix, at your service."

"What! he who is commonly known as Pierre--"

"The Partisan, lieutenant," interrupted the other, quietly. "Yes, I
am the man, and my horse, Emperor, of whom you have heard, since you
have heard of me, is down in the brake yonder; and, what is the better
thing just now, there is a good fire burning, and some venison steaks
ready by this time, if they be not over done, and a flask of good
sherry wine and some cool water; and if you and your fair lady will
share the supper of the Partisan, I shall be happy to think that I am
pardoned for the slight alarm I gave you; and after supper, we will
hear what has brought you hither, and what I can do to serve you. Is it
a bargain?"

"Surely it is; and very thankful shall we be for your hospitality,
and yet more for your advice. This is the famous soldier, Julia," he
continued turning to the lady who accompanied him, "of whom you have
heard so much, and whom we had hoped to meet at San Antonio."

No more words were spoken until they reached the spot which Delacroix
had selected for his bivouac; but, as they did so, an exclamation of
pleasure burst from Julia's lips at the romantic beauty of the scene.

The travellers immediately dismounted.

Now, as Julia stood erect before the Partisan, with the clear light
of the blazing wood-fire falling full on her face, and revealing all
the charms of a figure, tall as the tallest of her sex, voluptuous
and fully rounded, yet slight withal, and delicate and slender as the
fairest ideal of a poet's dream, he thought that he had never looked
upon anything so perfectly and femininely lovely.

For some moments he stood gazing at her, mute, and positively
breathless with admiration; then, suddenly recollecting himself, he
called to the nearest of the dragoons, bidding him lead the lady's
horse down to the river, and water him; and then conducted her
respectfully to the place where he had spread his poncho on the grass,
and with the aid of that and his large saddle, arranged for her an
extemporaneous arm-chair near the fire, which the fresh coolness of the
woods rendered not wholly needless, even at that season; while the thin
smoke that rose from the wood embers, kept the mosquitoes at a distance.

Meanwhile, some of the dragoons applied themselves to clean the
horses and accoutrements, while others unloaded the pack mules, and
unbuckling the bags and cases which they carried, produced camp-kettles
and canteens, and a small India-rubber tent and camp-bed, which was
speedily set up and prepared in the methodical manner of the old
soldier, and promised better accommodation for the lady.

"My cooking is ready, lady, such as it is," said the Partisan, "and
I fancy you have the Spartan sauce, which even makes the black broth
palatable."

Julia started a little at the classical allusion, and cast a quick
glance toward her young husband, whose attention had been fixed on
another portion of the roving soldier's speech, and said quickly,
repeating the Partisan's word:

"Lady! Indeed I have been strangely remiss and discourteous, Major
Delacroix. In the first hurry of our introduction, I forgot to name
ourselves to you, though Yankee like; yet, I assure you, I am not a
Yankee; I by no means forgot to exhort from you all that I wished to
know. I should have imagined, Jule, that you would have found tongue
enough by this time to make yourself known to Major Delacroix, but
since it seems you have not done so, better late than never. Allow
me, Major Delacroix, to present you to Mrs. Arthur Gordon, six weeks
ago Miss Julia Forester, of New Orleans; and that done, to call your
attention to my very humble and unworthy self, Arthur Gordon, First
Lieutenant of the Second Dragoons."

When Arthur Gordon pronounced the words, Julia Forester, he started
forward, and exclaimed:

"What--what! it cannot be--the daughter of my best and oldest friend,
Colonel John Forester? I recollect his wife's name, whom I never saw,
was Julia."

Julia Gordon blushed crimson as he spoke, and then in an instant turned
as pale as ashes.

"My mother!" she gasped out, with a great exertion of the will
compelling herself to speak at all. "My poor mother, I never saw her
either, at least not within my recollection. Yes, Major Delacroix, I
am Colonel John Forester's wild and wilful daughter. God bless him,"
she continued, a big tear swelling to her eye, "as he deserves a better
child."

"Not so, not so, young lady. I am certain that it is not so. A brighter
or more beautiful, he could not have, and it will be hard to convince
me he could have a better, Lieutenant Gordon, allow me to shake your
hand, and congratulate you; your father-in-law, and your sweet lady's
father, was, I may say, to me more than a father; for, when Nature
robbed me of both my parents, he supplied both their places. God bless
John Forester, and all who love and honour him."

So thoroughly was the Partisan engrossed by his own warm and generous
feelings, that he did not perceive at all, what would at any other time
have been sufficiently apparent to a man of his keen and intuitive
sagacity, that there was something of evident discomposure in the
manner of the young officer as he spoke to him of his father-in-law.

The green carpet of the meadow was spread with their simple fair, and
the Partisan did the honours of his camp with a singular blending of
the frontiers-man's bluntness, and the easy manners of the gentleman
and soldier.

There was, however, an inexplicable gloom hanging over the little
party, and scarcely was the frugal meal ended before, on the pretext
of weariness, the lady retired to her tent, and the husband went away
for a few minutes, as he said, to inspect his sentries, while Pierre
Delacroix filled his Indian pipe with kinnekinnink, and, stretching
himself at full length on his blanket, in the warmth of the fire,
rested his head on his elbow, and mused more deeply than he had
done for many a year, rolling out all the time great volumes of the
odoriferous smoke of that Indian mixture, which he had learned to
prefer to the Havana.




CHAPTER II.

THE LIEUTENANT'S STORY.


The Partisan had not sat long alone, ere the young officer returned
and joined him; yet, in that brief space, almost all the actions and
adventures of a not uneventful life had passed through his mind; so
strongly had his imagination been excited by the occurrences of the
evening.

"Come, Mr. Gordon," said the Partisan, "I fancy that by this time you
have got your men settled for the night. Had you not better take your
pipe, and sit down with me, that we may talk matters over. By something
you let fall a while ago, it seems that you have been expecting to meet
me at San Antonio, although I knew it not, nor have been there these
two months. Now, you must have had some end in seeking me; and, until I
know what end that is, I am at a loss to see how I can aid you."

"To make you understand that, Major Delacroix--"

"Pardon me, sir," replied the Partisan, hastily, "I have no great
respect for titles of any kind, least of all for military titles, when
not backed by military rank and command. So, if you please, you will
call me Pierre, or Delacroix, or Partisan."

"Very well," replied Gordon. "It is on you that we have counted all
along for taking us safely to our journey's end."

"Well, we have gained something at least. Now where may that very
definite place, which you call your journey's end, be? And, as the next
question, what made you count upon me?"

"Our journey's end--Taylor's camp, of course--where else _should_ it
be?"

"Anywhere else, I should think, considering the means you have of
getting thither, and the company you have with you. You do not really
mean to say that you contemplate carrying that beautiful and delicate
young woman with you to head-quarters?--the thing is utter madness."

"And yet my destination is headquarters; and she has no home, save my
tent."

"Julia Forester--John Forester's daughter no home!" cried the Partisan,
in far louder tones than he was wont to use, and starting to his feet,
half indignant and half astonished. "Did I understand you aright, young
sir? Did you say Julia Forester has no home save in the tent of a
second lieutenant of dragoons?"

"I did say precisely that, Pierre Delacroix," answered the soldier,
nettled a little by the manner of the questioner, and shaking off his
momentary embarrassment the instant he was put upon his mettle.

"When I knew Colonel John Forester, he was reputed to be worth a
million of dollars," said Pierre.

"When I knew him," replied Arthur Gordon, "he was reputed to be worth
two, at the lowest figure."

"And has he become a bankrupt since then, or a beggar?" asked the
other, sharply.

"Neither, that I ever heard. _Au contraire_, he is, all but one or two,
the richest man they say in Louisiana."

"And why the devil, then, did he give you his daughter for a wife, and
not give you the means to sustain her."

"I never said that he did give her to me," said the other, steadily.

"You said she was your wife."

"I did say so, and do. But I will substitute a short story for a long
debate."

"Pray let us do so."

"It is six years since I first visited New Orleans; and being the
bearer of letters to Colonel Forester was received hospitably and
entertained in his house, where he then lived nominally alone, with the
exception of his only daughter, Julia, at that time a beautiful girl
of fourteen. Being very young myself, we were thrown much together, a
sort of childish affection, half-liking and half love, grew up between
us--not altogether childish either; for it constantly increased during
the three years which I spent in the city, until it became a powerful
passion. When I entered the army, on the first raising of the second
dragoon regiment, and before leaving the city for the north-west, I had
an explanation with the colonel; and it was understood, and agreed,
that at some future period, which was left undecided, Julia should be
my wife. We were permitted to correspond, and I mounted my horse and
rode away with my regiment, as light-hearted and as happy a soldier
as ever set jack boot in steel stirrup. I received letters from my
betrothed, of which I shall only say that they were all that the most
sanguine lover could desire.

"After a while, however, a difference in their tone became apparent.
Not, indeed, in the manifestation of affection, but of hope. At length
her letters ceased altogether; and I was months without receiving any
tidings from her. When the present war broke out I was eastward to
recruit and had no opportunity of visiting New Orleans, although my
brain and my heart were both on fire to do so. Three months since I
received, the first time for nearly a year, a short, hurried, agonizing
note from Julia, entreating me to come near her, without an instant's
delay, as her mistress was too great to be endured, and one way or
other she must release herself from it. For once, fortune favoured
me; for the same post which brought her letter brought orders to the
captain of my company to send me forward instantly with the men we had
raised, to the very city in which I most desired to be. A fortnight
afterward I was on the spot, and learned all the infamous and horrid
truth.

"Your friend, the high and honoured soldier, whom I had known of
old--the very pattern and impersonation of uprightness, and chivalry,
and true nobility of soul--had so far lapsed in the decline of his
intellectual powers from his once glorious standard, as to have
made a coloured woman--his own emancipated slave, and formerly his
mistress--his lawful wife and the partner of his fortunes; placing
her openly at the head of his table, and bringing his illegitimate
daughters, the offspring of his foul concubinage, into equality of
station and society with his own beautiful, and pure, and noble
child--with my Julia!"

"Great God!" exclaimed the Partisan, bounding to his feet almost in
fury; "great God! can this be so? Would that I had been near to him;
for, by the Lord that liveth, if neither argument nor entreaty should
have been power to prevail over such low and beast-like passion, my
hand--my own hand, which has caressed his cheeks and played with his
grey hairs so often--my own hand should have spared him the infamy, and
slain him in his untainted honour."

"But this was not all, nor half of all, that poor Julia suffered; for
the incarnate devil, whom I must call Mrs. Forester, not content
with forcing the deluded old man into the rescinding of his will, and
bequeathing all but a mere pittance to herself and base-born children,
never ceased persecuting him day or night, till she procured his
promise to send Julia secretly away to Europe, there to be immured in
a convent; fearing unquestionably that if she should be married to an
American gentleman and soldier, her husband would find some means to
frustrate the enormities she had planned so artfully, and secure a
share at least of the partial old man's fortunes. I had an interview
with him, though not without much difficulty; I offered to forego
all--to sign away all claim on her behalf and my own, provided he
would give me her hand, portionless and alone. For a while I thought I
had prevailed; but the fiend entered the room, and I saw the old man
quail before the gaze of her fierce, snake-like eye, and all was lost.
Then, I, too, lost my temper; and I swore by the God who made me, and
by the hell to which that woman's deeds were leading her, that her
plans should be frustrated, and that Julia should be my wife in spite
of man or devil. I got brief leave of absence on the promise to join
at head-quarters before the last day of the present month--embarked
my recruits with my second lieutenant; and on the third day after,
Forester's garden wall was scaled, his daughter's window broken, and
before the day dawned she was my bride.

"Still flight was needful, and we fled; for by his wrath, and the
unscrupulous wickedness of her who prompted him, we might still have
been separated for a while, if not for ever. We fled, I say, to
Natchez, and thence to Natchitoches, where by good fortune I found the
little squad of dragoons who escort me, making their way down the river
to join my party, which they had been detailed to enter as a veteran
nucleus. With them, and this letter to yourself from an old friend of
mine, who has, I believe, lived with you, Frank Arrowsmith of ours, I
have made my way thus far safely.

"He gave me a letter to you, commending us to your care. He told me
that if you would undertake it, you could guide us in safety into
Taylor's camp, through all the guerrillas in Mexico."

"He did me too little and too much justice. Too little, in supposing
that there was any _if_ about it. The idea of Pierre Delacroix refusing
to guide or assist a lady in the midst of danger. As to my being _able_
to carry you safely into Taylor's camp, that's quite another thing."

"Is there so much danger?"

"The country is alive with horse. Every village is in arms, every
rancho has turned out its riders; and keen riders they are, I assure
you. Why, between us and the fences, and all the way towards Encinos,
there are not less than a thousand men scattered about in little bands,
from six to fifty and upward. And now, you go and bid your men to put
no more wood on the fires, and lie down one and all, and get all the
sleep they can. They will need it before we reach Monterey."

"What! will you have no sentinel?"

"I would rather have my brown horse, Emperor, for a sentinel, than all
the dragoons in the United States, or out of it. Do what I bid you, and
then get to your bed yourself. I will wake you before the morning star
is up to-morrow."

Gordon arose, well satisfied that the Partisan knew his business far
better than he, and went away to do his bidding, much to the delight of
the unfortunate dragoon, who was pacing up and down with his carbine in
the hollow of his arm, envying his more lucky comrades their sound and
healthy slumbers.

This duty done, the young officer hurried back to his tent and his fair
bride; and, in doing so, passed close to the bivouac of the Partisan.

He had wrapped himself close in the handsome blanket, with his knife
drawn in one hand, and his pistol in the other, ready for instant
defense on the least alarm; and, with his head resting in the hollow
of his large Spanish saddle, was already buried in deep and dreamless
sleep.

In ten minutes more there was not an eyelid open, of man or animal, in
the encampment; and the broad, lustrous, Northern moon, sailing in a
flood of silver glory through the azure firmament, alone watched over
them, like the unsleeping eye of an all-seeing Providence.




CHAPTER III.

THE PASSAGE OF THE BRAVO.


The stars were beginning to grow pale in the heavens, and a faint
greyish tint was creeping gradually upward from the Eastern horizon,
and usurping the dark azure of the cloudless sky, when the light sleep
of the Partisan was interrupted by the long, tremulous, low, whining of
his favourite horse.

He started to his feet in an instant, and listening eagerly, and again
laying his ear to the ground, as on the previous evening, speedily
became aware that a large body of horse was passing along the hard
prairie, not far from the skirts of the timber. Instantly awakening the
young lieutenant, and his dragoons, he bade them strike tent, load the
mules, and saddle the chargers with the possible speed and silence,
keeping their arms ready, for that danger was at hand.

This done, he took up his trusty rifle, and stole away with a noiseless
step to reconnoiter the party, which had now come so near that the
clank of the steel scabbards against the stirrup irons was distinctly
audible above the hollow sound of the horses' tramps.

The noise, however, gradually died away, the troopers having evidently
ridden down the outer edge of the forest to the Southward, without
noticing the track left by the horses of our company.

Within ten minutes, Pierre returned with a very serious countenance.

"There are above a hundred of them," he said; "regular lancers of
Carrera's band. They have gone Southward for the present; but we may
expect them back within an hour, for they are evidently on the look-out
for our trail, which they must have followed from the last bottom,
and lost at night on the dry prairie; had the morning been one hour
advanced, they must have seen it, and we should have been all killed
before this time; for they make no prisoners."

"There is no time to lose, then," said Gordon, hastily, looking with an
anxious eye to the face of his wife, who was already equipped and ready
to mount. "Let us get to horse at once, and put the river between them
and us."

"That is soon done, so far as we men are concerned," replied the
Partisan; "but how do you get _her_ across rivers such as this?"

"We have an India-rubber pontoon here," he answered, pointing to a sort
of oval bag of that material, depending from two air cylinders of the
same stuff, which, when inflated, and distended by two or three short
staves, form a rude boat.

"Let her get in, in God's name!" replied the Partisan, "for all this
takes time, and we have little enough of that to spare."

And, with the words, he led his own horse, now fully accoutered, down
to the shore, at the spot where he had watered the animal on the
previous evening, followed by the dragoons, three of whom led the
beasts, while one carried the light pontoon.

Gordon brought up the rear, with his fair, delicate wife hanging
upon his arm, and smiling with serene and beautiful confidence in
the protection of her gallant husband. Arrived on the bank, all the
dragoons mounted and entered the broad and rapid river, which could
not at this spot have been less than five hundred yards in width.
Three of them leading the pack mules and the lady's jinnet, and the
fourth carrying in his hand the reel on which was wound the tough cord
of twisted hide, by which the frail bark was to be drawn across the
whirling current.

So strong was the stream that, although the horses swam well and
stoutly, and although the dragoons were as well trained to the
management of their horses in the water as on dry land, they were
carried a great distance down the river before they were enabled to
make the opposite bank.

Then with a bright eye and a cheerful smile on her lovely face, the
soft and delicate young woman entered the frail vessel, which sunk so
deeply in the water, even under her slight burthen, that the extreme
edges only of the cylinders which supported it were visible above the
surface of the swift glancing waters.

Scarce was she landed, ere she was seated on the back of her beautiful
and docile palfrey, which, recruited by its night's rest and plentiful
pasture, pawed the earth, eager to be once more in motion. Gordon had
already ridden a yard or two into the river, when he was attracted by
the singular aspect and expression of the Partisan. Both horse and man
stood like statues.

The charger's fine limbs positively trembled with excitement; his
small, thin ears were pricked acutely forward; his large eyes dilated;
and his nostrils distorted to the utmost, and as red as blood.

Pierre sat erect in his saddle; gazing with his keen dark eye into the
recesses of the forest, his left hand raised to his ear, for he had let
fall his reins on the disciplined charger's neck, and his cocked rifle
ready in the right.

The next instant, a single Mexican came into view, wheeling his
small but fiery horse round the thicket, which had sheltered their
encampment, at full gallop.

The rifle of the Partisan rose slowly, and, with a steady motion, to
his shoulder, and there remained as still and firm as though it and the
extended arm which supported it, had been wrought in bronze or iron.

And now the ranchero--for such he seemed to be--was within forty yards
of Pierre, when he saw the horse, the man, the levelled rifle--when he
recognized the being he most feared on earth--the far-famed Partisan.
Wheeling his horse in an instant, by dint of his cruel massive bit,
which threw him on his haunches, as if by magic, the terrified wretch
turned to fly in the direction of the troopers, who had gone down to
the southward, and were not probably even now more than a mile distant.

Satisfied by the man's flight that he was unsupported, Pierre rapidly
uncocked his rifle, and threw it to the ground, turning as he did so
to forbid Gordon--who had unslung his carbine, and now half suspecting
treachery in his guide, was raising it to his eye--from firing.

"Not for your life!" he cried--"not for your life! Cross the river, and
ride westward. I will deal with this dog."

And, with the word, gathering up the reins in his left hand, he gave
Emperor the spur so suddenly that he bounded six feet into the air,
with all his feet together, and dashed at once into his tearing gallop.

Meanwhile the rider had uncoiled the lasso, which hung from the pummel
of his saddle, and whirling it around his head in the true Spanish
fashion, thundered along in pursuit of the fugitive at a tremendous
pace.

The Mexican had, it is true, some fifty yards the start of his pursuer,
and knowing that he was riding for his life, or at least for his
liberty, plied his long-roweled spurs with desperate energy.

On drove the Emperor, covering sixteen feet at every stroke, and
gaining every second upon the trembling fugitive. Now he was within
twenty yards distance, when the ranchero, turning in his saddle,
deliberately levelled his escopeta at the Partisan.

In another moment his carbine would have been discharged, and the alarm
communicated to the other troopers; but ere he could pull the trigger,
the Partisan wheeled Emperor by a quick movement of his hand and thigh,
and hurled the tremendous missile as sure and almost as swift as his
own unerring bullet.

Aimed by an eagle eye, and launched by a master hand, the terrible
noose of the lasso encircled both the forelegs of the Mexican horse
as he sprang forward, was drawn taut on the instant by the very speed
of the trammelled captive, and hurled horse and rider headlong to the
earth, with a violence which left both for an instant senseless.

The next moment Pierre leaped from his saddle and sprang upon his
captive.

"Life!" he cried, piteously, in Spanish, "life, for the love of God,
and the most holy Virgin! For charity, give me my life, Senor American!"

"Mount your horse, fool!" replied the Partisan, sternly, "who the devil
do you think would trouble himself to take such a miserable life as
yours."

Admonished thus, the man climbed awkwardly to his saddle, and when once
there was secured in his seat by Pierre, who, cutting the lasso from
the Mexican saddle, fastened his feet with it under his horse's belly,
though not so tightly as to deprive him of the necessary command of the
animal.

This done, he released his arms, and bidding him in a stern, quiet
voice followed him close and silently, if he did not desire to be
strangled, he leaped lightly into his own saddle, and cantered back
toward the river, followed by his captive, who took admirable care to
keep so nigh to his conqueror that the strain of the harsh cord about
his neck should not be drawn any tighter.

In the meantime, Lieutenant Gordon, who had first watched the chase
with some apprehension, and very great anxiety lest the fugitive
should escape, had no sooner seen the lasso hurled, and the downfall
of man and horse, than, perfectly content to trust all to the skill
and judgment of a man who had exhibited such readiness of thought and
action, he addressed himself to obey his directions; and, putting his
horse steadily down the bank into the river, swam it gallantly, holding
his pistols above his head in his right hand, in order to keep the
powder dry in case of future emergency.

Before he was half way across, the Partisan came up at a brisk, hard
canter, with his trembling prisoner in tow, whose sword, pistols, and
escopeta he threw into the river, and then taking his own pistols from
the holsters, and holding them aloft, like Gordon, plunged in himself
and swam stoutly over, dragging the unfortunate ranchero in mortal
terror after him.




CHAPTER IV.

THE DOUBLE TRAITOR.


There was no need of discussion or debate, so evidently correct was the
plan of the Partisan; nor, had his views been much more questionable
than they were, is it at all probable that any opposition would have
been made, so completely had he gained the confidence of the whole
party, by his promptitude, his gallantry, and his extraordinary
coolness in danger. The heads of all the horses, therefore, were turned
westward, and away they rode at as rapid a rate as the nature of the
ground permitted. In the present order of the march, the most danger
being anticipated from the rear, the oldest and most intelligent of
the dragoons was detached to a hundred yards in front, followed by
the three others; two leading the pack mules, and the third having
charge of the prisoner, about whose neck one end of the lasso was still
secured, while the other was made fast to the pummel of the soldier's
saddle.

After these, Gordon and his fair bride rode together, conversing at
times in a low voice, but yet oftener keeping silence.

In the rear of all rode the Partisan, alone, at nearly a hundred yards
distance from the little group which preceded him.

As they galloped onward, however, through the belt of timber which
bordered the Western as well as the Eastern marge of the Bravo del
Norte, time slipped away and brought no sounds of pursuit from the rear.

Just as they were approaching so nearly to the margin of the open
ground, that the dragoon, who acted as vidette, was looking round for
orders, Pierre uttered a shrill, long-drawn whistle, which was the
preconcerted signal for a halt; and, after the rest of the party had
pulled up their horses, galloped forward himself till he reached the
extreme verge of the covert, where, without speaking a single word, he
dismounted, fastening his charger to a tree, and advanced stealthily
into the open prairie.

After being absent about twenty minutes, during which the remainder
of his party had lost sight of him altogether, he returned with a
thoughtful expression on his strongly-marked features, and walked
through the little group of dragoons and pack mules, until he reached
Gordon and his fair bride, who sat on their panting horses, eagerly
awaiting his approach.

"Have you heard anything," he asked, quietly, "from the forest in our
rear?"

"Not a sound," replied the young officer.

"There are three smokes, one hereaway, some six miles to the southward.
Now there are three plans, of which we must choose one, and then act
on it for life or death. We must work twenty miles due north, up this
forest land, and so get above their posts--which were the safest plan
of all, if it would not carry us so far out of our route, and bring us
far too soon into the settled country, quite out of the line of our
communications--or we must strike due southward for that extinguished
fire, and so strive to make our way down to our posts at Mier and
Camargo, which would do well enough did not the whole of that country
swarm with guerilleros--or, again, we must drive right onward, and
take the chance of falling on the party at the little fire unawares,
and finding them as few that we can master them. If we succeed in
doing so, we have the best chance of reaching Monterey in safety. For,
once through these frontier parties, we shall, it is likely, find the
country clear until we reach our outposts."

"The risk of the three, then, is nearly equal," said Gordon, musing
deeply.

"The immediate risk of the last is greatest; the ultimate risk the
least; but, in truth, it is chance, anyhow."

Gordon desired him to help the lady to mount, replaced his slender
baggage on the back of the good horse Emperor, and then, without
setting a foot in the stirrup, laid his hand lightly on the pummel, and
vaulted into the saddle.

After this, miles and miles vanished beneath the feet of their horses,
as they pressed onward steadily and swiftly; Pierre, once again in
the van, leading them on, rifle unslung and ready, at Emperor's fast
slashing trot.

Now they were within a mile or less of the digy brow, steeper and more
abrupt than any which they had yet passed, from the other side of which
the smoke rose in grey volumes, having been fed with recent fuel. Here,
then, Pierre halted, and caused the pack-mules to be securely tethered
to stakes driven into the moist earth of the prairie bottom, together
with the horse of the Mexican.

The prisoner--after being once more interrogated, and persisting in
his tale that there were but six men; that there was a large stream
at the base of the descent; and that the fire was on this side of the
stream--was dismounted, gagged, bound hand and foot, and laid on his
back upon the grass.

This done, Gordon arranged his handful of men, himself leading on the
right, while Pierre rode forward some six horse-lengths in advance,
and Julia, who had refused positively to remain behind the pack-mules,
followed a length or two behind.

Now they were within twenty paces of the extreme brow of the ridge,
which alone separated them from their enemy--three paces more would
have brought their heads into relief against the sky above the summit
of the hill, and discovered them to the sentinel, if there were one,
on duty. At this moment, Pierre pulled his horse short up, dismounted
silently, and with a gesture to the well-trained and gallant animal,
which, it was evident, he understood--for he stood stock still on the
instant, with ears erect, expanded nostril, straining eye, quivering
in every limb with fiery eagerness--cast himself down, rifle in hand,
among the shorter herbage which clothed the steep ascent.

There were, as the prisoner had stated, six men only; two of whom
were awake, the one a sentinel stalking to and fro with the escopeta
in his hand, the other, a non-commissioned officer, who sat smoking
his cigarillo by the fire, over which a camp kettle, filled with some
savory mess, was simmering.

The death-shot, which sped its bullet crashing through the brain of the
hapless sentinel, aroused them all, and brought them to their feet,
amazed and terrified, and unprepared for action.

Meantime, the dragoons crossed the bridge and poured down all abreast,
receiving as they came, a straggling volley from the escopetas of the
lancers, who seeing that flight was hopeless, stood to their arms like
men, and making a desperate defense.

Then came a desperate race, for life or death, across the firm dry
prairie, which echoed under the thundering horse-tramps firm, solid,
and elastic.

The Mexican had, perhaps, gained a start of some fifty yards before his
foe was across the brook, and his small but high-bred horse, being the
fresher of the two, held his own for a little way, and even widened
the gap at first, between himself and his pursuer. Ere long, however,
the tremendous stride and power of the Anglo-American thorough-bred
horse began to tell; and, at every stroke, the Partisan closed on him.
Nor was the other slow to perceive the disadvantage. He stood up in
his stirrups, looked quietly behind him, and seeing that none of the
dragoons had passed the brook, but had dismounted and were now grouped
about the fire, deliberately pulled his horse up, and, unslinging his
escopeta, took a deliberate aim at Pierre Delacroix.

He fired. The ball whizzed through the air, so close to the head of the
Partisan, that it severed one of his long, dark locks; but it passed
onward harmless. Then, seeing the failure of his missile, the Mexican
couched his long lance and rode at the frontiers-man with a savage yell.

Silently Pierre charged right upon him; but, when he was within a
horse's length of the spear's point, he wheeled suddenly to the left,
and as the Mexican was borne past him, delivered a straight lounge,
_en carte_, which emptied his saddle in an instant, and left him but a
minute's life to wrestle out on the greensward.

The Partisan had no time to give mercy, and he rode away to join Gordon
and the lady; but, ere he did so, he met the prisoner in charge of the
two soldiers who had brought up the mules, and the fellow, looking at
him half askance, asked him in Spanish, with a sullen and almost savage
intonation, whether he had not told him truly.

Pierre replied only by two words--"Very truly." But he noted the accent
and half-sneering smile; and the first words he spoke as he joined the
lieutenant, were:

"Confound that scoundrel! I have half a mind to reward him with one
ounce of lead instead of two of gold."

"That were scarce worthy of you, Partisan," said Gordon, "and scarce
worth the time. What harm can one poor devil like that do to six stout,
well-armed fellows, such as we?"

"I do not know," answered Pierre, "I do not know; but right sure I am,
that he is a double traitor."




CHAPTER V.

THE NIGHT ALARM.


All day they rode across the open plains, presenting still the same
invariable aspect of rich prairie land, for the most part nearly level,
but now very rich and fertile, and becoming more and more so, with
every mile our party traversed.

At noon, they halted for three hours under the shelter of a clump of
magnificent oaks over-canopying a little pool, the well-head of as
clear a streamlet as ever was the haunt of Grecian woodnymph. The
sylvan meal was spread with all the simple luxury of a frontiers-man's
fare.

After the meal was over, the Partisan said:

"Now try to sleep for an hour or so, while I go and take a round on
the prairie. I see a flock of buzzards yonder, whose motives I don't
exactly understand, and I would have a nearer look at them."

And with the word, he took up his rifle, tried it with the ramrod
to see that the ball had not fallen out, from the speed at which he
had ridden, as the gun hung muzzle downward at his back; renewed the
copper caps, loosened his wood-knife in its sheath, and walked off
unaccompanied toward the spot in the plain above which a flight of the
black vultures, commonly known as Turkey Buzzards, were hovering and
swooping, at a distance so great that they looked no larger than flies,
and that no ordinary eye could have distinguished what they were.

As he moved away slowly, Julia's eyes followed his departing figure,
and her face wore a very thoughtful expression, as she turned round to
her husband.

"There goes an extraordinary man," she said, with an expression of deep
feeling. "A very singular, and very noble character. I never have seen
and very seldom read of anything like him."

"By Heaven! I believe he is in love with you, Julia," replied Frank
Gordon, half laughing, half in earnest. "I have thought so all the
morning."

"Silly, silly, Frank!" she answered, slapping his hand playfully. "Do
you know that they say jealous husbands make false wives? and that you
should not imagine that I could like any man but you."

About an hour elapsed before the Partisan returned, bearing on his
shoulders the saddle of a fat buck, which he had shot during his
reconnaissance, wrapped in his own hide, and in his right hand,
together with his rifle, a long Comanche arrow reddened with dry gore.

He found the whole party sleeping so soundly that he walked into the
very midst of them without disturbing one of the number.

For many hours, not a sound was heard in the neighbourhood of the
little encampment. The moon rose and soared above it in her silver
beauty, and bathed everything for miles and miles around in soft
lustre--the stars rose and set--and the first grey ray of morning was
just beginning to pale the eastern horizon, when a deep, continuous,
hollow sound, like the roar of the distant surf, aroused every one in
an instant.

"Indians! it is Indians!" exclaimed Gordon. "Stand to the horses, lads.
Strike the tent like lightning. If one of the beasts neigh or stir, we
are lost."

Three of the dragoons, who had risen to their feet on the first alarm,
obeyed his orders in an instant, as regarded the horses; Gordon himself
struck the tent, and in deep silence, speechless and almost breathless,
they awaited the result.

Nearer and nearer drew the din. Gordon was right; it was the fast
falling tramp of unshodden horse hoofs. Five minutes, or less, after
the first alarm, the mounted horde swept by the mouth of the gorge,
so near that the travellers could see their shaven and plumed scalps,
their easy martial seats on their wild horses, and their long lances in
relief against the sky. But the darkness which brooded over the little
basin protected them, and almost as soon as it was there, the danger
had passed over.

But as it ended, and the men had time to look around them, it was
perceived at once that one of their number--Pierre, the Partisan--was
missing, and that the sergeant, although that din might have aroused
the dead, still lay asleep on the greensward.

Asleep, indeed! in that sleep which knows no waking. Three deep
knife-wounds in his bosom, his throat cut from ear to ear, the cords
severed which had bound him to the prisoner--these sufficed to tell the
tale.

But the Mexican and the sergeant's charger had vanished, and the
Partisan and brown Emperor were absent.

Horror, and a sense near akin to despair, fell on the party thus
abandoned. For a little while they gazed in each other's faces, mute
and white with surprise, if not with terror. Gordon was the first to
recover from his consternation, and he spoke cheeringly.

"The prisoner has escaped, and the Partisan has gone in pursuit of
him, that is clear," he said. "We have nothing to do but to wait here
until he returns. We have food in abundance; and water and forage for
the horses, and we can keep this pass against all the Indians in the
universe, so long as our ammunition lasts--and we can fire five hundred
rounds, if the Comanches find us out, which I think they will not.
Keep good heart, therefore, men, and, trust me, Pierre Delacroix will
be back here before sunset."

"But the Comanches! have not they cut him off?" whispered Julia, who
had not spoken one word since the first alarm, but had behaved with the
cool, passive fortitude of a brave, noble woman, awaiting the end in
silent resignation.

"Surely not," replied Gordon, confidently. "Had they fallen in with
him, his brave horse would surely have outstripped them, and in his
flight he would surely have led them in a contrary direction from this,
our stronghold."

"Sure he would. You are right! you are right!" said the quick-witted
girl--"God's name be praised; you are right, Frank; he is safe."




CHAPTER VI.

THE BELEAGUERED CAMP.


"Now I will post a sentinel on yon hillock, and then we will pass the
day as easily as we can. I and my fellows will lay poor Sergeant Davis
in the earth, which, if it be not consecrated, will at least shield him
from the ravening wolf and the loathsome vulture."

The sabres of his dragoons, and an axe or two, which had been brought
with them as part of the camp equipments, sufficed to scoop out
a little hollow in the rich soil of the moist basin, hard by the
streamlet's bed, and in it, wrapped in his watch-cloak, with his plumed
shako on his head, and his good sword on his thigh, all that was
earthly of the gallant veteran was laid to take its long sleep.

Gordon secured his telescope, and, mounting a steep hill, surveyed the
country, expecting to see the Partisan.

All at once he exclaimed in a full, manly, and clear tone:

"Julia, huzza! huzza! He is here--come forth and greet him. The
Partisan is here already."

And just as the highly-bred brown horse bore him up the low bank from
the rivulet's bed, she came out quickly from the little tent with a
warm flush on her soft cheeks and a bright light in her clear blue eye,
and a fleet step, and an out-stretched hand, which showed that the
joy which she manifested at his coming was from the heart, sincere and
earnest.

"Oh!" she cried, "Major Delacroix!" and her sweet low voice faltered
as she spoke, as if she were on the point of bursting into tears, "how
glad, how very glad I am to see you."

"Too glad, I am afraid, dear lady," answered the gallant soldier,
bowing almost to the saddle bow, "too glad, I am afraid; for your
pleasure almost looks as if you thought I had deserted you."

"Oh! no, indeed--indeed!" she answered, clapping her hands together in
the intensity of her earnestness; "I knew that you would die a thousand
deaths before you would desert me--before you would desert, I mean,"
she added, with some slight embarrassment, "any woman in distress or
danger."

"You need not have modified your first expression, lady," replied the
Partisan, quietly; "as for dying a thousand deaths, I cannot say for
that, but certainly so far as risking the one life I do possess, I
would do that for _you_, willingly."

Julia Gordon was a high-minded, artless, innocent woman, if ever
such an one breathed the breath of life; but still she was a woman.
She perceived at once that she had struck and fascinated the wild
Partisan at first sight, and though she would not for the universe have
intentionally caused him a single pang, she did unconsciously encourage
him, and lead him on to wilder and more wandering fancies than he had
ever entertained before.

"You flatter me, fair lady," he replied, with a smile, as he dismounted
from his good horse; "and flattery from such lips as yours were
perillous, indeed, to a younger man than I, and to one alienated from
the hopes, the wishes, the delights of civilized society. But let us
go in to your tent," he continued, "and you shall bestow upon me your
hospitality to-day, in requital of the poor meal I set before you on
the other side of the Bravo."

When the repast was ended, and coffee set before them, he produced his
pipe, and filling it with his favourite mixture of tobacco, applied
himself for a few minutes to smoking silently, Gordon following his
example, and Julia awaiting patiently the relation, which, with the
true woman's instinct, she foresaw to be close at hand.

"Now then, lieutenant, since we are about to start, it were, perhaps,
as well that we should determine whither."

"Whither," exclaimed Gordon, starting, and looking very anxiously in
the old soldier's face. "I thought that had been determined long ago. I
thought we were in full route for Taylor's camp before Monterey."

"It is impossible," replied the Partisan. "I did hope at first
to effect it, but the hope was delusive--the thing is a sheer
impossibility. We are in the midst of out-laying parties of regulars
and, what is worse yet, of guerrillas; and, worst of all, of these
accursed Comanches."

"And to return?" asked Gordon.

"Is equally impossible."

"What then? For the love of Heaven, speak," cried the young husband,
actually trembling with the violence of his anxiety and apprehension.

"It is impossible for a party, at once too strong to avoid discovery,
and too weak to resist an enemy, to push on to Monterey, even if we
had not a lady with us. I could, myself, run the gauntlet thither, and
arrive in safety, though even that is doubtful. You, or she, at least,
must remain in concealment until I can bring you such succour as will
suffice to her safety."

"Remain in concealment, here?"

"Not here, exactly, nor yet very far distant."

"Can it be done?"

"I think it can, with safety--else had not named it."

"And whence will you seek succour?"

"When God and the fortunes of war shall send it. Perhaps not higher
than the general's camp--perhaps I may stumble on Jack Hays, or Walker,
or McCulloch, or Gillespie's rangers. They are on the scout almost
all the time, either in the van or rear of the army; and now I think
it likely they will be down here away, with the intent to open our
communication. God send that they may."

"God send it so, indeed," replied Arthur Gordon, earnestly. "But what
has led you so completely to alter your views and intentions?"

"That which I have seen with my own eyes, or heard with my own ears,
last night."

"And what may that have been?"

"Listen. I was awakened last night by the sound of a scuffle and a
faint groan. Before I could get on my feet, however, I had the pleasure
of seeing that scoundrel, whose life we spared in the morning--and a
stupid thing we did in sparing it--lead his horse out of the circle and
leap on his back. There was no use in awakening you, so I untethered
Emperor as quickly as I could, and out in pursuit of him. For all
the speed I could make, he had got full a half mile away on the open
prairie before I was in the saddle; but I cared little enough for that,
seeing that in a five miles' race, I knew well enough that I could make
up such a gap as that, and overhaul him, too, without much trouble.
But what _did_ vex me, and set me to thinking, was, that instead of
making the best of his way back over the ground we had traversed in the
morning, he struck off here to the north-west, riding as straight as if
he had been following a beaten track, without a sign of hesitation, or
so much as looking behind him."

"That was strange," said Gordon.

"I soon found out whither he was bound, and I was thinking of taking
a straight course for the rancho, at which I saw he was aiming, when
all at once I heard a yell in the forest, scarcely three hundred yards
ahead of me, and before I had time to think, out galloped forty or
fifty red skins from the forest, and drove right across the open ground
right down upon our runaway. He felt that he was lost, I think, as
soon as he saw them, for he made but a very sorry race of it, wheeling
and turning to and fro, as if he knew not whither to fly, and the
consequence was that they ran him down in less than ten minutes, and
that within less than a hundred yards of the brake which hid me. If I
had just then had ten rangers with me, armed with good western rifles,
they never would have served him as they did, nor would one of them got
off scot free. But what could I do? I was but one against fifty, and I
knew not how soon my own turn might come: so I had only to stand by and
look on while they--"

"Murdered him!" exclaimed Julia, covering both her eyes with her fair
hands; "good God! how terrible!"

"Burnt him alive, lady," said the Partisan, coolly.

"Burnt him alive!" exclaimed Julia, whose hands had dropped from before
her eyes into her lap at the first words of his reply. "Burnt him
alive, and before your eyes!"

"Before my eyes, lady. Not a prayer, not a shriek, not a groan of the
wretched devil escaped my ears, and the smell of his roasting flesh
sickened and almost choked me," cried the Partisan.

"And why, why did you hold back?" exclaimed Julia, wildly catching him
by the arm, "why did you not rush upon them?"

"I could but have died with him."

"Then should you have died with him," she cried, scarce knowing what
she said. "Not to have done so, is not like the man I have heard you
called--not like the man I took you for."

"Hush, Julia, hush!" cried her husband, springing to his feet. "Be
silent, child, if you cannot speak reason--"

But Delacroix interrupted him, speaking very slowly, and with an
inexpressibly mournful intonation of voice.

"Let her go on," he said. "It was for _her_ sake I did it, and most meet
it is that she should pay me for it with ingratitude. Who ever served
or loved a woman and met with other guerdon for his services? I was a
fool--I am a fool, but I did not expect this at her hands."

He hung down his bold head as he spoke, and one or two big tears, the
first he had shed for years, rolled down his swarthy cheeks.

"And now bid your men strike the tent, and pack just what baggage your
lady cannot spare. Pack it on the dragoon horse, whose saddle is left
empty by that murderer's deed, who has dearly rued it. The rest with
the tent and pontoon must be abandoned, and the mules that bore them
must be slain. Let them hide everything in the chaparral; the sun will
have set within an hour. Meanwhile, I will go forth and see that the
coast is clear."

"But whither, whither are you about to lead us?" inquired Gordon,
anxiously.

"If you trust me you will follow me, lieutenant, whithersoever I lead
you. If not, you will not follow me at all, for if it be my intent to
deceive you, I can do so by words as well as by actions.

"Oh, Major Delacroix!" exclaimed Julia, who had recovered from her
bewilderment, and was sensible of the error she had committed, "you
are offended, you are angry with me, and justly--I have been most
ungrateful."

"Not angry, lady--not offended. A man cannot be angry with such a one
as you, do what you will with him. I _am_ disappointed, perhaps hurt,
but certainly neither angry nor offended."

"You must forgive me," she exclaimed, springing passionately forward,
and catching his hand in both her own, "you must--you must forgive me.
I knew not _then_, I know not even now, what it was I said--will you
but forgive me?"

"Surely I would, had I anything to forgive, sweet lady," he replied,
with a grave, sad smile. "But I have nothing, unless it be," he added,
with a low sigh, "my own folly. But a truce to this, we have indeed no
time for parleying. Will you trust me and follow me? As we ride onward
I will tell you whither."

"To the world's end," answered the beautiful girl, clasping her hands
and blushing crimson with the violence of her own emotions. "To the
world's end, if you will not forgive me."

"Now will you be so kind as to issue your orders to your men,
lieutenant, and you, madam, to make your preparations for a ride which
may extend through the night until day-break to-morrow?"

He spoke so decidedly that there was no excuse for attempting to
prolong the conversation, and Gordon left the little tent immediately
in order to give his directions, while the Partisan lifted his rifle
from the ground where he had deposited it on entering, and turned to
follow the young officer without saying another word.

But ere he had reached the entrance, Julia, who had been standing with
down-cast eyes and a strange expression, half sad, half passionate on
her beautiful features, sprang forward to intercept him, and again
caught him by the arm.

"What have I done," she cried, passionately, "what have I done that you
thus spurn me--thus despise me?"

"I, lady!" and he gazed at her in blank astonishment; "I despise you?"

"Yes, yes, miserable _me_, and I deserve it all, aye, more than
all. Oh, God! oh, God! I shall go mad. What shall I do to win your
forgiveness?"

"I have said, madam," he replied, mastering himself and retaining his
self-composure with a mighty effort, "that I had nothing to forgive.
But now it is my turn to ask," and his voice assumed a deeper tone
of feeling, and his whole manner showed an intenser meaning, "will
_you_ spare _me_? You know what I mean, lady--all women _know_ their
power, and, I suppose, all _abuse it_. But as I have endeavoured to
serve you truly, as I intend to do to the end--as I am resolved to
die for you--will you spare _me_, I say? Spare me my self-respect, my
consciousness of right, nay manhood, my repose of soul, my honour.
If you will, lady, I forgive, I bless you. If not--if not, tremble,
I say, tremble, not at the thought of my vengeance, but of your own
remorse. Think of this, lady, and fare you well. We speak no more alone
together--no more, forever!"

And he flung her hand, which he had held tightly clasped in his own
while he spoke, away from him contemptuously, half indignantly, turned
on his heel and left her.

She gazed on him for a moment wistfully, and then sank down upon the
bearskin on which he had been sitting, buried her face in the fur, and
wept bitterly, as might be seen from the convulsive sobs which shook
her whole frame as she lay prostrate in her desperate sorrow.

Within an hour the Partisan returned to the camp which had been the
scene of so much mental suffering and excitement to all the parties who
had passed the last weary, long hours within its guarded precincts. But
when he did return, he had fully mastered his composure, for he now
fully understood his own feelings, and perceived the peril of indulging
them. And he found all his comrades collected and self-possessed, at
least in appearance, and prepared to set forth at a moment's notice.

The horse of the unhappy sergeant had been equipped, instead of his
own demipique, with the pack-saddle of the poor predestined mule,
and stood, seemingly conscious of his degradation, loaded with such
necessary baggage as could in no way be dispensed with.

The appearance of the Partisan, and the first quick gesture of his
hand, gave the signal; and all the men vaulted at once into their
saddles.

"All is safe!" he exclaimed, cheerfully. "To horse, to horse, and away!"

And with the word, he laid his hand on the pummel of the brown
charger's demipique, and, without setting his foot into the stirrup,
sprang at one bound to his back.

Then, after saying a few words in a low voice to Arthur, who
communicated them in turn to one of the dragoons, he bowed to the lady,
saying:

"And now, if you are ready, we will proceed at once," and rode at an
easy gait out of the gorge, followed by all the party.

The heart of Julia sank as she gazed around; and she felt that the
least addition to the sense of dread and half superstitious awe which
now beset her, would be too much for her powers of endurance. Yet,
while she thought thus, another item _was_ added--it was the sharp and
sudden crack of two rifles, discharged, almost simultaneously, in the
small amphitheatre from which they had just departed.

She started in her saddle as if she had received a blow, and would have
fallen from her seat had not her husband thrown his powerful arm around
her, and supported her frame on the back of her palfrey.

"It is nothing," he whispered; "it is nothing only the poor mules which
we were compelled to shoot, as we could not bring them with us, and
dared not leave them to follow, and, by following, betray us."

"More blood!" cried Julia, bursting into a paroxysm of tears; "more
blood! my God! when will this have an end?"

"You should have thought of that Julia," replied the young soldier,
sharply and bitterly, "before you married a soldier. That done, such
thoughts are too late."

"Alas, alas! they are, indeed, too late."

"And do you cry alas! for that, false girl?" exclaimed Gordon, in
so loud a tone that his words reached the ears of the Partisan, who
instantly reined back his horse, and laying his hand kindly on the
young man's arm, said, in a low voice:

"Oh, peace, peace, for shame! Consider what she has borne, what she has
yet to bear--and all for you."

"I wish I were in my grave," she answered, raising her mild, soft eyes
to meet his. "I never shall be happy more till I lie in it."

"Nay, lady, speak not thus," returned the veteran, warmly. "Death, at
the best, is a dread mystery. In God's good time, we must all come
to that; to His good wisdom, therefore, let us leave it. And, oh, by
no levity or petulance of ours, let us call down His anger on our
heads. But, I assure you, it is no gloomy place, no fearful or dark
abiding-place, that I hope to conduct you, but to a sort of fairy
bower, inhabited," he added, assuming a tone of gayety which he perhaps
scarcely felt "by what I thought, till I met your blue eyes, Mistress
Gordon, the loveliest woman I e'er looked upon."

Despite herself, Julia Gordon was interested and amused, and yielding,
womanlike to the immediate impulse, she cried: "What! a fairy bower,
and a fair woman, in this howling wilderness?"

"Aye, lady, even so! and thereby hangs a tale, which, as you will
be thrown, I think, upon her hospitality, and as it may beguile the
tediousness of our night-march, I will relate to you, if you choose to
hear it."

"Oh, tell it, by all means, Partisan," cried Gordon, eager to atone for
his late petulance, and to divert his wife's apprehension; "I hope it
is a love tale."

"'Cato's a proper person'" answered Delacroix, laughing. "You see I
quote, lieutenant. But here goes my story.

"It was a little better than a year ago," he began, "that I first
visited this part of the country, which I know--every pass, glen, and
pond, and rivulet of it--as if it were my own garden. All then was
violence, and fierce, irregular strife, and vengeful indiscriminate
warfare and confusion.

"I was alone on this good horse which I now ride, and armed as you now
see me. At times I would join this or that band of rangers, when on
some actual service which promised excitement and the chance of action,
I for the most part scouted by myself.

"On this occasion, however, I had a special duty to perform, being
charged with dispatches from the general to the chief of the band,
which will not name, nor otherwise designate, except as being ever the
most daring and successful in the onslaught, although too often the
most merciless in the moment of victory."

"Well, it was a lovely summer's evening, as ever shone out of Heaven,
when I passed through this belt of forest; not exactly here, or
in this direction, for I came in farther to the southeastward, and
approached the clearing which surrounds the plantation, whither we now
are bound. When suddenly, as I rode along, following the track of the
horse hoofs, which I could easily distinguish in the mossy greensward,
and judging by many certain indications that I could not now be far
behind them, though I heard nothing to denote their vicinity; when
suddenly--I say, I caught the distant sounds of merriment, and revelry;
the light cadences of the guitar, the merry laugh of girls, the deep
rich voices of the male singers, in the harmonious Spanish tongue, and
all the glee and anxiety of fandango.

"I felt a momentary sense of pleasure, for I knew that I was in time,
which I had feared might not be the case; and that the attack, which
it was my mission to prevent or at least to render bloodless, had not
as yet taken place. The next instant a sudden doubt, a great fear fell
upon me. How could it be that I should be so close to the rancho and
the band, of which I was in pursuit, yet closer, but unseen, unheard
and unsuspected. I knew that not a moment must be lost. That even now
the rangers must be stealing with ready arms upon their victims; that
even now the doom of the gay lancers must be sealed, unless my presence
should arrest it. I gave my good horse the spur, and throwing the rein
upon his neck, galloped at the top of his speed along the intricate and
mazy wood-track.

"Never, in all my life, did I spur so hard; and never did a road
seem so long, or so devious; nor was this the effect of imagination
only; for I have since ascertained by actual inspection although the
distance, as the bird flies from the spot, where I first heard the
music, to the rancho whence it proceeded, is but a short mile, the road
by which alone you can reach it, measures three at the least, winding
it to and fro to avoid pathless brakes and deep barrancas, and is
exceedingly deep and miry.

"The sound of my horse's tramp, splashing through the deep clay, was
already heard by the lancers, and heard, alas! by their ambushed foes,
when I fear it spurred to accelerated action; when suddenly from the
wood to my left, the shrill blast of the bugle rose piercingly upon the
night air, and was answered by a second at a little distance. There
was an instant's pause, breathless and awful as the lull that precedes
the burst of a thunderstorm; and then a long loud shout burst out on
all sides, and the quick running rattle of a hundred rifle-shots fired
in quick succession. God! what a shriek succeeded! And then the clash
of blades, and the blasphemies and yells of the charging Texans, and
the deep oaths and dying groans of the slaughtered Spaniards and the
howling of hounds and mastiffs; and, above all, piercing my very brain,
the maddening screams of women pealed up in horrid dissonance to the
peaceful heavens, which, in a moment afterward, were crimsoned with the
glare of the rushing flames, making the twilight scenery of the calm
forest lurid and ruddy as the fabulous groves of hell!

"When I heard that tremendous uproar, and saw the outburst of that
furious conflagration, I spurred my horse the faster, and at last,
issuing from the forest, came upon such a scene of horror, blood and
devastation, as I trust it may never be my fate to look upon again.

"The rancho or country dwelling-house which had been attacked was of
unusually large dimensions, consisting of many buildings, with barns,
stables, cattle-folds, and out-houses of every kind.

"Suddenly a pistol shot or two startled me, followed by a shout and the
clashing of swords from a distant quarter of the garden.

"I was still mounted, and with the speed of light I galloped toward
the spot whence those sole sounds of human life proceeded. Across
the smoothly-shaven lawn and luxuriant flowerbeds I drove my charger
recklessly. I came up. I was yet in time! It was a small, low building
of two rooms only, the inmost of which had windows reaching to the
ground, secured with jalousies, and perfectly embowered by the rich
leaves and vagrant tendrils of a hundred climbing parasites.

"And this lone bower, evidently the abode of some Spanish beauty,
was now the last citadel of the hapless inhabitants, mercilessly
attacked and desperately defended. It was fortunate for those within
it that the Texans had discovered it from the court-yard, with which
it communicated only by one door in a massive wall of stone--all its
windows opening into the secluded quarter of the garden, which they had
not as yet discovered.

"From the court-yard, separated from the garden in which I stood by the
high and massive wall I have named, the shouts and rush of armed men
came clearly to my ears; and, by the English tongue, the wild oaths,
and the bitter denunciating, I readily perceived that it was the band
of whom I was in pursuit, and that they were forcing their way into
the building, in despite of all opposition. Still it was evident to
me, by the silence which prevailed in the inner room--opposite to the
casements of which I stood--that this last sanctum was yet unforced,
though the rapid discharge of pistol and rifle shots, and the clash of
rapier and bowie-knife at the door, announced that its security was
menaced, and could not certainly be maintained many minutes longer.

"There was not a second to be lost. Springing down from my horse, with
one pistol in my left hand, a second in my belt, my good broad-sword in
my right hand, and my wood-knife between my teeth, I drove the frail
jalousies asunder with one blow of my foot, and stood the next moment
in the scene of terror. And God of mercy! what a scene that was! Should
I live centuries I never can forget it. It was but a second that I
gazed around me; yet in that fleeting second I took in more minute
details than I could recount to you in an hour.

"The chamber was the sleeping-room of some young female. Yet this spot
was already the abode of death--might even be the scene of outrage
worse than death.

"On the low, virgin bed was stretched--where it had been hastily
deposited by the alarmed bearers--the lifeless corpse of an old man--an
old Spanish gentleman. A small, round, livid hole in the centre of
his forehead, surrounded by a discoloured spot, and the blood which
had flowed from the back of his head and deluged all the cambric
pillow-covers, showed plainly that he had fallen by the unerring
missile of a Texan rifle. I learned afterward that he was killed, in
the very act of offering hospitality, by the first shot discharged that
day, on his own threshold; and I do not regret that the perpetrator of
the atrocious deed fell, that same day, by my hand and this good weapon.

"But to proceed. On the floor, close to the window by which I made
my entrance, lay stretched an aged woman, the wife apparently of him
who slept unconscious--happy that he was unconscious--of the horrors
which surrounded him. She, too, had been struck down as I judged, not
a moment before I entered, by a chance bullet; for she still breathed
a little, although life was fast ebbing from her veins in spite of
the efforts of the loveliest girl my eyes had then looked upon, who
knelt beside her, seemingly unaware of the fierce uproar which was
raging, nearer and nearer every moment, in the adjoining apartment; the
door of which stood wide open, allowing the horrid din, the hideous
imprecations, and the blue sulphurous smoke of the death-shots, which
rang incessantly without, to force their way, unhindered, into that
quiet chamber.

"I said that one quick glance showed me all this, and, to truth, I
had not leisure for a second, for I was not well within the chamber
when a tall young Spaniard staggered back to the threshold of the
door, and, discharging a pistol at the Texans while in the very act
of dropping, fell headlong on the floor upon his back, his left hand,
which still grasped the yet smoking pistol, striking the ground within
a few inches of the feet of that fair girl. She started at the dreadful
interruption, and, for the first time becoming aware of my presence,
uttered a long wild shriek; and, believing that her hour had come,
arose to her feet with an effort, and laying her hand on her bosom,
said, in a low, sweet voice, in the Spanish tongue, 'Strike, if you
will; but, in the name of the most Holy Virgin, harm not an orphaned
virgin!'

"Alarmed by her cry, a young gentleman richly dressed, who was
defending the door, with rapier and dagger, with all the valour of
despair, and whose back had been turned toward us, looked around
quickly, and as he did so received a sharp wound in the breast from
a Texan knife. The murderous weapon was raised to repeat the blow,
when I seized him violently by the shoulder, cast him back into the
middle of the room, crying, 'Amigo,' and thrust myself into his place,
confronting alone the infuriate assailants.

"The men knew me in an instant, but their blood was up, moreover; and
several of them to the intoxication of heated passions and unbridled
license had added the intoxication of wine; quantities of which had
been found on the premises, and had been drunk without stint.

"It was in vain that I called on them to hold, and demanded their
captain. My answer was, that they were all captains there alike, and
would take no command from any, coupled to an insolent warning to take
myself out of harm's way if I were wise, before worse should come of it.

"A moment or two before he reached the spot, he was informed of my
coming, and of the resistance I had met from his men. There was blood
on his face, on his hands, on the blade of his sabre, which he bore
still unsheathed. But so soon as his eye fell upon the group opposing
me, and saw that I was fighting on the defensive, it seemed positively
to flash fire--his white cheek gleamed with a red unnatural hectic--and
he actually gnashed his teeth with rage. 'Rascals! Dogs! Mutineers!'
he shouted. 'Do you dare to resist an officer? Down with them, Pierre;
down with the dogs! Spare them no longer! Give them the steel,' and
suiting the action to the word, as the hindmost man of the party,
turned aghast at finding himself as it were between two fires, he threw
himself upon him, and ran his sword through his body. The rest flung
down their arms, and with some difficulty I obtained their grace, for
he would hear at first of nothing but drum-head, court-martial, and
immediate execution.

"And now, my tale is told. That bower is the sole relic of a once rich
and noble residence--that fair, pale girl is, with the sole exception
of her brother, who was the wounded youth I mentioned, the last scion
of a race as noble as ever came from the shores of old Castile."

"But, tell me," exclaimed Julia, who had listened rather impatiently to
the late discussion--"her brother!--what became of her brother who was
wounded--whom you saved?"

"What could become of him? He pulled his sombrero over his eyes,
buckled his father's sword to his side, and his good spurs to his heel,
took lance and lasso, backed his best horse, and never since has given
quarter to a man who speaks with an English tongue. I would not bet a
dollar that he would spare my life, if I fell into his hands in action."

"And where is he now, or how engaged?" asked Gordon.

"Since Romano Fallon's troop has been broken up, he is Padre Taranta's
right hand man. He is the most dangerous enemy America now has in all
Mexico."

"And it is to his sister's dwelling that you are leading _me_?" asked
Julia, in astonishment.

"Even so, lady. If once you cross her threshold, you are safe against
all the force of Mexico, until such time as we can bring you succour,
or a flag under which you may enter the lines."




CHAPTER VII.

THE RUINED RANCHO.


The moon by this time had risen, and already far above the horizon was
beginning to pour her light into the shadowy recesses of the forest.

Along the road they travelled, and although advancing only at an easy
ambling canter, had traversed something better than twenty miles, when
the distant barking of a large dog was distinctly heard by all the
party, and within a few minutes after that sound became audible, the
advanced dragoon, who was a hundred or two yards ahead of the party,
reined up and informed the Partisan that a heavy body of horse were
coming down the road rapidly toward them.

Pierre halted, and telling Julia that there was no danger, and desiring
the men not to stir from the spot, or speak, or call out, whatever
they might hear or see, dismounted from his horse, cast the rein to a
dragoon, and then hurried back on foot, as fast as he could, directly
toward the track which they had just left.

"Just as I thought, guerillas," muttered the Partisan to himself. "It
is Juan de Alava's squadron, for a thousand."

The squadron was perhaps ten minutes or a quarter of an hour passing
him, for there were, as he had conjectured by the sound, while they
were yet at a distance, above a hundred of them--in fact, he reckoned
about a score beyond that number--and they rode in very open order, and
not much faster than a foot pace.

Pierre listened to every word that fell from their lips.

The next glance showed him that his life had not been worth a dollar's
purchase had he fully arisen to his feet, for he needed nothing to
tell him that the eyes of the two who now passed him--eyes wandering
suspiciously at every step of their horses through the forest about
them--were very different to encounter from those of the mere troopers
who had hitherto passed by him.

These two men were of a widely different aspect from the rest, and from
each other also, though one of them was clad, except that the materials
were richer, in the same costume with the men who preceded him.

The other, who rode a little the foremost of the two, and the nearest
to the Partisan, was a little old shrivelled man. Yet within that frail
and meagre frame, hardened as it was, and exercised into a mere mass of
compact bone and sinew, it was easy to perceive that there resided a
world of untamed youthful spirit, and all the strength of manhood.

"Now, Padre," exclaimed the younger, "for the love of God, let us set
spurs to our horses and get the troop forward at a quicker pace. At
this rate, we shall not reach the open ground before day-break; and, in
that case, they will have the start of us."

"Not so, not so, Juan," replied the old man, in a clear, hard voice.
"If our information be correct, and there be a lady with them, as I
doubt not it is, they will have halted for the night, and the later we
come upon the ground, the more chance of finding them."

They continued speaking as they rode along; but these were all the
words that reached the ears of the Partisan. No more did he require,
however, to inform him of all that he wished to know.

So soon as the clatter of their passage had died away into the ordinary
silence of the woods, the Partisan hurried back to join his friends,
who were awaiting his return in no small anxiety, at least, not to say
trepidation.

"All is well," he exclaimed, as soon as he came into ear-shot of the
little party; "all is well. It is Padre Taranta and young Juan de
Alava, and troop. They are in search of us, too."

They then all hastened back to the main road, and cantered forward at
a better pace than they had as yet ventured on trying. Half an hour's
ride brought them to the banks of the rivulet which divided the clear
grounds that surrounded the once splendid estate from the wild forest.

A minute or two afterward, however, as the hoofs of their horses began
to clatter on the pavement, a fierce baying broke upon the stillness
of the night, and two huge sheep-dogs, of the far-famed Mexican breed,
came bounding out, furious, as if to attack the intruders.

But the Partisan soon quieted them; and then, as if aroused by the
uproar, some one was heard to stir within the rancho, a light flashed
through one of the casements, which was immediately thrown open--a loud
voice hailing to inquire who came so late.

"Friends, friends!" cried the Partisan, in the Spanish tongue. "It is
I, Sanchez; it is Pedro, the Forester."

"Thanks be to God!" shouted the old man, who had spoken from within;
"welcome, senor. Wait till I open the door for you."

The lattice was pulled to, as he ceased speaking; but they could hear
him hallooing within to arouse his mistress and the scanty household.

"Ho! senorita, senorita Marguerita; he, Pedro the Forester, Pedro el
Salvador!"

A moment afterward, the bolts were withdrawn and the gate thrown open,
and the lady, with her conductors, entered the ruined rancho.

The first sight which met the eyes of Julia Gordon, as she crossed
the threshold of the door, and stood within the hall of that lonely
dwelling, was the figure of a young, delicate, tall girl, who struck
her, at the first glance, as being the very loveliest creature she had
ever looked upon. And indeed she was exceedingly lovely.

In her left hand she carried a small lamp, which was the only light in
the large apartment.

It seemed that she had not distinguished the words of old Sanchez,
when he shouted to arouse her from her slumbers; for, as the Partisan
advanced, who had stood hitherto in the back-ground, and had been
concealed by the darkness which pervaded the whole room. Marguerita
sprang eagerly forward to greet him.

"You! you!" she cried, fervently; "do my eyes tell me truly? Is it,
indeed, you? Lord of my life! friend of my soul! preserver of my
honour! is it, indeed, you, Pedro el Salvador. Oh, I am happy--oh,
very, very happy."

And, as she spoke, in the intensity of her passionate feeling, she
clasped her snowy arms about the rough soldier's neck, and letting fall
her Madonna-like head on his iron shoulders, burst into a flood of
tears.

"Nay, nay!" exclaimed the gallant rover, gently disengaging himself
from the innocent girl's embrace; "nay, nay! weep not, sweet Senorita,
this is no time for tears, for I have come to ask a favour--a favour as
great as the lives of us all."

"Ask for _my_ life, rather," she answered, emphatically, suffering the
tears to trickle down her cheeks unheeded, "for it is yours; ask for my
soul, you should have it, were it mine to bestow."

"Impossible, indeed, Marguerita," replied the Partisan; "impossible,
indeed, that either I should ask, or you grant, were it to save a
world. But, listen to me, and first look upon this beautiful young
woman."

"Add one word more, Don Pedro; say that she is _your_ wife," said the
girl in a singular tone of half-resentful vehemence, which Pierre did
not then comprehend.

"She is the wife of my friend, Lieutenant Gordon, lady," he replied;
"no volunteer, I assure you, but one of May's dragoons."

"Pardon me," she said, turning to Julia, "pardon me, dear lady; but
at times I am half distraught, and my mind wanders, I know not how
or whither, since--since that day--but _he_ has told you, doubtless.
In one word, you are welcome. You are safe as if you were within the
temple of your God. You are alone, you are in danger, _he_ loves you,
and I doubt not _you_ love him; and I, Marguerita de Alava, swears it,
by all the saints of Heaven, that I will die before one hair of your
head, one nail of your finger, be injured. But this," she continued,
after a moment's pause, "this is poor hospitality. Without there!
Sanchez, Estefania, bring lights, and wine, and pile up the fire; the
nights are chilly here among our forests."

The old shepherd, who had been awaiting her commands without,
marvelling evidently at the long delay ere he was summoned, appeared
instantly, bearing a pair of tall waxen candles, almost torches in
size, in two massive silver candle sticks of different patterns, but of
great value.

The Partisan then left the room for a minute or two, in order to give
some instructions to the dragoons; for, in the present crisis Gordon
had delegated the command to him; while the young husband drew near to
the stove, unwilling to quit Julia, and more than half suspicious of
the Spanish lady's motives.

So soon, however, as the girl's eye fell upon her own scanty attire,
revealed as it was now by the bright lustre of the candles, she
started, as if she had but that instant remembered how slenderly she
was clad; blushed crimson, and raising both her hands to conceal her
half-uncovered bosom, turned quickly, and fled with a swift step into
the inner chamber.

"She is jealous of you, Julia," said Gordon.

"Jealous of me, Arthur?" she exclaimed, blushing deeply as she said the
words; and he observed the blush, but observed not the indignant tone
in which she spoke.

"Is that a blush of consciousness, or of shame, Julia?" he said, after
a moment's pause, gazing at her sternly.

"Of indignation!" she answered, vehemently, her soft blue eyes flashing
fire as she answered him. "Of indignation, sir, that any man should
dare use such words, entertain such thoughts of me. Yes, Arthur Gordon,
she is both in love and jealous. I saw that at a glance; and I will
tell you something more; she is _not_ jealous without a cause. Is your
glance answered? For the man whom she loves, does _not_ love her, and
_does_ love me."

The young man spoke not, stirred not, answered not. He stood abashed,
crest-fallen, dumb before her. Conviction was borne in upon his soul
by every word she uttered.

"Now listen to me, Arthur Gordon. I trust, I know, I thank my God! I
am too proud, if not too pure, ever to do the thing that should make
me know what shame is. But, mark me: if there be aught on earth which
alienates love, it is to be suspected of not loving. If there be
aught on earth that engenders evil thoughts in the heart, it is to be
suspected capable of evil thinking. If there be aught on earth that
makes a woman doubt herself, it is to be doubted by him who should
sustain her; if once she doubt herself, others will soon have cause to
doubt, to despise her. If I were not so proud, I should say to you,
therefore, 'Make me not that which you would not have me!' I _am_ too
proud, too strong, too confident in the right to say so. But I _do_
say, 'Make me not scorn you, cast you away from me, _hate_ you.' I
could do all these things, Arthur Gordon, and, though they kill me, I
_will_ do them, if ever more I hear from your tongue or see in your
eye a doubt of my honour--of my love. I have said enough--should have
said too much had I not seen in you aforetime the germs of this folly,
which, if not nipped in the bud, will make you, will make both of us
indeed wretched. Now I will go and join our hostess; and do you seek
the Partisan and decide upon our future movements."

He raised his eyes slowly to meet her glance, and as he met it no
longer fiery or indignant, but full of confidence and love, a faint
smile played over his lips, and he stretched out his arms half timidly
toward her, with this one word:

"Julia!"

And she refused not the proffered embrace, but fell on his bosom and
kissed him tenderly; and then withdrawing herself gently from his arms,
said, with her own bright, beaming smile:

"Now go--go your way, silly boy--and beware how you let that noble man
perceive your folly."

"He should not, for my life!" answered the young dragoon, as with a
light heart, a firm step, and a mind perfectly re-assured and easy he
went forth by one door into the court-yard as she passed by the other
into Marguerita's boudoir.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE PARTING SUPPER.


When Arthur Gordon issued out into the quiet court-yard, he found the
Partisan tranquilly superintending the preparations of the dragoons,
who had already lighted a fire near the fountain and having rubbed
down their chargers which were busy about better provender than they
had enjoyed for many a day, were now making their arrangements for the
night.

The Partisan, having seen the baggage all packed securely, went back
and entered the rancho, and crossing over to Marguerita asked her to
guard Julia as she would a sister.

"I will guard her as my sister; as my life," she answered. "No harm
shall come to her, save through my life. You shall find her safe when
you return, or you shall find us together."

"I know it," he said, gloomily. "I know it, Marguerita. Yet, I think we
shall never meet again," he added, in a whisper.

"We shall--we shall meet again!" she exclaimed, almost triumphantly.
"If not on earth--there, there, where there are no wars, and no
enemies--where we shall part no more forever!"

"Amen!" replied Pierrie.

Two hours later, and the horse-tramps of the dragoons had died away
in the distance, and Julia had wept herself into forgetfulness of her
sorrows on the bosom of Marguerita.

       *       *       *       *       *

The morning which followed the departure of Pierre Delacroix and his
companions from the ruined rancho, dawned as serene and gentle as the
waking of a new-born child.

The song of birds and the distant water-fall hailed Julia, as she awoke
from her slumbers; and the soft, melancholy singing of Marguerita
suddenly reminded her where she was.

A moment afterwards the song ceased, the door flew open, and Marguerita
entered, leaving several choice and dainty eatables, and addressed her
guest:

"You must pardon me, lady, if I perform these little offices myself,
and intrude my services upon you, for the fortunes of war have imposed
the task of such light labours on me, happier than many of my sisters,
who are reduced to utter penury and ruin."

"Pardon me, rather, dear Marguerita--for so you must let me call
you--that I permit you thus to wait on one, who is so far in every way
beneath you. Except," she added, with a winning smile, "that in all
times and countries the character of a suppliant has been invested with
a sort of mournful dignity."

"Is it so, lady?--is it so, indeed?" cried Marguerita, half eagerly,
half-sorrowfully.

"Julia! Julia!" she cried, imploringly, "will you call me Julia? I
called you Marguerita, dear, dear Marguerita."

"Julia--dear Julia, then," replied the Spanish girl, soothingly;
"believe me, I thought not to wound you, but my heart bleeds, my heart
burns when I think of my country and her wrongs. Hark!" she exclaimed
in a low whisper, "heard you that?"

"Heard I what?" cried Julia, terrified beyond expression at the sudden
change in her tone, manner, and countenance; "I hear nothing but the
wind, the birds, the water!"

"There--there again!" said the other, standing erect and motionless,
with her finger upraised, her head thrown a little backward, her lips
apart, her nostrils dilated, her eyes fixed on vacancy. "There--there
it is again--they are coming!"

An instant afterwards the jingling of spurs and the clang of a steel
scabbard on the stone pavement of the outer room was heard approaching
the door quickly.

Then Marguerita's face lightened for a moment as she sprang to meet the
new comer.

"It is Juan!" she cried, "it is my brother, and thanks be to God,
alone!"

The door flew open, and on the threshold stood the young guerilla. It
was the form of the Antinuous, without his effeminacy--it was the head
of the conquering Bacchus, without the sensuality. A specimen more
perfect of young manhood never walked the earth.

"_Madre de Dios_, who is this?" he asked.

"Brother! Juan! brother!" exclaimed Marguerita, seizing him in her
arms, and striving to embrace him.

"What have you done, mad girl? Who is this, I say, who is this,
Marguerita?"

"A suppliant, a fugitive, a friend, a sister, a sister of the
Partisan--of Pedro, my brother, Pedro el Salvador."

"An American," he said, slowly, his brow gradually uniting into a
black frown, as he uttered the word, and his eye growing lurid with a
concentrated fire, then laying his hand on the hilt of his stiletto, he
murmured through his set teeth, "She must die."

"Never, no! for your life! for your soul! for the name of God! for the
most holy virgin! no, brother, no; not while I live! He brought her
here. He that preserved your life and my honour. He asked me to protect
her! and I swore by my mother's soul; and now I swear it!"

"Fool!" he almost shouted in his rage, as he thrust her aside
violently, "Carrera will be here within ten minutes, and all our lives
are forfeit by your treason."

"We can conceal her. In the niche, you know, in the niche. Sanchez and
Estefania and Francisco need but a hint to make them mute as statues.
We can conceal her, brother, and be saved."

"He knows that they came hither. We have traced their hoof-tracks to
the very gate. A wounded soldier saw them leave their hiding-place, and
we met Carrera on their track. I know not how we failed to meet them."

"Where is Estefania?"

"In arrest."

"And Francisco?"

"And he likewise."

"Then we are saved."

"How saved?"

"Go! Tell them, you, to swear that the dragoons forced our hospitality
by menace, which we could not resist. They were five strong--young men,
well armed. What could we do?"

"It may save us--who knows?"

"It will save us! Do it. Away! Every moment is a life!"

Then, as he left the room in haste, she sprang up on the bed, touched
a spring in the wall, and the back of the shallow niche in which the
crucifix stood flew open, turning outward on a hinge, disclosing a
small circular closet, lighted by a small air-hole, and containing a
low stone bench, wrought in the wall.

"Up, up!" she exclaimed, shaking Julia sharply by the arm.

And aroused from her prostration by the dreadful emergency, and nerved
by the firmness of the Spanish maiden, Julia did rise, pale as a ghost,
but calm and firm, and kissed and blessed her hostess, and mounted into
the small hiding place, and drew the secret door close after her.

Nearer and nearer came the bugle horn, and then the clang of hoofs, the
orders of the officers, the din of the men dismounting, and the clash
and clatter of their arms.

Hurriedly, in the meantime, had Marguerita thrust aside the few
articles of Julia's clothing which were scattered about the room, but
when she thought that all was safe, and the steps of the officers
were heard in the outer hall, she sat down quietly to her embroidery,
and took up again her mournful song, and was singing tranquilly and
unconcernedly, when her brother again entered the apartment.




CHAPTER IX.

SPANISH HONOUR.


"Marguerita, come forth. The General Carrera and his staff request your
hospitality."

Marguerita immediately came forward, and was admired by all.

"I regret deeply," the general said, after a few moments spent in
ordinary compliments, "that we were unable to arrive hither a few hours
sooner, as our presence would have, I hear, relieved you of unpleasant
visitors, of whom we have been in pursuit some days."

"We had _unexpected_ visitors indeed, if not unwelcome," she replied.
"But to say the truth, they were not uncivil, and though we had not the
power to refuse them what they asked of us, they behaved courteously,
and made but a short stay."

"Be sure of that," answered Carrerra, twisting his moustache; "they
knew that I was at their heels. But, however, we will take a little
refreshment, and then to horse again."

After they had partaken of refreshment, he arose from his chair, and,
again bowing, was on the point of leaving the apartment, and the poor
girl thought that the crisis was past and the danger over.

When in the very midst of the bustle and hurry of leave-taking, an
aid-de-camp rushed in hastily and announced that the riding-horse of
the American lady had been found in the stable of the rancho, well
groomed, and feeding at a well-filled manger.

"Who groomed him?" asked Carrera, sternly.

"A boy called Francisco."

"Bring him in."

And immediately the shepherd boy was led in between two dismounted
lancers, with escopetas trailed in their hands.

"How came the lady's horse in the stable?"

"It was tired, lame, who knows?--they left it behind."

"Now, mark me, if you speak one lie, you shall be shot to death within
five minutes. If you speak truth, the Republic will reward you. Where
is that lady?"

"Who knows?" was the evasive answer; but as he uttered it his eyes
wandered to his master's face, as if to consult his eyes before
replying further. He met their steadfast gaze, and continued, firmly:
"She went with the rest."

A dragoon entered at this moment, bearing a lady's side-saddle and
bridle, with girths and hangings all complete, and cast them down at
the general's feet; and then said, as he saluted:

"We have found a dragoon horse dead--shot within a few hours,
general--in the corral, with all his accoutrements upon him."

The general's cold, hard eye turned silently and sternly on the
miserable boy.

"Speak," he said, "or die. Take your choice. Where is the lady?"

"Quien Sabe?"

"Away with him."

Two stout dragoons seized him, and despite his cries, his struggles and
entreaties, dragged him away as if he had been a mere infant.

There were five minutes' dreadful, death-like silence. Marguerita stood
cold and impassive as a pillar of stone, with her teeth set and her
hands clenched. But for the heaving of her bosom and the quivering of
her eyelid, she gave no signs of life.

Juan de Alava preserved his soldier's mien and aspect, but his eye
wandered wildly.

The next moment the sharp rattle of a volley, succeeded by one death
groan, rang through the hall, and the thin blue smoke drifted in
through the open door, and half filled the apartment.

"_Fiel hasta la muerte_," muttered he between his hard set teeth.

"Bring out the other servants," roared the general, furious at being
frustrated.

"Give them five minutes, also, to confess; if they speak not, shoot
them."

After another short pause an orderly entered, and announced that they
had fled into the woods.

"Ha! this lies deeper than I thought for, lady," he added, turning to
Marguerita; "we must have your presence in an inner chamber. Valdez,
call in our major and six captains, a court-martial. Senor de Alava,
follow us."

And without more words, he stalked into Marguerita's private chamber,
seated himself in her own arm-chair, and ordering his officers to form
a half circle round him, proceeded to arraign her as a culprit.

"You know," he said, sternly, but not uncourteously, "you know,
Senorita, the doom which our laws have pronounced against all traitors
who comfort, protect, or harbour an American?"

"Senor, I know it."

"It is?"

"Death."

"You are very young to die."

"I am young, Senor; but when God calls us hence it is never early."

A slight murmur of admiration ran through the circle at her calm and
dauntless resolution, but found no echo from the cold lips of the
general.

"Where is the lady gone who was here last night?"

"The boy whom you murdered told you that she went with the rest."

"He lied, and lost his life by his lie."

"On your honour, do you know where the lady is at this moment?"

"I do know."

"Where is she?"

"I have sworn to be silent."

"That oath was treason to your country."

"By your proclamation."

"You know it? You have read it?"

"I do--I have."

"Enough. One question more--will you reveal it?"

"I will not."

"And you know the alternative?"

"Death!"

"And you are prepared to die--so young, so beautiful, to die a
traitress?"

"God will forgive me."

"Colonel Don Juan de Alava, on your honour, as a soldier and a
gentleman, do you know where this American woman now is?"

"I do know."

"Where is she?"

"Do you think me less firm than a woman?"

"Have you sworn secrecy?"

"I have not sworn."

"Speak, I command you."

He was silent. The general cast his eyes sternly round the circle,
reading the judgment of each man by his face, as he asked:

"Are they guilty of high treason?"

And each man nodded in silence as the question came to him in turn.

"And your sentence?"

"Death!" replied Valdez, standing up and uncovering, and all the others
arose in their order, and bowed in assent.

"Never!" exclaimed two voices in one cry, and, as if by one movement,
brother and sister drew, and raised on high, a sheathless blade.

"Brother--sister--adieu!" and the blades rose as if to strike--but ere
the blow was dealt, a calm, sweet voice cried "Hold! I am here."

And at the words, there in the niche, disclosed by the removal of
that holiest emblem, the Christian's dying God--there with her golden
tresses floating disheveled like a halo of glory round her, with her
blue eyes filled with the ineffable lustre--the lustre of a martyred
saint, her innocent, artless features glowing with strange exultation,
her lovely lips apart, madonna-like, stood Julia Gordon.

"I am here, man of blood. Spare them. But with me do your pleasure; I
am in the hands of my God, now as ever."

At the command of his general, Valdez arose to assist Julia down; but
as he took the first step, he stopped short as if thunder-stricken.

Nor was it wonderful, for as he took that step, one short crack
came echoing from without, the well-known death-shot of the certain
rifle--then pealed a bugle, high and shrill--the terrified alarm--and
then crack! crack! went the deadly rifle of the west.

And high above all other sounds, and high arose the cry of the
Texans--"Remember the Alama, the Alamo?" and Gordon's name was mingled
with the din; and the fierce cheer of the Partisan, "Pierre, Pierre!
charge for Pierre and glory!" completed the dismay of the surprised and
baffled murderers.

As the first din of that surprise fell on the startled ears of the
Mexican commander, he sprang to his feet, unsheathed his sword, and the
other officers following his example, they dashed forward gallantly to
find their men, and lead them to the charge--all save one, Valdez.

"And why does the gallant Colonel Valdez loiter in the rear, when his
men are in action?" asked Juan de Alava, sneeringly.

"I might retort the question, sirrah, were it becoming me to reply to a
prisoner and a traitor."

"And did you so retort, sirrah," answered Alava quietly, "I might reply
that a prisoner has no right to be in action, did it become me to reply
to a liar."

"Now mark me. Before these ladies whom you _have_ insulted, _would_
have outraged, I strike you thus. I spurn you with my foot thus and
thus!" and as he spoke he suited the action to the word, giving him
a severe blow with the flat of his sword across the shoulders, and
actually kicking him twice with his foot.

Both men were in the prime of life, young, active, sinewy, and skilful
to a wonder in the use of their weapons. Juan was as brave as his own
steel, and Valdez, a base coward, was forced to fight for his life.

"Kill him! Kill him!" cried Marguerita. "For my sake kill him! By no
hand but yours must the villain die!"

They both fought desperately and determinedly, one fighting for life,
and the other for vengeance.

Hopeless of directing Marguerita from her appalling object, Julia
turned, sick at heart, toward the window--the same window which had
given entrance to the Partisan, when he arrived but in time to save
Marguerita--and at the very moment she did so, it was driven inward
with a loud crash, and she was clasped in the arms of Arthur Gordon.
The sound of the forceful entrance, the clanking steps of his men,
for the three dragoons were at his heels, and the clatter of his
accoutrements, had well nigh proved fatal to Alava; for at the sudden
uproar in his rear, he turned his head quickly, and was admonished by a
sharp wound in his side for his imprudence.

And, like a wounded lion, Juan de Alava charged him home so fiercely
that he had not a second's breathing time. Three triple feints, each
followed by a home lunge, Valdez had parried in succession, when he
lunged in return. His foot slipped a little on the marble floor; his
blade was struck aside by Alava's dagger, at the same instant in which
his chest was pierced and his heart cleft asunder by his home-driven
blade.

Scarce was that fearful death-struggle completed, when two of the
dragoons advanced their carbines and called on Juan to yield him on
good quarters.

Juan had already lost much blood, and staggered sickly, and would have
fallen but for the sword on which he leaned.

"Where is your officer?" he asked, in Spanish. "I am a gentleman, and
will not yield but to an officer."

"I am an officer," cried Gordon, springing forward, having learned
by one word from Julia who he was. "I am your friend, too, Senor Don
Juan--your friend forever."

Gordon, having seen Juan in safe hands, he went forth in search of a
surgeon.

Utterly dispirited and broken, the Mexicans rushed in a body to the
window, by which their comrades were pouring out; and, the two currents
meeting, jostled and reeled together like tides conflicting in a narrow
channel.

But the terror and the numbers of those without were the greater; and
gradually they forced their way inward, actually using their weapons,
one against the other, in the madness of their despair. And still
on the rear of that confused and weltering route raged the fierce
broadswords of the Texan riders.

"Ha, Mason," exclaimed Gordon, as the rangers swept past him in their
charge, recognizing a young officer of his acquaintance. "This work
is over now. For God's sake send one of your fellows for a surgeon. A
friend of mine lies badly wounded, yonder, in the orange thicket, by
the stream."

"Aye, aye!" cried he whom he addressed, reining up his horse. "You,
Grayson, gallop to the rear, and bring up surgeon Maxwell."

"Yes, sir," answered the man, and dashed away to the rear.

"But I wish you would send a dozen men down yonder to that thicket, to
mount guard over Julia," said Gordon. "She is almost alone."

"I'll go myself," answered Mason, "or the devil a soul will I get to
stir, so long as they can shoot or stick a Mexican. Halt! dress--halt!
or I'll scewer some of you. That is it. Now steady. Gordon, I'll see to
that--never fear. But I wish you would gallop down, and stop firing.
All resistance is at an end, and it is now mere butchery."

"I will, I will," replied the young dragoon; "there has, indeed, been
enough of it."

And putting his spurs to a charger, which he caught as it ran by
him masterless, he galloped forward, shouting to the men to cease
firing. But eager as he was to check the carnage, he was preceded in
the work of charity by the bold Partisan, whom he could see mounted
among the crowd of dismounted rangers, close to the often-mentioned
window, actually cutting at his own men with his broadsword to enforce
obedience, and shouting till he was hoarse, in Spanish and English
alternately:

"Cease firing, and give quarter."

Suddenly a shot flashed from a loop above, and he reeled in his
stirrups and fell headlong.

A fierce roar followed from the soldiery; and, in an instant they
forced their way bodily into the building, and woe to the Mexican whom
they met when the word was given--"Pierre!"

"My God! they have murdered him!" cried Gordon; and forgetful of all
else, he drove madly to the spot, sprang from his horse, and raised him
from the bloody greensward.

"They have done for me at last," cried the gallant soldier, as Gordon
raised his head upon his lap, as he knelt behind him.

"I trust not, indeed."

"They have. I am a dead man, Gordon. But come, my time is short; have
me borne to the ladies--unless," he added, "you fear to let them see
me."

"You are right. Maxwell is there, tending the hurt of young Alava."

They had conversed alone, with no witness but the beautiful brown horse
of the Partisan, which, bleeding himself, from many wounds, stood close
beside them, not having moved a yard since the fatal shot was fired,
gazing upon his fallen master with an eye that seemed full of human
intelligence and sympathy.

"Emperor knows that I am dying. Soh! Emperor, good horse. Soh!
Emperor!" he added, raising his head a little to gaze on his favourite.

And the beautiful brown horse whinnied as he heard the long-loved
voice, and advanced a yard or two, and rubbed his muzzle gently and
fondly over the face of his dying master.

"Good horse, good Emperor," said the Partisan, patting the face of
his horse with his failing hand. "I never shall back you again, good
Emperor. He is yours, Gordon, when I am gone. You will be kind to him,
I know."

The young dragoon wrung the hand of the dying man hard, and the big
tears burst in volumes from his eyes, and fell down like rain upon the
face of the veteran.

"Go forward," he said, faintly; "go forward, Gordon, and apprise the
ladies. Women are tender plants, and this, I think, will shock them."

And slowly they did bear him, with the beautiful brown horse following
them step by step with his head bent almost to the dust, and trailing
his long, thin mane on the ground, in the depth of animal sorrow.

When Gordon reached the bower the surgeon was fastening up his case,
having dressed young Alava's wound, and was on the point of going
to offer his services, he said, where they might be more seriously
required.

The young soldier caught his last words as he entered, and arresting
him by the arm, said, earnestly, in a low voice, even before he replied
to the congratulations of the women:

"That is here, Maxwell; nowhere can they be more required than they
will be here. God send that they may avail."

Though uttered in a whisper, Julia heard his words, and judging from
the expression of his face, clasped her hands, and cried, earnestly:

"Not the Partisan, Arthur--oh, say it is not the Partisan."

"Would that I could."

"Not severely--not fatally, at least?"

"I fear mortally."

"My God! my God!" and she burst into a paroxysm of almost hysterical
weeping.

The conversation had all passed in the English tongue, yet, as it were,
instinctively, Marguerita caught their meaning, and she uttered one
long, piercing shriek, and fell lifeless to all appearance.

The surgeon and Julia hastened to raise her up, but Pierre said quietly:

"Let her be--let her be if there is no danger. It is better she should
be senseless until all is over."

"There is no danger," said Maxwell, with an air of wonder.

"God bless you, then, good Maxwell; betake you where you may do more
good--my days are numbered. Commend me to McCulloch and Gillespie. My
rifle to the first, my pistols to the latter, and this, doctor," he
added, as he handed him his knife. "Yourself, Gordon, will keep my
horse. Bury me in my blanket with my sword by my side. Fare you well.
Now, lady," he added, turning his eyes to Julia Gordon, "in your ear.
You will permit me Gordon?"

"Surely--most surely."

Then Julia knelt down by his side, and clasped his cold hand in her
own, and listened with her whole soul in her ears, watering his face
with her tears.

"That poor thing," he said, turning his eyes toward the motionless form
of Marguerita, "you will be kind to her--you will care for her--you
will love her?"

"As my own sister," faltered Julia through her sobs, "as my own sister."

"Then I die happy. Gordon," he added, raising his head a little for
the last time, "this agony is well nigh over. She has promised to be a
sister to poor Marguerita; will you do likewise?"

"She shall be my sister."

"God's blessing on you now friends. I am going, fare-you-well. Weep not
for me, for I have lived happily, and I hope not altogether uselessly,
and I die happily, for I die with my duty done, in the arms of those I
love the most dearly, and in the faith of a Christian."

Then he closed his eyes, quite exhausted with his efforts, and lay for
a long time speechless so that they believed him dead.

But he opened them again after a while, and said, very faintly:

"Brown Emperor; good horse. You will be good to him, Gordon?"

Then one of those strange things occurred which at times almost make us
think that brutes have souls and reason. For, before the young soldier
could reply, the brown horse, which had followed the bearers of his
master to the entrance of the arbour, and paused there, as if conscious
that he must not enter, no sooner heard his own name uttered in those
feeble accents, than he thrust his head through the foliage and uttered
a long, low, plaintive neigh, utterly unlike any sound he had ever
before been heard to utter.

"Ah! thou art there, old friend. God bless thee, too, if it be no sin
so to pray. Thou wilt be cared for; will he not, Gordon--Julia?"

But neither could reply for sobbing. He understood the reason, and said
once again:

"Bless you all--may God bless you. Remember that I die a Chris--a
Christian. I am go--going. Gordon, Gordon, let her--let her kiss--kiss
me, Julia."

"Kiss him, quick; kiss him, kiss him, Julia."

She knelt beside him, bent her beautiful form over his bosom, and
pressed her cold lips to his, and the pure spirit of the noble and
high-minded soldier passed away in that last--that first embrace of the
woman he had loved so chastely, so devotedly, so nobly.

Happy who so die, in the arms of love, religion, honour.

       *       *       *       *       *

More words are almost needless. Julia and Gordon, under the guidance of
the gallant rangers, reached the lines at Monterey in safety. Long did
they mourn over that true and noble friend, who, though the friend but
of a day, had stamped himself on their souls forever.

Poor Marguerita never ceased to weep for the man she loved so madly and
so vainly, till, in the convent which she entered within a month of his
death, her sorrows and sufferings were ended.

One thing alone remains to be recorded. The brown horse, which had
followed his master's body to the grave, and watched his interment with
an almost human eye, was forced almost by violence from the spot when
the last ceremony was ended.

But in the afternoon, when the column was formed to march, and the
bugles sounded the advance, he reared furiously, broke the leading rein
by which a dragoon was guiding him, and galloped to the spot where they
had laid his master.

They followed him, and found him lying on the grave, rooting up the
fresh laid sods with his muzzle. But when he saw them drawing near, he
rose to his feet with a weak, staggering action, stood for a moment
gazing at them proudly, then uttered the same long, shrill, plaintive
neigh, and in the sound expired.

They scooped a little hollow--it was no sacrilege--beside the grave
of him whom he had borne so truly, whom he would not survive, and
laid him by those honoured ashes, with this motto rudely carved on a
low headstone close by the simple monument, which love erected to the
memory of the gallant Partisan:

    +Fiel hasta la Muerte.+

    +Marguerita.+

They sleep together. Never was better horse or nobler rider.


THE END.


Printed by James Jackson, and Published by him at his Publishing
Office, 2, +Red Lion Court+, Fleet Street, London, E.C.




+Read+


    Boys of London

    and

    Boys of New York.

    [Illustration]

    One Penny Weekly.


    PUBLISHED BY

    JAMES JACKSON.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Silent Rifleman, by 
Henry William Herbert and James Jackson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SILENT RIFLEMAN ***

***** This file should be named 46304.txt or 46304.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/3/0/46304/

Produced by Jana Palkova, sp1nd and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
