The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Vale of Lyvennet, by John Salkeld Bland

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Vale of Lyvennet
       Its Picturesque Peeps and Legendary Lore

Author: John Salkeld Bland

Editor: F. H. M. Parker

Release Date: July 18, 2014 [EBook #46319]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VALE OF LYVENNET ***




Produced by sp1nd, Chris Whitehead and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)







[Illustration: JOHN SALKELD BLAND.

(_Frontispiece._)]




  THE

  VALE OF LYVENNET

  ITS

  PICTURESQUE PEEPS

  AND

  LEGENDARY LORE


  A MANUSCRIPT BOOK BY
  JOHN SALKELD BLAND,
  of Wyebourne, Reagill



  EDITED BY
  F. H. M. PARKER, M.A.,
  Barrister-at-Law,
  and Member of Council of the C. & W. A. & A. Society


  Kendal
  Titus Wilson, Publisher
  Highgate

  1910




  TITUS WILSON, PRINTER, KENDAL




INTRODUCTION.


The river Lyvennet rises on the northern side of the range of hills
stretching eastwards across Westmorland from Shap Fells. It runs
through the parishes of Crosby Ravensworth and Morland, receives the
tributary stream of the Leith, and falls into the Eden near Temple
Sowerby. The distance from its source to its outfall is less than
ten miles measured in a straight line; but the little valley is full
of varied interest, to which each age has contributed a share. Half
way down the stream, and out on the west, lies Reagill, and in it,
Wyebourne; and Wyebourne was the home of John Salkeld Bland, who,
nearly fifty years ago, compiled this manuscript history of "The Vale
of Lyvennet."

John Bland's grandfather was a yeoman farming his own land at Reagill.
He had a family of two sons, Thomas and William, between whom he
divided it; Thomas, who was an artist and sculptor of no mean ability,
remaining at Reagill, while William established himself at Wyebourne,
a mile away, married, and also had two children; one being John Bland
himself, the other a daughter, now Mrs. Dufton, to whom the thanks of
this Society are due for use of her brother's manuscript, and for her
kindness in supplying information about the family.

John Bland was only six months old when he lost his mother, from whom,
perhaps, he inherited a constitutional delicacy from which he always
suffered. He was educated at the well-known school at Reagill, and
afterwards at Croft House, Brampton. Early in life he began to show a
gift for drawing, but he never received lessons; his aptitude, like
that of his uncle, was purely a natural one.

He also studied botany, geology and chemistry. Before he was
twenty-two he had made a geological map of the district; this came
before the notice of some of the leading authorities of the day, and
received high praise from them; it is interesting, therefore, as it
affords us proof of the high standard of merit reached by his work. He
afterwards went over to America for a time; an expedition comparatively
rare in those days. During the summer of 1866 he made studies from
nature of about a hundred wild flowers, painted in water colours, and
had just finished mounting them before his death. For his weakness of
health had shown itself in attacks of pneumonia when he took cold;
finally consumption set in, and he died on January 4th, 1867, aged
twenty-seven years.

But the work in which we are most interested is his manuscript "The
Vale of Lyvennet." The book consists of ninety-one pages about 12 by
10 inches, filled with drawings and plans, of which there are about
two hundred, large and small; with a written description of each.
Infinite pains have been spent upon it. He has taken each object of
local interest in turn, recorded minutely what is known about it,
and accompanied it with at least one drawing. The work has not been
quite completed, as the last three pages, and pages 79 (a beautiful
half-page drawing of Flass House), and 82, lack text; there are a few
blanks left for measurements, and several spaces for pictures. It is,
of course, the pictures that give the book its unique character, for
they make everything a reality to the reader. The drawings themselves
are beautiful; but even apart from them, a better account of the valley
could hardly have been made, either in material or arrangement. And it
is not unworthy to add that the text is written in the most delicate
penmanship, almost as finely executed as the drawings themselves.

But his studies were not confined to antiquities or art, nor his
reputation to his native valley. Mention has already been made
of his geological work. The map was submitted to the Manchester
Geological Society at a meeting on December 30th, 1862, with a
paper entitled:--"On the Carboniferous Rocks in the neighbourhood of
Shap and Crosby Ravensworth: a section of that series which lies on
the northern and eastern extremities of the Lake District." He also
submitted a section from Wasdale Crag to the valley of the Eden near
Appleby--distance about ten miles; which, with the paper, was printed
in the Society's _Transactions_, vol. iv., p. 44.

Mr. Bland was unable to be present, and the paper was read by Mr.
E. W. Binney, F.R.S. Mr. Binney, who was one of the most eminent
geologists of the day, afterwards made the following remarks:--"I
became acquainted with Mr. Bland last year, in going over that district
to look over some property. He showed me this map, and it occurred to
me that I had not seen any map of a limestone district so well worked
out by a local man. Mr. Bland has devoted many years to the examination
of the becks and gills of his district, and has formed this section. I
think the paper a very valuable one, because it shows how the limestone
begins to be separated by coal measures."

Mr. Joseph Dickinson, H.M. Inspector of Mines, President of the
Society, added:--"I could have wished for the map to be published
as well. I do not think we could hand over our funds for a better
purpose." But the expense was a serious matter, and the map, now
preserved at Reagill, does not appear ever to have been published. The
paper is written in a much more matured style than the present work,
possibly because he is writing of matters that can be ascertained with
greater certainty; he expresses himself in the manner of one who has a
complete mastery of his subject.

As to the sources of his information, Mrs. Dufton says that his
account of the manorial disputes was derived from a collection of
old parchments in the possession of Mr. Salkeld of Meaburn Hill,
his great-uncle; representative of a family which had been resident
in the locality since the reign of Elizabeth. To attack sixteenth
century documents for information must have required a great deal
of enthusiasm, especially in one with such a love of outdoor life;
for these documents are dreary things, and, as Mrs. Dufton observes,
they were very hard to read. Another instance of the thoroughness of
his work is shown in the fact that he reproduces the heading of one
of these in the old writing, an undertaking by no means easy; and an
excellent reproduction it is.

He had evidently read a great deal, and had gone carefully through most
books that describe his neighbourhood, and he collected and stored up
what was related to him by his friends. His industry was extraordinary,
and he is said never to have wasted a moment of time.

He probably owed much to Canon Weston, then vicar of Crosby
Ravensworth, who took a kindly interest in his work, and used to invite
him to the vicarage when he had visitors interested in science or
archaeology. Among those whom he met were Canon Simpson, first President
of the local Archaeological Society, who was then incumbent of Shap; and
Professor Harkness, who once filled the Chair of Geology at Queen's
College, Cork. He was also appreciated and helped at Lowther, where he
saw the paintings by Lady Mary Lowther (wife of the famous "Sir Jammy,"
the first Earl) some of which he copied; while no doubt he learned a
great deal from his uncle, Thomas Bland.

The latter, a man of varied talents, also deserves some notice here.
He was famous for his Italian garden at Reagill, which he laid out and
decorated with statues and oil paintings in the alcoves, all his own
work; he was an excellent artist in black and white, and reputed to be
a musical composer of merit.

His nephew tells us of his sculpture commemorating Charles the Second's
halt at the head of the Lyvennet, and of the stone he set up to mark
the place where the forefathers of the famous Joseph Addison had their
home in days gone by. But there is another work which can be seen by
everyone; a pedestal and pillar surmounted by a figure of Britannia,
executed by him, and erected at his expense, on the hill facing Shap
Wells Hotel, to commemorate the accession of Queen Victoria. It was
placed there in 1842; the railway close by was opened in December,
1846; so it stands within the view of all.

Mr. Bland did not attempt to immortalise himself by putting his own
name upon it; it is a pity that persons visiting it have not been
equally modest; for the pedestal, which bears bas-reliefs and an
inscription, has been defaced by idlers for more than half a century,
as their dated scratchings show.

He also celebrated this event each year by a large entertainment. This
is mentioned by Whellan in his _History of Cumberland and Westmorland_,
written in 1860, who says:--"A festival of a somewhat unique character
is held here (at Reagill) annually, on the anniversary of Her Majesty's
accession, on the grounds of Mr. Bland, which are richly ornamented
with pictures, statuary, etc. A band of music is engaged for the
occasion, and the days amusements are interspersed with lectures,
addresses, music, dancing, and other recreations." The gathering
was actually held on the Friday nearest to the anniversary; on some
occasions as many as 1,400 guests were present.

No memoir of Thomas Bland would be complete without some account of the
wonderful garden that he planned and made. John Bland has preserved
one view of it in its old splendour; it is reproduced at the end of
this book. The wall on the right of the entrance was known as "The
Local Gallery," as paintings of local scenes, Shap Abbey, Lowther,
Brougham and others, were mounted in alcoves there. Beyond, near the
angle of the wall, was the "Shakespeare Gallery." Facing the entrance
stands Sir Walter Scott; below three bas-reliefs, that on the right of
the spectator representing Rob Roy, that in the middle Bois-Guilbert
fighting on horseback, striking Athelstan down; the third, Prince
Charlie.

On the left of the entrance is a terrace with a statue of Music,
holding a lute, emblematic of the Lyvennet; there are also statues of
Addison, Burns, and Hugh Miller the geologist; for Thomas Bland, like
his nephew, was interested in geology. This terrace stretches away to
the left; against it, and facing the lower lawns beyond was a building
for the musicians. The whole garden was lavishly decorated with
paintings and sculptures; the last of the former were removed from the
walls about three years ago. It seems almost incredible that one man
should have accomplished so much work; but he had a marvellous facility
for rapid work and simple execution. He could finish his work very
finely, but seldom did so.

A description of the gardens, and the statues in particular is
contained in Anthony Whitehead's _Westmorland Legends and other Poems_.
It would have been pleasant to say something of Mr. Whitehead, whose
memories are so closely connected with the work of the Blands; but
it is a delicate matter to write of a man in his lifetime; and he is
still living, and bearing his ninety-one years very lightly. Two of his
stanzas are quoted in this book, to illustrate the tale of Crosby Hall.

Thomas Bland worked at art for its own sake, cared nothing for fame,
and would have hated notoriety. He had at least one excellent chance
of becoming known to London art circles, for David Cox (the younger),
who had seen some of his drawings, was interested, and wished to
introduce him to his friends. He gave Mr. Bland several of his own
water-colour paintings, and some correspondence passed between them;
but the introduction fell through. He had, of course, many visitors,
some of whom came to see him only from idle curiosity. These he could
not endure. For their benefit he had a large oleograph of Garibaldi set
up in his studio. If they fell into the trap, and admired it, they were
summarily dealt with, for he could be brusque to those whom he did not
care about. The Garden Beautiful was free to all; but he would not
sacrifice time or convenience to a bore--least of all, an admiring bore.

There is one story told of a trick which was played upon him: about
1855 he went to Kendal to hear a lecture on electricity. He was
sceptical of the marvellous powers claimed for it, and refused to
believe that it would be impossible for him to let go the handles of
the battery when the current was turned on. Having the courage of his
disbelief, he went upon the platform to try, and unsuspectingly put
his top hat between his knees. Then the operator turned the current
on strong, and it was only after that top hat was fairly flattened in
his struggles that he was released, amid the roars of the audience;
whereupon he fled from the room and back to Reagill, a wiser man--with
a ruined hat.

He seems to have been credited with a certain amount of eccentricity,
though this may have been due to a commonplace reading of unusual
gifts and vigorous originality; but it is certainly the case that he
was highly esteemed as a man of warm heart and kindly disposition,
which attracted all with whom he came in contact; and in his own
neighbourhood his death was greatly deplored. He died on September
18th, 1865, in his sixty-seventh year, unmarried.

But John Bland's work, good as it is, has an additional value, because
there was at the time no systematic effort in this field of research.
The Cumberland and Westmorland Antiquarian Society held its inaugural
meeting on September 11th, 1866, only four months before he died, and
for some six years not much was done. Thus he was the first to plan
the important stone circle at Gunnerskeld. This, like its neighbour
at Oddendale, belongs to a class, rare in Britain, which consists of
concentric rings of stone. Mr. C. W. Dymond, F.S.A., in publishing
a plan of Gunnerskeld circle, says:--"So far as my researches have
extended, no plan of this megalithic group has ever been published,
nor, save in a local guide book, have I ever seen it mentioned." The
book contains a drawing, a ground plan and a description of each of
these remains.

But he never lapses into dulness. Indeed, he pokes quiet fun at
the antiquary pure and simple. Certain earthworks, he says, have
been supposed by some antiquaries to be a maze; a dilemma in which
antiquarians are sometimes found. Writing of Crosby Park, he has a
gentle thrust at those who deal of venison and vert, and ancient deer
parks and forests:--"These things," he says, "are past and gone, except
to the dreaming poet and the prosing antiquary."

His sketches cover a wide range. He puts before us each object of which
he writes; heraldry, old buildings, picturesque landscapes, down to the
bracelets and rings found in Skellaw quarry. And each of these pictures
is a work of art, for his was a genius that touches nothing it does not
adorn. He had no mean imagination; there is a vivid picture of a man
on horseback, rider and beast recoiling in terror before the vision of
the Headless Horseman of Gaythorn Plains, which is galloping across
their track in the moonlight. He has a humorous picture of a "Ghost
seen by Bet Whistle"--a dead pollard tree, which makes a most menacing
apparition, though probably the ingenuity of the artist has something
to do with it. And over the first page, majestic in flight, soars the
Roman eagle.

It has been possible to reproduce only a limited number of his
drawings: in making a selection (no easy task), some preference has
been given to those which represent objects no longer existing.

In dealing with the text, variations have been made as seldom as
possible, and then where the author might have wished an alteration, in
accordance with later discoveries. Thus, the account of the settlement
at Langdales has been curtailed, as its great mystery, a bank running
from the pre-Roman village across the Roman Way, has been explained
by the recent discovery that the bank is modern. Part of the account
of Harberwain is left out, as he takes _Har_, on the authority of
a distinguished local antiquary, to be a man's name; and reasons
accordingly. It really means _high_. Some of the quotations from
Ossian are left out, as, though appropriately introduced, they divert
attention from Mr. Bland's own work. The chapter on the history of
Crosby Church, compiled from Charleton's _History of Whitby Abbey_, is
omitted, as a recent account of the church has been published; while in
the present book certain limits of size had to be observed. Incomplete
sentences, where details of measurements are wanting, have generally
been deleted.

This brief memoir attempts nothing more than a record of the life and
work of John Salkeld Bland. If he should be forgotten, we should be the
poorer for the loss; and yet his work was done so unobtrusively that a
studied appreciation seems out of place. The publication of his book
may cause his name to be connected in local literature with that of
the Lyvennet. Perhaps this is the most fitting memorial for him--to be
remembered as the chronicler of the valley he loved so well.




WICKER STREET.

THE ROMAN ROAD CONNECTING THE STATIONS AT BOROUGH BRIDGE AND KIRKBY
THORE.


The earliest historic record respecting the North of England was
made by Tacitus, from whose works we learn that the Roman armies
led by Agricola first advanced into this district and conquered the
inhabitants then known as the Western Brigantes in the year A.D. 79, in
the reign of the Emperor Vespasian.

The base of Agricola's operations was Chester, (Deva), the station
occupied by the 20th Legion; with these he advanced northwards by the
modern towns of Manchester, Preston and Overborough, and up the vale of
Lune to Borough Bridge, at each place forming a station and connecting
them by roads cut through the forests; the last station he placed in
the only pass by which Westmorland could be conveniently entered from
the south-west.[1] From Borough Bridge the road had gone nearly direct
to Kirkby Thore, traversing the whole length of the vale of Lyvennet.
Many antiquarians supposed it went to Brougham, but the name Wicker
Street applied to an extensive hill on the west side of Crosby--a name
significant of a Roman way--led to examination a few years ago and a
road was found traceable from near Black Dub to Dale Banks, a distance
of more than two miles, indisputably in the direction of Kirkby Thore:
it is regularly formed and rounded in the middle, about thirty feet
across, the ground being generally hard and dry; no trace of paved work
is to be found.

The march of Agricola's army is said to have been straight as the
track of a sunbeam, and his roads are generally considered to be
carried in a direct line surmounting every obstruction. However this
may have been in an open country, it is more reasonable to suppose
that in a district like this they would overcome a difficult ascent
by deviating to the right or left. In leaving Borough Bridge they
have crossed the Lune twice, considerably to the right, in preference
to going straight over the steep hills and numerous ravines of Loups
Fell, which would have been almost impossible; then again, where are
the first traces of the road, instead of ascending the steep cliff of
the scar near Bousfield How, they have gone to the west, ascending
and so coming by easier gradients to the top of Wicker Street. This
is the most commanding point overlooking the vale of Lyvennet, and no
doubt, as its name implies, it was an important point to the invading
Roman armies, Wicker Street according to some authorities meaning "the
gateway of the pass." It was from this point probably that Agricola's
army first beheld our lovely valley; for he, after establishing a
stronghold at the gorge of the mountain pass at Borough Bridge would
either lead or send out a party of soldiery to survey the country
northwards, a district abounding in forests and fastnesses in which
roamed the fierce and revengeful Britons; their scouts would of course
avoid the craggy heights of Orton Scar, and following up the course of
the stream from the north be led to ascend by the way along which the
road was afterwards laid out: though we may reasonably allow that all
the low districts were at that time densely wooded, yet it is highly
probable that on the high lands were extensive openings clear of wood,
or perhaps here and there patches of brushwood; such the character of
the soil and its general void of wood at the present time leads us to
imagine; the only brush now to be seen is on the top of the hill and
known as Wicker Street Thorn, which, like the Shap Thorn and Johnny
Hall Trees is a guide mark for many miles round. Here by the side of
the road is a square oblong enclosure of earth and stones which, after
the construction of the road perhaps served as a _mons exploratorum_
by which, and others such, the garrison at Borough Bridge could be
warned of the approach of the enemy. The road from this point descends
and crosses the Blea Beck; an embankment has been raised on each side
and brought near together; quantities of huge boulders have been used
to bank it up and probably form a culvert. From here it crosses Slack
Randy, passing near some entrenchments and curious stone circles called
Yow Locks and descends Long Dale. In this field on the brow of the hill
above Dale Banks is what antiquarians affirm to be a British village;
it presents earthworks covering three or four acres of ground: these
consist of irregular squares, circles, &c., formed of earth thrown up
to the height of from one to three feet.[2]

Continuing the course of the road, it is traceable to the bottom
of the hill, where it has crossed Odindale beck, after which all
further traces have been obliterated by enclosures and the plough; the
direction however is straight for Kirkby Thore, crossing the Lyvennet
near Dairy Bridge, where there is an ancient paved wath, then past
Lofterns and over Castriggs in King's Meaburn township, across the
Eden about two hundred yards above the present bridge at Bolton, where
there are remains of an abutment, as of a bridge, with mason-work and
grouting now overgrown with brushwood; thence in the direction of
Kirkby Thore joining the more important road known as Watling Street
from Bowes in Yorkshire. No remains of decided Roman character have
ever been found in connection with this road, but this is accounted
for by the fact that no settlement was made in the valley, it
being but a thoroughfare along which passed and repassed the Roman
legions employed in the somewhat vain attempt to subjugate the wild
Caledonians. It is possible this road or track was previously used, but
of this we have no proof, but from that time up to the making of the
present road over Shap Fell it was used as the great highway between
the southern parts of England and Scotland.

[1] The route by Overborough, Borough Bridge and Kirkby Thore was the
Maiden Way; but it is probable that Agricola's first advance to this
district was made along the coast.

[2] For full details of the most recent excavations and finds, with
plans, see reports on "A Romano-British settlement at Ewe Close, Crosby
Ravensworth," by W. G. Collingwood, F.S.A., (1907-8) _Transactions_,
Cumberland and Westmorland Antiquarian and Archaeological Society, N.S.,
vols. viii. and ix.




EARTHWORKS.

THE SITES OF ANCIENT BRITISH VILLAGES.


The most important monuments left by the ancient Britons who inhabited
this country previous to the Roman invasion are the several remains of
villages. Caesar, in describing what the Britons call a town, says:--"It
is a tract of woody country surrounded by a vallum and a ditch for
the security of themselves and cattle against the incursions of their
enemies." Strabo confirms this, and says further:--"That within the
inclosures formed of felled trees they build houses for themselves and
hovels for their cattle: these buildings are slight, and not designed
for long duration." The vallum is expressed in Welsh by _caer_ or
_dinas_, the same with the Gaelic _dun_. Diodorus Siculus and Strabo
tell us that the houses of the Gauls were wretched cottages, being
constructed with poles and wattled work in the form of a circle with
lofty tapering or pointed roof, and Caesar also says that the houses
of the Britons were similar. These it is true were of south Britain,
but it is reasonable to infer that with little alteration those of the
northern inhabitants would be similar. Some authors suppose the present
Welsh pigsty to represent the form of the ancient British house. This
is a circular building with a conical roof, and having a large circular
enclosure attached.

In the district under consideration there are remains of earthworks
which may be considered of this character. They generally consist of
ridges of earth and stones varying in height from one to three feet,
forming irregular squares, circles, passages, &c., covering a greater
or less area of ground. In five of these are to be found small
circular enclosures generally six yards in diameter, with a gap or
opening on one side; each of the other larger enclosures have also an
entrance and in some places a sort of street or passage communicates.
The most extensive and distinct are the remains of Long Dale, which
are skirted by the Roman road: in the middle part of these are seven
or eight of the small circles. Another though much smaller is on
Wickerslack Moor: this has five small circles, with two or three
irregular squares and a large circle; a large area is also enclosed
on the high side which is not cut up by any earthworks. In two of
the small circles was found a rude pavement formed of large slabs of
sandstone rudely laid down and fit together with smaller boulders of
granite, &c., but no limestone; these stones bear evident marks of
having been exposed to fire. The ground chosen for these enclosures
without exception are upon the hard limestone rock, covered by a very
thin layer of earth; this with the loose rock has been bared off and
used to form the earthworks. They are also generally at a considerable
distance from water.

Yow Locks, another of these villages, is on the open moor called Slack
Randy; here only one or two small circles can be traced; but the ridges
are very marked, many of them being formed of large boulders rolled
together. These are very plentiful near; there are two peculiar oval
enclosures formed solely by large boulders, the longer diameter of each
being nine yards. Another village may be seen in a field near Gilts;
though very irregular, yet it affords traces of eight or ten of the
small circles.

How Arcles, a little above Wood Foot affords a large circle, but only
one or two of the small ones; these may have been obliterated by
the plough. Bellmouth, probably a corruption of Bermont, is another
between Reagill and Sleagill; part of this is quarried away, and about
twenty years ago a human skeleton was found behind one of the outer
earthworks. Another on Wickerslack Moor has only one small circle
attached to a larger one, and enclosed by a large irregular square.
The new road cuts through it, and the plough will soon obliterate
all trace of it, as it doubtless has done of many others in the now
cultivated parts of the country. At Harberwain is another though in
a great measure obliterated, yet still exhibits a few squares, &c.;
connected with it is a rampart of earth; this seems to have been for
some extraordinary defence.

Other entrenchments are still to be found more or less obliterated by
the advance of agriculture; some of a strategic character which will be
afterwards noticed, and others again that will forever puzzle enquiry
for what purpose they were raised and by what people.

To the most ancient inhabitants many authors ascribe the origin of the
various stone circles to be found in different parts of the country.
There are two remarkable ones in this district, one in Gunnerskeld
bottom, and another near Odindale Head. The former is situated on a
level area elevated a little above the bed of the stream. It is a
circle of large granite boulders eighteen in number, some of which are
still standing upright seven feet high, while many have fallen one way
or the other. The circle is thirty-eight yards in diameter; and within
it is another formed by thirty-one stones much smaller in size and
eighteen yards in diameter; within this has been apparently a mound,
most of which is removed for the sake of the stones and the earth has
been thrown into a heap outside; there are still some large stones left
and three in the centre are situated as though they may have formed
part of a cromlech. There is no record of anything having been found,
and the word Gunnerskeld is of too modern a character to throw any
light on the matter.

The one near Odindale Head is similar, at first sight inspires a truly
Ossianic feeling. It is situated on a hill of "dark brown heath," it
is formed of an outer circle of thirty stones not so large as those at
Gunnerskeld, twenty-five yards in diameter, within which is another
circle of twenty-one stones closely packed to each other seven yards
in diameter; within this are a number of other stones irregularly laid,
similar to Gunnerskeld. It was opened in presence of Rev. J. Simpson,
but nothing was found excepting a small portion of black carbonaceous
matter. A peculiar feature is that there is an upright stone placed
outside the inner and within the outer circle on the south-east side.
On the north side about seven yards distant is the remains of another
circle, fourteen yards in diameter, having another within of four
yards, but many of the stones have been removed.

Respecting the origin of these circles authors differ considerably,
some considering them to be the temples of the Druids, within whose
mystic bounds sacrificial rites were performed; while others attribute
them to a later people, the Pagan Saxons, Angles or Danes.

Odindale, like Gunnerskeld, is a name significant of the latter people.
Odin was the one great god of the Gothic nations, from whom they all
claimed descent, and to whom, of course, their greatest honours were
paid.

There are also other circles much smaller in size and each on elevated
ground, one near Threaplands is formed of seven granite boulders, and
is five yards in diameter; some of the stones are six feet in length.
Another on Harbyrn Rigg is six yards in diameter and formed of eight
stones and another outside. On Wicker Street is another formed by
eleven stones five yards in diameter, and near to it is a small one of
four stones, three yards in diameter. Another on Harkeld is formed by
ten stones, and is six yards in diameter; in digging in this one, a few
inches deep was found a stratum of charred bones. The one on Harbyrn
Rigg has three stones in the centre, but no trace of ashes: some of the
stones are six or seven feet long, and have all originally been placed
upright. These we may also attribute to the ancient Britons, probably
the monuments erected around the funeral pile of important personages
whose names and fame they have failed to record, but yet, in the words
of the poet, "have spoken to other years."

The Druids in their temples had generally a spring or stream of water
near. This is the case with the one at Gunnerskeld, but not so with the
other, unless we can associate Anna's Keld with it; which is, however,
half a mile distant. This well is mentioned by Camden, who says that
like Euripus of old it ebbs and flows with the tide.[3] However it may
have been then, it is not the case now; but devoid of this interest
its position is one of dreary grandeur, being situated in the midst of
the dark brown heath. To what people we may attribute the saintly name
of Anna is doubtful, but it has at some time been an important spot,
from the fact that it is the source of Crook Syke, whose waters have
run through the gigantic temple at Shap, now known as Carl Lofts; a
temple like Avebury in the south dedicated to the dread worship of the
serpent.[4] It is now almost destroyed, but it is considered to have
been one of the most important monuments of antiquity in the north of
England.

 As Mr. Bland arouses our curiosity as to the origin of remains of
 this kind, it may interest readers to have a short account of the
 various opinions which have been expressed on the subject. These have
 been based mainly upon researches in Wiltshire, more particularly at
 Stonehenge and Avebury; and if these relics prove their founders to
 have possessed much knowledge and ingenuity, it can hardly have been
 more marvellous than that embodied in some of the theories formed
 about them.

 The first scientific report on Stonehenge was made by Inigo Jones,
 at the wish of James I.; he thought it was a temple erected by the
 Romans, after the Tuscan order. Charleton, physician to Charles II.,
 held that it was a monument of the Danish period. Aubrey, about the
 same time, attributed it to the Druids. Next came Stukeley's famous
 theory. Stukeley, a man of great learning, had read of the Druids,
 and had seen the circles; then he found a grotesque story in Pliny
 about an egg, miraculously produced from the saliva of serpents, and
 regarded as a charm by the Druids. So, he reasoned, the Druids made
 the circles for serpent worship; and, according to his argument, the
 complete temple consisted of a diagram of a snake, miles long, done in
 boulders, the circles being the reptile's coils! To demonstrate this,
 Stukeley made a plan of the Avebury remains. The result was not very
 convincing; essential parts of the creature's anatomy were wanting;
 and a snake is nothing if not continuous. But he sketched in these
 missing parts out of his own head, and the thing was done. Somewhat
 similar results were got from a hurried survey of Shap, about 1725.
 Such is the groundwork of the popular belief in "Druids' Circles,"
 and yet, at the time, it was received almost as a revelation. John
 Wood, of Bath, about 1747, introduced the idea that the numbers of
 the stones corresponded to certain astronomical cycles or periods of
 time. Rev. Edward Duke, writing in 1846, saw in the Wiltshire remains
 a vast plan of the solar system as known to the ancients; the small
 circles at Avebury were the sun and moon at the summer solstice;
 the avenue of stones on either side was the northern portion of the
 ecliptic; Silbury Hill, a mile south, the Earth. Four miles north of
 Silbury, Winterbourne Basset circle stood for the planet Venus; south
 of it were Mercury; Mars; Jupiter, represented by Casterly Camp,
 nine miles from Silbury; and Saturn by Stonehenge, sixteen miles
 off. The vastness of the scheme will be appreciated by saying that
 an equivalent of this in Westmorland would place Saturn at Tebay,
 Jupiter at Shap, and the Earth at Eamont Bridge; or, following the
 railway, the viaduct crossing the Eamont. Mr. Duke notices that all
 the points are in almost exact line due north and south; and that
 Stonehenge points directly towards the sunrise at the summer solstice.
 About twenty years later, a good deal was made of practically the
 same fact, that from the so-called Altar Stone within Stonehenge, the
 sun on Midsummer Day appears to rise immediately over a distant stone
 called the Friar's Heel; hence it is argued that Stonehenge was an
 observatory. This is the modern popular theory, possibly because of
 its simplicity. Fergusson, about 1870, published a most interesting
 argument that these circles were set up after the Romans left; his
 conclusion is not generally accepted, though his views are treated
 with respect. Those who think that archaeology must be dull, should
 read his racy satire at the expense of poor Stukeley. One of his
 suggestions is that Long Meg, or perhaps the Grey Yauds circle, may
 be a memorial of King Arthur's battle in the Caledonian Forest. The
 best opinion is that of Mr. W. C. Lukis, who thinks that the object,
 in the first instance, was that of burial-places; that they were
 formed before the Roman invasion; while Mr. Arthur Evans assigned to
 Stonehenge an approximate date of 450 B.C.

[3] The exact wording is:--"Near the head of which (the Lowther) is
a well which, like Euripus, ebbs and flows several times in a day,"
a much less remarkable thing. Apparently Mr. Bland's informant has
misquoted in conversation. The second edition of Camden's _Britannia_
(1723) comments that this phenomenon is not infrequent in rocky
country, and not usually lasting; and that there was then no ebbing
fountain to be heard of near Shap.

[4] This idea is that of Stukeley; it had, at the time, a very large
following, but is now rejected.




ANCIENT BURYING PLACES.


The remains next under consideration are the cairns or burial mounds.
These have been very numerous on the high grounds and unenclosed moors
around the source of the Lyvennet. Thirty or forty may still be found
perched upon the highest peaks, or otherwise on commanding situations,
others on the overhanging banks of the streams, while some have been
placed without any characteristic choice of site. Some of these bear
significant names or more often the name is applied to an extended
area of the hill or plain on which they are found; and others there
are with which no name can be connected. The word _How_, Danish--a
hill, is generally significant of a mound, but is often applied to the
whole, as Sill _How_, Raise _How_, Bousfield _How_, _How_ Arcles, _How_
Neuk and _How_ Robin; on each of which are mounds. _Raise_ is an older
word of similar meaning, and is applied more directly to a mound, as
_Raise_ How on Bank Moor. This name is more common in the neighbourhood
of Shap. _Pen_, of Cambro-Celtic origin, having the same meaning, is
found in _Pen_hurrock. Others again bear the ordinary name of _Hill_,
as Iren _Hill_, Round _Hill_, &c. Though these mounds have been raised
by different people each in their day, yet they are often found to have
been named or rather called _Hills_ by whatever word in the language
or dialect of the succeeding races expressed the same. Others again
there are bearing names peculiar to themselves, as _Iren_ Hill, _Sill_
How, _Hollinstump_, Pen_hurrock_, Robin Hood's Grave, Lady's Mound,
&c. Though they are numerous, yet many of them have been opened by
the hill-breakers of the last century, or been more or less ravaged
for the sake of stones, earth, &c.; for this reason it is difficult
to distinguish those belonging to different ages, though it is highly
probable the great majority are British.

On Gaythorn Plains--an extensive tract of comparatively level moor
on the north side of Orton Scar, are two mounds 100 yards apart,
respectively fourteen and [ ] yards in diameter; the larger of these,
on being opened by Rev. J. Holmes, was found to contain in the centre
an urn of baked clay, ornamented with rude zig-zag work on the outside;
this was broken but had contained ashes; besides this the mound
contained remains of five different skeletons which, from the wear of
the teeth, had been of different ages; some being sharp and pointed,
while others were worn quite flat. It is a remarkable fact that no
teeth found in any mounds show the slightest symptoms of decay.

At the extreme edge of the Plains on the brow of a cliff overlooking
Sale Bottom is another mound composed solely of stones; it is
twenty-six yards in diameter, and has originally been about seven
or eight feet high. It is known as Hollinstump, a corruption, as
some think, of Llewellen's Tomb. Llewellen was the last of the Welsh
Kings, and was beheaded about 1280 in the reign of Edward I., but it
is improbable the King would trouble to send his mangled remains for
interment to such a distant part. It was opened by some gainseeking
hill-breakers, who say they found a large slab of sandstone, under
which was a full length skeleton and a small implement--in the
words of the finder:--"He seemed t'eve been buried in his cleayse
wid a jack-a-legs knife in his waistcwoat pocket." Of the sandstone
slab:--"They brak it up an' gat three carfull o't finest sand et iver
was carried to Appleby Low Brewery." Bone dust was not then come into
fashion, or else we may be certain his bones would have been sold to
the crushing mill. This place is said to be haunted, the apparition
being a headless horseman who dashes along at a furious yet noiseless
speed. Those who have seen him describe him as having in place of a
head something like a blaze of fire, and others like a backboard laid
upon his shoulders--perhaps the distinguished spirit of the wronged and
headless Welsh King, whose sole revenge is to dash on the midnight wind
around his tomb, to the terror and dismay of each benighted wanderer.

Round Hill near Towcett, was opened by a similar class, out of which
was got a sandstone slab of large size, afterwards made into a
chimney-piece; under it were also found human bones. A like one existed
at Flatt Neuk on Bank Moor, but is now removed; within it was a cist
formed of rude stones set up edgewise, in which was the skeleton,
and alongside a bronze spear-head; this cist was covered by a large
sandstone slab, over which had been heaped, as in the others mentioned,
earth and stones even to hundreds of cartloads in quantity; in some
cases brought from a large distance.

Penhurrock, the highest point by the road leading from Crosby to Orton,
was a large mound of stones, but it has been removed and broken up
for road metal, with the exception of a few boulders of granite. Its
diameter was about twenty yards, having in the centre a cist surrounded
by an irregular circle of stones about eleven yards across; the
boulders are only very small, and have been covered up in the mound.
A quantity of bones was found, some of them of gigantic proportions:
and what is rather curious, in a small cavity on one side were found
a quantity of ashes, remains of the fire by which the bodies had been
consumed. As no account was kept of the deposition of its contents,
in what position the entire skeletons were found, or where the ashes
of those consumed had been placed, we can form no decided opinion
respecting its age; but from its mixed contents it was probably used as
a burial place by different succeeding races.

On Long Scar Pike is a large mound of stones twenty yards in diameter,
and eight or nine feet high. It has been opened, but no account kept.
There is another on How Nook Pike, a little further south; these
are the highest points in the parish of Crosby Ravensworth, and are
positions truly worthy as the resting-places of some ancient chieftains
or warriors, overlooking as they do the vale of Orton, the Lune and
their tributary dales of Bretherdale, Langdale, Wasdale, and the vale
of Birkbeck with its far-famed medicinal spa, backed by the bleak and
rugged peaks of Shap Fells.

On Wicker Street, near the stone circle, is a large irregular oblong
mound, twenty-four yards in length, and another at no great distance,
but small and circular, on the east side of the Roman road. A more
remarkable one is on a limestone cliff overhanging the Lyvennet, in
Crosby Gill; it is an oval, or keel-shaped, ten yards the longer
diameter, and six the less, and about seven feet high.

Robin Hood's Grave is an oblong mound, seven yards by three. It is
situated at the bottom of a narrow rocky dell at the head of Crosby
Gill, where the footpath from Orton to Crosby enters the woods, once
the chase of Sir Lancelot Threlkeld. It is noticed by Mr. Sullivan in
his "Cumberland and Westmorland," but he speaks of two heaps: this is,
however, a mistake, there being only one. Of this mound he says "It was
once customary for every person who went a-nutting in the wood, at the
south end of which this heap is situated, to throw a stone on Robin's
grave, repeating the following rhyme:--

    Robin Hood, Robin Hood, here lie thy bones;
    Load me with nuts as I load thee with stones."

Whoever was the original of the famous outlaw, and whether he was
properly Robin of the Wood or Robin with the Hood, his name is now
connected with mounds and stones innumerable in various parts of
England. On Ploverigg Edge are two large stones, known as Robin Hood's
Chair and Punch Bowl; in short, too much popularity has converted him,
according to the view of critical investigation, into a myth. Probably
the well-known rhyme of schoolboy notoriety may be in allusion also to
the famed outlaw of Sherwood Forest:--

      Robin a Ree, Robin a Ree, if I let thee dee
    Many sticks, many steanes be heaped o' my weary beanes
      If I sud set Robin a Ree to dee:

This game is usually attendant on bonfires, near which, those joining
the game stand in a row; the first then takes a fiery stick, and
whirling it round and round repeats the rhyme, then handing it to
the next, who repeats it, and so on till the stick dies out; the
unfortunate individual, in whose hand this happens, is then at the
mercy of the grimy sticks and wet sods of his companions.

Not far from Robin Hood's Grave is a spring known as "King's Well,"
which is supposed to bear its royal title from being visited by King
Henry VII.; but of this we have no more reliable proof than we have
that Robin Hood's remains lie beneath the mound, which, on being
opened, was found to contain only an old sheep's skull.

There are three mounds near to each other on the east bank of the
stream near Gilts; they are about seven or eight yards in diameter
each. None of these have been opened. Between Gilts and Lodge is one;
below it are a number of parallel and other earthworks, suggesting to
the mind of some antiquaries the idea of its having been a maze; a
dilemma in which antiquarians are often found.

A little south of How Arcles is a mound near which are circular and
square entrenchments.

Lady's Mound is near the high road over Meaburn Moor, from which it is
said the Countess of Pembroke once stood and remarked that she could
see from that point three of her ancient castles, namely, Brough,
Appleby and Brougham.

On the east side of Morland Bank is a mound on the edge of what has
once been an extensive marsh now known as Redmires. It is here worthy
of remark that Morland Bank is a corruption of Mere or Mireland Bank,
from _mere_, a marsh; literally meaning "the bank amongst the marsh
lands." It is a tongue of high ground which has at some time been
almost surrounded by marshes. These though now drained still retain
the significant names of Redmires on the east side, through which runs
Lyvennet, and Eelmires on the west, drained by a tributary stream. That
these have been more extensive and of a more marshy character is proved
by the fact that when Redmires was drained in 1863, at the depth of
4-1/2 feet, in black marshy earth, was found part of the head and horns
of a deer. The skull has been forcibly broken from the neck, while the
horns have been cut round with some sharp instrument and then broken
off; the four tips on the part of the horns left are also cut and
broken off. The remainder of the horn, being useless, has been thrown
away into the marsh, on the banks of which would have been the scene of
the slaughter; whether by Briton, Roman or Saxon we know not: but it
is certainly a relic of the chase when the native deer of Westmorland
ranged wild and free over its forests and fells. In the same drain and
about the same depth was also found a small stone ornament. It is best
described as half of a large marble one inch in diameter, with the
top flattened and a hole made through it about a quarter of an inch
in diameter, slightly wider on one side than the other; it is of blue
slate. These, by some, are called Druids' rings.

Returning again to mounds, one was removed in Reagill Croft, in which
was found what was called a bronze spear-head. On Wickerslack Moor
another was removed, having on the original surface a layer of black
earth surrounded with boulders, but all covered up. Others of various
sizes may also be seen on Ploverigg Edge, Hardendale Nab, near Murbur,
Potrigg, near Starbey Field, &c., possessing no features particularly
worthy of remark. Near Harberwain Plantation was formerly a circle of
stones eight yards in diameter, within which had been a mound; but it
is all now removed.

On Harberwain Rigg is a remarkable mound occupying a very elevated
position; its diameter is fourteen yards, and surrounded by eighteen
large boulders. It was carelessly opened a few years ago, and in the
south-west side was found a human skeleton of gigantic proportions;
but whether he had been in a cist or how laid was not noticed. Along
with the bones were found portions of the horns of the red deer. The
mound is called Iren Hill, doubtless a corruption. Half way between it
and the stone circle was found in a cleft of the rock a bronze dagger
blade, thirteen inches in length and four inches broad at the hilt.
It is of very good workmanship. Whether it is coeval with the mound
is doubtful; but it is a good specimen of the weapon which supplanted
those of the stone age, and in the hand of the Briton opposed the
advance of the Roman legions. Another relic of the same age is a small
bronze celt three inches in length, which was ploughed up in a field
near Blinbeck, and now in possession of Mr. Markham of Morland. Iren
Hill is the only mound now left in the neighbourhood having a circle of
stones round.

Orton Scar, an extensive tract of high ground, is a dreary wilderness
of rocks, extending for many miles, presenting little more than the
bare limestone cut up in its original formation by deep chasms into
blocks of various sizes. These again are carved and worn into most
fantastic shapes by the wearing power of winds and rains. The only form
of vegetable life flourishing in the crevices are of the fern species,
some of which are peculiarly rare in other localities. Here and there
are patches of earth affording a scanty herbage of bent and moss for
the few hardy mountain sheep. These rocks break off on the south-east
side forming bold escarpments overlooking the vale of Orton, while on
the other side they slope away in the opposite direction for a mile
or more, variously broken up into rocky valleys and ravines unadorned
by either bush or brake. The scenery is, of course, in the immediate
neighbourhood, of a wild and dreary character; but its high situation
affords a wide panoramic view of the surrounding country, bounded all
round by the more or less distant mountains, even to the blue line of
the Cheviots. Of archaeologic interest there are a few mounds located in
different parts on the high elevations; but the observing eye cannot
but note that it has been more a place of refuge and safety in life to
the ancient inhabitants than a resting place after death; and in such
localities would we expect to find the fastnesses of the Celtic races
to which they would fly when the Roman armies made their appearance
through the gorge at Borough Bridge, and also the people of after ages
seeking safety from the marauding Scots or Danes up to the last Border
foray. Associated with the last-named times is the highest point: from
which often has blazed the beacon fire signalled from other heights,
and warning the inhabitants below to prepare for the approaching danger.

Castlesteads, about half a mile further east, is an elevated plateau
of rock, having a sloping level surface of about half an acre, covered
with bent and moss. On nearly every side it presents an escarpment of
rock from three to fifteen feet high; along the top of this has been a
rude wall or barricade of stone to serve partly as a defence against
attack, or more likely as a fence to enfold horses and cattle. Within
it on the south side are two oblong enclosures about twenty yards long
by eight each, and on the north-west side is a large pile of stones as
though it may have been a rude tower. This elevation is situated in a
hollow and immediately all round it is an impassable plain of rocks
and chasms. These are continued, more or less similar, for a mile or
more on every side; so that this stronghold could only be gained by
horses and cattle by circuitous windings, known only to those most
familiar with the locality. In this place and others similar, then, in
ages past, we may conclude that in times of invasion or when marauders
ravaged the country, the inhabitants of Orton and Crosby would remove
their cattle and other goods for security, which it certainly would
afford, if such were to be had; first, from its secluded situation,
for, unless previously known, it would escape discovery, and if known,
a few men well armed and familiar with the crags would have baffled
and perhaps overcome a whole army. Some authors suppose the word
Castlesteads to be associated with Roman works, and possibly this place
may have held out and been reduced by them. However this may have been,
at no great distance to the north were found in April 1847 a beautiful
silver brooch (Fibula Vestiaria) and a silver torque, in a crevice
of the rock at a depth of about five feet. Possibly these may have
been in the possession of some reckless Roman captain whose hardihood
and reckless daring led him amongst the treacherous scars and hardy
Britons, which when he discovered, in his haste to retreat flung away
his cloak to free himself of its encumbrance, unmindful of its valuable
ornaments.[5]

About a mile from Castlesteads, descending by a rocky ravine in an
easterly direction, is a remarkable hollow called Sale Bottom, where
are the remains of mounds and earthworks, to all appearance of a
strategic character--perchance the battlefield on which the owners of
the fold on Castlesteads have struggled to defend themselves and their
property. It is a narrow area of level land, bounded on the north side
by an escarpment of limestone more or less bold; on the opposite side
is a more regular slope, while the ends are gorges more or less rocky.
Across the level area of this bottom have been formed five or six
embankments of earth and stones running from the rocks on one side and
on the other ending in counter entrenchments, two of which, at about
twenty-five yards apart, run parallel along the slope of the hill, and
so defending the most approachable side. The entrenchment at the upper
end has also a ditch on the outside and runs between the cliff in one
ravine over a hill to another ravine. Scattered over this area are also
seven or eight mounds, which lead us to suppose that after the action
was over the dead were buried on the field. The principal mound is
circular, nine yards in diameter; near it is another, forty yards long
and about five broad. These are of earth and stones, and have been made
of the materials forming one of the breastworks, parts of which are
still left at each end; besides these, further up, are three irregular
shaped ones, about ten yards long each by five; there are also three
other smaller ones in different places, all within the area of the
entrenchments. These mounds have never been opened, so that no idea can
be formed of the people by whom they were formed. The word Sale is by
some supposed to mean strife or battle, and possibly the various forms
of Sel and Sill may be of similar derivation, for example, Sill How,
near Odindale.

On the eastern slope of Sill How are the remains of raised banks of
earth and stones running in different directions, apparently for a
similar purpose to those in Sale Bottom--defence against the attacks of
horsemen or chariots. Crowning the hill, not far from the stone circles
is a mound which, on being opened, was found to contain in the centre a
small chamber formed by four flat stones set edgewise, making a cavity
about eighteen inches by ten and six deep; this contained a quantity of
ashes and charred bones; over it was laid a rude limestone slab about
three feet long by two. Upon this was loose earth and then another much
larger stone.

Outside in the body of the mound were also found quantities of
human bones and teeth and also the teeth of horses. Amongst the
earthworks are one or two mounds, one of which contained human bones,
miscellaneously thrown in at a slight depth. The south-west slope of
the hill is called "Outliers Brow," on which, on making a road, a
bronze spear-head was found.

In Stony Gill, near Winter Tarn, are also similar remains of irregular
earthworks, running across a level piece of ground at different
distances from one steep breast of rock to another, the scene of
another of those struggles constantly occurring in savage ages. The
most remarkable feature is a mound on the top of which has been erected
a memorial or bauta-stone commemorative of victory. This has fallen
from its erect position, and a portion of the top having broken off is
still lying at no great distance. This again illustrates Ossian when
commemorating a victory. He says:--"I took a stone from the stream
amongst the song of bards, we raised the mould around the stone, and
bade it speak to other years." Then contemplating of what would happen
in after years he says:--"Prone from the stormy night the traveller
shall lay him by thy side: the whistling moss shall sound in his
dreams, the years that are past shall return. Battles rise before him.
Blue-shielded kings descend to war. The darkened moon looks down from
heaven on the troubled field. He shall burst with morning from his
dreams and see the tombs of warriors round. He shall ask about the
stones." But the time is now too far past; the chief is forgot--and who
shall reply?

On the high ground east of Winter Tarn is a mound ten yards in
diameter, near to which are some faint traces of an irregular oblong
enclosure. Within this are two circles, respectively fifteen and eleven
yards in diameter and three yards apart. The traces of these are very
slight, as though a small trench had been made around some temporary
camp. To the south-east of this, on what is called The Edge, is one of
those large circular ramparts of earthwork; it is nearly obliterated
by the plough, but seems to have been about fifty or sixty yards in
diameter. There is another similar near Hard Ing, much more perfect,
with a mound and ditch; some antiquarians attribute these to be the
work of the Danes, as strongholds in their forays.

The last remains of a strategic character to be enumerated are on Bank
Moor. Here there is a level plateau of land which has been fortified on
the west and north by a deep ditch, formed along the brow of the hill.
When the brow is a rocky crest no ditch is made, but it is continued
across the north end to another breast of rock. This extends still
higher, away at about an average of 150 yards, parallel to the other,
to Raise How, a large mound at the southern extremity. The whole length
of the plateau is about a quarter of a mile.

[5] More probably both are pre-Roman. They are now in the Museum of the
Society of Antiquaries.




RELICS OF THE STONE AGE.


Near Winter Tarn at different times have been found various relics of
the ancient Celts belonging to the Stone Age. Two stone celts, one of
greenstone, the other of basalt. The one of basalt is broken and only
a portion left; the other is perfect--with a hole in it to receive a
shaft and be used as a mace or battle-axe. Another similar was found on
Crosby Fell, near Hause Edge, but is now lost. One of another character
was found in Threaplands Gill; it is of green slate, smoothly polished.
This has been broken, the portion found is the narrow end. Its length
would originally be about [  ] inches, having a sharp broad edge.
Another, of basalt, was found near Gunnerskeld, of similar character,
but more pointed at the narrow end. The use of these is doubtful; they
are, however, though much larger, similar in shape to two others found
near Winter Tarn, and these are almost exactly similar to such as are
used by the North American Indians to strike off the skins of deer and
other animals. They are used by placing the narrow end in the palm of
the hand, and with the broad, sharp edge beat off the skin from the
flesh; and undoubtedly those found in this neighbourhood have been used
by the ancient inhabitants of Westmorland for a similar purpose.

In the neighbourhood of Winter Tarn at different times and at different
places have been found three annulets, or as they are sometimes called,
Druids' rings; they are all similar, being small flat circular stones
of slate, and half an inch thick and an inch in diameter; there is a
hole in the middle around which are concentric rings on the flat sides:
they are also grooved round the edges.




A RETROSPECT

OF THE CONDITIONS OF THE COUNTRY UP TO THE TIME OF THE NORMAN CONQUEST.


The northern counties of England have, through all historic record, and
in times previous from monumental evidence, been the scenes of constant
struggles, sometimes between the different tribes of the inhabitants
amongst themselves, or marauders; and at other times united as a people
opposing the invasions of foreign aggressors, as the Romans, and after
them the Scots, Picts, Angles, Saxons and Danes; each in their turn
conquering in whole or part, and so settling as a separate people, or
mingling with the previous inhabitants. How remote may have been the
influx of our first colonists we have no clue; but ethnologists agree
generally that these were the Hiberno-Celts, who came not later than
four centuries before our era. These came in from the north, generally
following and forming settlements along the hills and valleys. To them
is attributed the erection of the stone circles and several of the
mounds on our hilltops. As a natural consequence they were the first
to give names to the various natural objects. These, as in every new
country, are the hills, streams, valleys, and natural clearings in the
forests, which they called by words synonymous in their language. To
them belong such words as _knock_, (a hill). They, have, however, left
but few names, being found more on the east and west fell sides.

The next race were the Cambro-Celts, who have come in from the
south. These we trace in the name _Pen_ (a hill) as Penhurrock, and
the affix _Cum_, &c. Other tribes and people also mingled in the
country from various sources, forming what were called at the time
of the Roman invasion the Brigantes. During the Roman sway, which
in the north was not more than 350 years, little change would take
place in the real character of the inhabitants, as the Romans almost
never intermixed with the native population. It was probably thinned
of its inhabitants--not only from the draughting of young men for
foreign service in the army, but more particularly from the fearful
visitations of fire and sword on the revolting tribes, which was
often the case with the Brigantes. The Roman era, was, however, a
period of peace to the north compared with the succeeding 400 years,
during which time it was subject to various invasions, first from the
Picts and Scots, who ravaged the poor, helpless Britons, after the
withdrawal of the Roman legions, for upwards of 150 years. Then came
the Angles, who invaded from the east coast along the Roman roads.
The Saxons followed, amongst whom there were constant wars. After
them came the wildest and most erratic of all--the Danes. Under these
Gothic tribes other words were introduced and affixes added to older
names; villages and more permanent settlements began to be formed,
requiring definite names: thus we have the affixes _ton_ (Angle),
_ham_ (Saxon) and _by_ (Danish), meaning a town or settlement. Thus
each having a different language or dialect, words belonging to each
have been blended into one forming the present Westmorland dialect;
and so, as civilization advanced, and names were required, they have
been bestowed by each different race and retained to the present day;
and, what is a remarkable proof of the addition of names by different
races, we often find two or three syllables in one name, each given by
a different people, and yet each and all having the same meaning. The
names now borne by fields have generally been applied to the same land
for ages previous to its enclosure; and are consequently indicative of
the existence of some particular race of people; or it may be some
event. Others again bear peculiar names which they derive from some
remains, even though these have been removed. These are often from
mounds, as Affleber, a corruption from Anglebarrow; from earthworks,
as Borwans, or from stone circles, as Stannerstones. Another curious
fact is that many of these places where earthworks or mounds are
or have been are said to be haunted. Such is the case near Reagill
Grange, where a gate noiselessly is opened for the midnight passenger,
and again as noiselessly closed. At other places a figure suddenly
appears, passes by, and vanishes; sometimes a dog, swelling into an
enormous size; again a calf or black swine, and not unfrequently a
lady in white, whose antics are as various as her observers. This myth
of the midnight air has often appeared to belated travellers, who, on
daring her, have fallen victims to her fury. Major White of Reagill,
one night coming through Blinbeck on horseback, saw something white in
a tree, which he supposed to be a howlet. Having a gun with him, he
fired at it. With this salute it began to swell and grew bigger till
it took the form of a lady in white. She jumped on to the horse behind
him, and galloped him through hedge, ditch and brake at a terrible
speed. At last he landed home, his clothes torn to shreds, and his
horse panting and white with foam. Another boggle haunts Langland's
Geayte. This is supposed to be a Barghast from its peculiar _wawl_
or _beal_. One old man tells the story that he was coming along on
horseback with some sacks under him. On hearing the wawl he jumped
off, and pulled off his sacks, thinking some one had put a cat in;
he found none, but presently cats began to wawl on all sides of him.
He then knew it was the Barghast, so mounting his horse he made all
speed along the haunted lane. Another man walking in the same lane saw
something black in the middle of the road; he, foolhardy, punched at
it "an' wi' that it gev the awfullest beal. I tewk to my heels than,
for I knew 'twas a Barghast." He told his tale to an old neighbour next
morning, who replied "La, man' it'll be our cuddy, it niver come heayme
yesterday neet," so off they went to see; and the cuddy it certainly
had been. These appearances are often in the most lonely places, and
in many instances the memory of some deed has in the ghost survived
all remembrance of the action. Such is the case at Skellaw Quarry.
Here a black man was seen to glide from point to point of the rock,
and then mysteriously disappear, invariably at the same spot. It is
a curious fact that there, a few years ago, some quarrymen came upon
the skeletons of eleven human beings. These had been laid in an open
channel or crevice formed in the rock, and then covered up. One of
these had been highly jewelled, which bespoke considerable importance,
having gold rings and bracelets on his fingers and wrists, and bronze
earrings; the latter had discoloured the bones of the skull. The bones
were carefully taken up, and devoutly interred in Morland churchyard.
We do not know that the divine rites of the church were performed
over them, but "The Black Man" has never more been seen. Along with
the human bodies were also found the bones of the lower jaw and other
parts of a swine, the provisions doubtless of the party who, whether
explorers, merchants or hunters, have been fallen upon and murdered
by some band of marauders; but at what period there is no means of
ascertaining.

Between Reagill and Reagill Grange is a stone called "The Boggle
Steayne;" it is haunted by a black swine, which crosses before the seer
past the stone, and then vanishes in a deep pool of water. The stone
is of immense size, but is half buried in the earth. Upon its upper
surface is a natural mark resembling a footprint. This is said to have
been left by the boggle. Another was formerly seen on the school, and
another on the house between it and the stone; evident traces of some
spirit of evil or perhaps of good, and who, like the Brownie of Bledwock

              .... though lang sen geayne
    The mark o' his foot's left on mony a steayne.

In following up the history of a people we find that each age had
its characteristic superstitions, and supernatural appearances. The
remote inhabitants believed in the transmigration of souls, and the
return of the spirit to haunt its earthly tomb; these and the later
Scandinavian races, imaginative to a high degree, and whose religion
gave to every object and event a presiding spirit, have peopled our
hills and bye-places with boggles, which for ages have kept in awe the
minds of many successive generations. To such means, and the native
wild and superstitious feelings descended from our forefathers, may we
ascribe the belief in apparitions such as the reappearance of those
dead, the lady in white, black swine, wraiths, &c. From the older
religions we have the Barghast, the ghost of the tomb, whose unearthly
lamentations warn mortals of fell mishaps, the Taisteral, a mischievous
spirit of evil; the dobbies, brownies and fairies. In these mysterious
spirits of the night do we trace the imaginings of a people long gone,
whose works are almost lost; yet tradition has never failed to hand
them down and down from father to son, yet each time ebbing weaker and
weaker, till now the advance of the nineteenth century has marked the
bounds "Thus far shall they go and no further"; now no longer the ingle
newk resounds with the dread tales of a grandfather, and by the next
generation all this will be forgot.

During the Roman sway Christianity was introduced into Britain, but
it is highly probable that it took but little root in the North. The
faint gleam of the true faith, if ever it existed, would be completely
extinguished by the introduction of the Pagan creed of the Gothic
nations, to the deities of which we are indebted for the names of
the days of the week, and for several local names throughout the
country. This wild religion, however, eventually gave way before the
advance of Christianity, for about the year 630 when Edwin was king of
Northumbria, the true light of the cross was first introduced into the
north by Paulinus, who is said to have converted the Northumbrians.
He probably followed the example of Augustine, who, to bring from the
old idolatry and not to offend the feelings of the people, consecrated
the heathen temples, and observed the heathen festivals; but dedicated
to the observance of Christian saints. The next advance was to erect
rallying places of truly Christian origin; these were crosses of wood
or stone, which to this day remain in reality or in name in almost
every village. One has been erected at Crosby by some devoted to the
reformation of the people around, which would assemble the new converts
to hear discourses on the blessings and comforts of the new religion.
But this was not all straightforward. The country became subject to
the incursions of the Danes, who brought back the old religion in its
wildest and most erratic form. The infant Christianity fell before
them, and Paganism was again in the ascendancy. Such, as its name
implies, has been the case at Crosby Ravensworth. The Danes coming,
find here a village with the cross planted on the green. They, without
respect to rights of property or religion, throw down the cross, and
hoist their standard "The Raven" symbolical of the mighty Odin, in
its place.[6] The village, to its previous name of Crosby, receives
the further appellation of Raven's-warth (the village or place) thus
dedicating the valley to the presiding care of the Raven God. This,
with Ravengill and Ravencrag in Crosby Gill, and the more direct
name of Odin in Odindale, all indicate the ascendancy of that people
who in their plundering inroads fought under the banner dedicated and
sacred to the Warrior God. Christianity, however, again gleamed forth;
the crosses were renewed and others erected. One has existed, erected
on Maulds Meaburn green; the pedestal was found when the present
school was built, and there is authentic record that it stood there
in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. A curious custom at one time existed
connected with these crosses. When a funeral procession passed, the
corpse was lowered and the people, uncovered, sung a hymn; this custom
is still remembered to have been observed in passing Meaburn by old
people, though no vestige of the cross remained, neither did anyone
know the origin of the observance,--an example of what we often find,
a custom existing when its origin and the object of its observance is
forgot. Another is also likely to have been on the hill bearing the
significant name of Cross Bank, near Reagill Grange. Thus Christianity
became firmly established, and wandering priests supported by the
voluntary contributions of his hearers went from place to place,
preaching the true faith, now holding forth from the steps of some
cross, or with his hearers beneath some wooden shed which received
the name of a church. A building of this character in all probability
answered that purpose at Crosby for many years previous to the erection
of the first stone structure. Churches were first built of stone
about the end of the seventh century, when Theodore was Archbishop
of Canterbury. He reformed the existing state of religion by having
stationary priests supported by a fixed salary raised by a tax called
"kirk scot" on all cultivated lands.[7] When the church at Crosby was
first built of stone, we have no record.

The condition of the people up to the time of the Norman Conquest had
made great advance since the first influx of the Saxons. A regular
government prevailed, and permanent settlements had been made. Nearly
all our villages may be traced back as having been first founded and
named in those times, and even many of the single houses betray in
the names a similar parentage. Cultivation was begun, and the land
divided into hundreds, tithings and hides. The choice of boundaries
is rather curious, and in some respects is proof of their antiquity.
The first objects chosen, when convenient, are rivers or streams; the
next landmarks are the wells and large boulders; of the former we have
examples in Gunnerskeld, Rudkeld, Anna's Keld and Ned's Well, &c. Of
the latter, in a district like this where large granite boulders are so
plentiful, they have often been chosen, and in the old boundary rolls
are called "Thunder Stones," the name by which granite boulders are
known in the neighbourhood. Some of the more remarkable are the Cross
Stone at Kiverriggs, where the parishes of Crosby, Shap and Morland
join; the Stooping Stone on Harkeld is by some thought to have been a
rocking stone; it is six feet high and lodged on a point of rock. It is
mentioned as a boundary in a grant made by Thomas son of Gospatric of
the manor of Hardendale to Byland Abbey.[8] Like all similar stones it
is said to be haunted, and also has a remarkable propensity of turning
once round every time it hears the cock crow! Another stone near Murber
bears the name of "The Dead Man's Grave;" it is small and has two
cavities in the top end, which gives it the resemblance of a skull.

The next objects chosen are the mounds or ancient burial places, and
occasionally the stone circles. These were then regarded with a fear
and sacred reverence which we might expect the common people of those
times, young in the belief of Christianity, would have for the numerous
monuments of their Pagan forefathers[9]; and it is quite probable that
even then the same mode of burial might be adhered to; consequently
these landmarks were as secure boundaries as either the wells or
rivers. Another boundary often adopted in elevated lands is the
watershedding line, or, according to the old wording, "where the water
falling from Heaven runs both ways." As a proof of the antiquity of
township boundaries it is worthy of remark that the manorial boundaries
which were made soon after the Norman Conquest very frequently do not
coincide, especially where the older boundaries have not been very
definite.

[6] Canon Weston gave as a possible meaning of the puzzling word
Ravensworth, "Hill of the Standard of the Raven," with the reservation
that this failed if the Danes did not reach here. Others think the
name is corrupted from Ravensthwaite, Raven's clearing. But far more
interesting than the meaning is the pains with which the author traces
out the historical steps by which the name, as he understands it, was
built up.

[7] According to Stubbs, the belief that Theodore was the founder
of the parochial system is mistaken; but his legislation aided its
development.

[8] The authority for this sentence is not clear, as the charter
granting Hardendale to Byland Abbey is not forthcoming. Perhaps Mr.
Bland has been misinformed by some one who had read the charter of
Thomas son of Gospatric granting to Shap Abbey the land on which the
abbey stood; here a "great stone" is mentioned, but this is between
Raset and the Lowther, quite a different spot. Mr. Bland is certainly
not responsible for the confusion.

[9] Prof. Boyd Dawkins relates a remarkable instance of this feeling
within living memory. About 1859 a Manx farmer offered up a calf as a
burnt sacrifice, to appease the spirits of the tumuli, disturbed by
archaeological spade-work!




MANOR OF CROSBY RAVENSWORTH.


Thorphine de Alverstean, son of Uctred, son of Gospatric, is the first
lord of the manor of which there is any account. In 1140 he gave the
church, with lands in the manor, to Whitby Abbey. He was succeeded by
his son, Alan de Alverstean, who reclaimed the church, but afterwards,
in 1174, confirmed all previous grants of his father. In 1218 Hugh
de Hastings had a grant of free warren in Crosby and Tibbay; he held
the manor under John de Veteripont, son of Robert. In 1221, Thomas
de Hastings, grandson of Alan de Alverstean, confirmed all previous
grants to Whitby Abbey. Also in 1243, this Thomas, who was brother of
Nicholas, Lord of Alverstean, again confirmed all former grants.

He was succeeded by Thomas, his son, who freed the monks and their
tenants from suit to his mill there, and gave them leave to grind their
corn where they pleased. In 1265, William, son of Thomas de Hastings,
confirmed all previous grants.

In 1313, Nicholas de Hastings, on the Inquisition post mortem of Robert
de Clifford, held this manor, and Nateby, by homage and fealty, and
27s. 2d. cornage. The wardship whereof, when it should occur, was
estimated at L40. In 1350, Ralph de Hastings held it in like manner,
and in 1423 it was in the hands of Richard de Hastings by like cornage.
In 1453 by a feodary it appears that Edward Hastings held Crosby by
cornage of 13s. 7d. subject also to wardship, marriage, relief, and
suit to the county court; and about the same time Lancelot Threlkeld
seems to have held the same of the said Edward. From this time there
are no more of the name of Hastings in connection with Crosby. The only
relic of this family is a slab which was found in the churchyard,
having an incised cross and shield upon it, bearing the arms of the
Hastings; which differ from those of the Threlkelds only in colour.
The principal residence of the Threlkeld family was at Threlkeld in
Cumberland; but they had large possessions at Crosby long previous
to this time, for in 1304 and 1320 Henry Threlkeld had a grant of
free warren in Yanwath, Crosby, Tibbay, &c., and in 1404 occurs the
name of William Threlkeld, Knight, of Crosby. Sir Lancelot Threlkeld,
Knight, was the son of Sir Lancelot Threlkeld, by Margaret, daughter
and heiress of Henry Bromflatt, Lord Vescy, and widow of John de
Clifford. He was wont to say he had three noble houses; one at Crosby
Ravensworth for pleasure, where he had a park full of deer; one at
Yanwath for comfort and warmth, wherein to reside in winter; and one at
Threlkeld, well stocked with tenants, to go with him to the wars. This
Sir Lancelot has been buried in Crosby Church beneath the large tomb
in the chapel belonging to Crosby Hall. The tomb is solid mason-work,
ornamented with flutings on all sides, and on the south side with
three blank shields, on which the armorial bearings would probably be
painted. On the top is an immense polished limestone slab, without any
ornament whatever; but on which it may have been the intention to have
afterwards placed an effigy. Above this as a canopy is a low, flat
arch, richly moulded, and on the north side enriched at each end with
the arms of the Threlkelds, and in the centre the same impaling that
of Bromflatt. At a later period the vault beneath was appropriated for
the occupation of Robert Lowther, Esq., of Maulds Meaburn Hall, and
probably at the same time the tombs underwent some alteration.

Sir Lancelot Threlkeld had three daughters, coheiresses; one was
married to Thomas Dudley, Esq., who with her received Yanwath; the
other two married two brothers, sons of Sir Christopher Pickering of
Killington, Knight, by his wife Anne, who was daughter and sole heiress
of Sir Christopher Moresby, Knight. One received with his wife the
Threlkeld property; the other, James Pickering, and his wife Elizabeth,
received Crosby. In 1527 this James Pickering held the manor of Henry,
Earl of Cumberland, by cornage of 13s. 7d., owing also wardship,
marriage, relief, and suit to the county court. He was succeeded by his
son, William Pickering, Esq., who in 1532 was an arbitrator in a cause
between Guy and Hugh Machell of Crackenthorpe. William was succeeded by
his son Lancelot, who lived many years at the Hall. In 1568 he married
a daughter of Thomas Blenkinsop of Helbeck; he had two sons, Thomas
and James, and several daughters; who were married to different people
in the parish, amongst others, some of the Thwaytes, at that time a
numerous and respectable family in Crosby. James was bailiff of Crosby
and lived at Craik Trees. He died in 1607. His father Lancelot died in
1603, and was succeeded by his eldest son Thomas. He, in the reign of
James I sold the manor and part of the demesne to Sir John Lowther,
Knight, of Lowther; and thus ended the dynasty of the Pickerings.

About this time there were considerable disputes between the lords
of manors and tenants, the lords claiming an absolute estate in the
tenements, and the tenants insisting upon an inheritance therein,
according to the customs of the manor. The dispute between Sir J.
Lowther and his tenants of Crosby Ravensworth was brought to issue in
the High Court of Chancery, and a decree obtained in 1624; whereupon a
grant was made to the tenants of all the lands upon payment of certain
fines. This deed bears date 1629, but for eight years longer the fines
remained unsettled. Sir John Lowther was at last compelled to agree
and to confer to the tenants their estates to descend according to the
common law, except that the eldest daughter or sister should inherit
and not all; paying only two rents for a fine, reserving nevertheless
the freehold estate therein, and suit of court and mill; but releasing
to the tenants all services of ploughing, harrowing, shearing, raking,
peat-leading, &c. This dispute lasted about fifteen or sixteen years.
Previously and about this time Sir John Lowther and also other lords
sold many parcels of land totally free, reserving only the royalties
and suit of mill after the twentieth moulter.

About the same time another dispute arose about the cornage, commonly
called noutgeld, and serjeant oats or bailiff corn throughout the
barony of Westmorland. In 1634 it was decreed that these duties were
due to the Earl of Cumberland, and were to be paid according to the
following agreement: the cornage was to be paid in money, and Sir John
Lowther, escheator-general for the North, regulated the measure of
oats. Instead of the old pecks containing eight and ten quarts being
up-heaped, they were to pay thirteen quarts straked measure.[10] There
is a list also of pout-hens collected by the land serjeant. These
duties in Crosby parish were as follows:--Cornage: Crosby Ravensworth,
13s. 4d.; Maulds Meaburn, 20s. 2d.; Wickerslack, 2s. 6d. Serjeant oats:
Crosby Ravensworth, 44 bushels 3 pecks; Maulds Meaburn, 70 bushels 1
peck. Pout hens: Crosby, 10; Gilts, 9; Harberwain, 6; Maulds Meaburn,
30; Odindale, 7; and Wickerslack, 8.

Sir John Lowther gave the manor and estate of Crosby in marriage with
his daughter Frances to John Dodsworth of Thornton Watlass, Yorkshire;
he had issue John, who succeeded his father about 1659. This John
Dodsworth had a son Robert,[11] who, it appears, though he lived at
the Hall, or at least in the parish, did not succeed his father;
for, according to Dr. Burn, John devised the estate to Francis Bayly
in 1673, his faithful servant and steward, second son of Dr. Bayly of
Penrith. He had issue Margaret Bayly, who was lady of the manor in
1696; and about the year 1700 she sold the whole manor and estate to
the Worshipful Richard Lowther, Esq., of Maulds Meaburn Hall.

[Illustration: CROSBY HALL

PREVIOUS TO ITS BEING REBUILT.]

Black Dub, at the head of Crosby Gill, is the source of the Lyvennet,
where, according to Dr. Burn, King Charles II., when he came in with
the Scots in 1651, rested, dined, and drank of the water. This is
authenticated by the Countess of Pembroke in her memoirs. The entry is
that

"On August 8th, 1651, His Most Gracious Majesty King Charles II. with
his army on his way from Scotland--passed Appleby about 7 miles to the
West."

Tradition says that as they were passing over Crosby Fell a shepherd
was met with. He was brought to the King, and questioned respecting
the locality, and even acted as guide to the army over the moors. His
name was Thwaytes, a family then numerous in Crosby. A rustic obelisk
has been erected to commemorate the event, and a more vivid description
of the place cannot be given than the following, extracted from a
provincial paper published at the time.

"This place is one of the most solitary and dreary that can well be
imagined, surrounded on all sides by an unenclosed heath; and, since
the formation of the road over Shap Fells, seldom seen except by the
shepherd or the sportsman. However, it must be recollected, that,
though now so still and silent, it was once the great thoroughfare
from Scotland through Lancashire, to the metropolis of England. To
the solitary passer-by, who now can only hear the sighing of the
breeze among the heather, or the bleating of a sheep, it may not be
uninteresting to reflect on the noise and clamour that must have
prevailed here on the day in question when the neighing of horses, the
clang of arms and the shouting of men on a hasty march, (for Cromwell
and his victorious army were not far behind), must have made a medley
of sounds that can be better imagined than described."

On one side of the obelisk is the following inscription:--

    HERE, AT BLACK DUB
    THE SOURCE OF THE LYVENNET
    CHARLES II
    REGALED HIS ARMY ON THEIR MARCH
    FROM SCOTLAND
    AUGUST 8TH, A.D. 1651.

This obelisk was renewed in 1861 at the expense of Mr. Gibson, and
besides the inscription on the lateral sides are bas-reliefs, on one
side of a crown, for which Charles was ardently striving; on the other
side is a lion, which unfortunately came in his way and overthrew his
hopes at the battle of Worcester. It has been further commemorated in
a poem, "The Lyvennet," by A. Whitehead, and also by Mr. T. Bland, who
has sculptured "The Lyvennet Vase," on which the King, dismounted,
is receiving a drink from the hands of the presiding goddess of the
stream.

[10] Straked, levelled off at the top, as opposed to heaped measure.

[11] There must be a mistake here, for if this Robert had been a
descendant in any degree of John and Frances, he would have succeeded
to Thornton Watlass, and lived there. As a matter of fact, the
estate went to John's next brother, whose descendants have it still.
John Dodsworth was never more than heir apparent; according to the
Visitation of Yorkshire in 1665, he was dead, his father was seventy
years of age, and he and Frances had had two children, Helen, who died
young, and John, then aged sixteen. Hence, when the latter died, his
son, if he had one, would be in the direct line of descent. Perhaps
Robert was a servant, and had adopted his master's name; as was
sometimes done in olden times.




THE PARK.


The Park at Crosby Ravensworth, of which Sir Lancelot Threlkeld boasted
as affording him unbounded pleasure, lies to the south of Crosby, and
is now known as Crosby Gill. It has originally been enclosed by a wall
three yards in height, and of immense thickness; portions of this are
still to be seen, the most perfect specimen being on the roadside from
Crosby to Gilts. It has certainly been a chase of princely dimensions,
containing within its bounds upwards of 700 acres, with a circumference
of over six miles. The chase is of a very irregular and romantic
character, being cut up into glens and ravines. A stream rising at
King's Well runs the whole length down a beautiful yet wild valley,
thickly covered with brushwood. This is joined in its course by three
or four tributary streams. The Lyvennet from Black Dub runs down a deep
and craggy glen, Raven Gill, down which the stream, after forming a
succession of cascades, flows round the base of Raven Cragg, forming a
deep pool called Aggy Lum; around which hangs a gloomy horror from the
fact that it was once the scene of the last dreary plunge of a frail
forsaken mother. Gilts beck, which gathers its waters from the bleak
scars around Penhurrock, has also formed its course down a deep ravine.
It is crossed, near Gilts, by a very picturesque bridge; the water runs
through a cleft in the rock. This has been taken advantage of as an
almost natural bridge. Its workmanship is attributed to Michael Scott,
or, as some say, the Devil, who, flying over with a load of stones in
his apron, the strings accidentally broke, and down fell the stones.
He, unwilling to reload, but still wishful to turn them to some useful
purpose, descended and formed the present bridge. On another occasion,
however, he has not been so industriously inclined, for an immense heap
of boulders near Wood Foot are also attributed to a similar accident;
which he left in so careless a manner, as, according to the expression
of an old farmer, "to spoil a lump of good land." A load these stones
certainly have been, but more likely that of some antediluvian iceberg
than that of his Satanic Majesty.[12]

The lodge, where probably resided the keepers, &c., is situated on an
elevated part of the chase, commanding a view of the whole surrounding
woods; it is now used as a farm-house, and has been rebuilt.

Many a time, doubtless, did the knight and his visitors at the Hall
enjoy the excitement of the chase as the sound of hound and horn echoed
among the dells.

       *       *       *       *       *

These were jovial days at Crosby; but like their noble originators they
are past and forgotten, except to the dreaming poet or the prosing
antiquary, who have preserved for us something of the past in that fine
old song:--

    Oh those indeed were merry days
      The merry days of old.

[12] It has been remarked that in England anything ancient is
attributed to one of four authors--Julius Caesar, King Arthur, the
Druids or the Devil. Julius Caesar did not reach the north, and Michael
Scott fills his place.




CROSBY RAVENSWORTH.


The village of Crosby Ravensworth is remarkably picturesque, being
situated near the junction of the stream from Odindale with the
Lyvennet; these streams afford marked features of natural beauties, and
are enhanced by the splendid sycamore trees in the neighbourhood of the
Church and Hall. It is also a very good specimen of villages arranged
under the feudal times, when the resident lord of the manor exercised
an almost despotic sway over the tenants and other inhabitants. The
Hall, therefore, as the manorial residence, would be a centre near
which were the dwellings of the villagers. One series of buildings is
known as Tenter Row; probably a corruption of The Enter Row, being at
one entrance of the village, and thus called in contradistinction to
Low Row at the other end. In these would live the tenants immediately
dependent on the Hall, while others, not so closely connected, resided
further up the village. There is the church also, impropriated to
Whitby Abbey by one of the earliest manorial lords. It is dedicated,
according to Randal Sanderson, to St. Lawrence; but Rev. Thomas Machell
says it was dedicated to St. Leonard. This latter might originate from
that hospital at York having lands here. There is a tradition of some
religious buildings having existed on the north side of the churchyard,
and a great portion of the land belonged; and from it must have
originated the names of Monks' Barn, Monks' Bridge and Monks' Garth.
Opposite the church is the vicarage, a truly characteristic building;
it has undergone many alterations and additions under the late vicars,
but is especially indebted to Rev. G. F. Weston, who has enlarged and
laid out the grounds with admirable taste.

[Illustration: CROSBY RAVENSWORTH.

BATTLING TREE, MONKS' BRIDGE, VICARAGE AND SCHOOL.]

There is the mill, where the tenants were required to grind their
grain, subject to the lord's moultre. The inn, too, opposite the
church, is a genuine specimen of a village alehouse, with its sign
of "The Rising Sun," significant of the landlord's good ale, "always
rising never to set," "cheering the heart it never saddens."

Up the village is a large spring; near it stood an ancient elm tree,
about which the lazy wives of the village gathered in groups to gossip
on the characters of their absent neighbours. The well still flows as
usual, but the picturesque old tree is gone; its place is, however,
occupied by a young one planted by Mr. Weston.

Another rendezvous of the fair sex was the Battling Tree on the Low
Green; but those frequenting this were of a more thrifty class; for
on the butt of the tree they were in the habit of battling or beating
their homespun webs after immersing them in the water.

Near the Battling Tree are the Butts, where the young men were wont
to practise archery and athletic games, such as running, wrestling,
throwing geayvelock, &c. They consist of two mounds about 100 yards
apart; upon these were erected temporary marks to shoot at. To the
practice on these butts we may attribute the skill of the yeomanry as
marksmen in times gone by. Every village green had its butts, and the
villagers were required by the lord of the manor to practise, so that
they might be able to contend with the Scots in case of an invasion, or
border foray. In some places the mounds have been levelled away but the
name still retained. They are to be found at Reagill near the school,
and also at Maulds Meaburn. Time, however, has made great revolutions.
These customs are now laid aside, being no longer required, and the
houses in which the actors dwelt have undergone alterations more than
once, especially Low Row, which was rebuilt in 1860, on the site of
the old house seen in the sketch. The previous house bears the date
of [   ] and was built by John Hall, a rather noteworthy character.
When the building was in progress he was so struck with its symmetry
that he kept stepping back and back, remarking at every step that it
was "farther off an' finer"--"spacious and uniform," till he stepped
backwards over into the beck; where, no doubt, his admiration was
cooled.

[Illustration: OLD HOUSE AT LOW ROW, CROSBY.]

During his life he made himself a monument, unknown to himself--which
will bear his name, for centuries perhaps--by planting a clump of trees
on an elevated piece of ground on Meaburn Moor; a landmark to all the
north of Westmorland, and known to every one as "Johnny Haa' Trees."




CROSBY CHURCH.

ITS ARCHITECTURE, &C.


The architecture of the Church may be best understood from the
foregoing illustrations, which require little or no description.
The Church was built after the usual cruciform plan, having a nave,
chancel, transept, side aisles and tower. The first historic record
concerning it is in the year 1140, when it was granted to Whitby Abbey.
Previous to this time (if it existed) it would merely be a wooden
structure, which would then be replaced by a stone one built after the
later Norman style of architecture. Part of this original structure
is still to be seen in the massive piers supporting the transept
arches. Then again in the early part of the thirteenth century it has
been partly pulled down and rebuilt in the early English style. Of
this character are the columns and arches of the nave. Similar arches
have also been erected upon the old piers in the transept. The change
is very marked in one instance, where the arch is brought down and
placed upon one of the old low columns, considerably to one side of
the capital. At that time the Church would assume the character which
it still in general retains. The richly moulded doorway belongs to
this period, and also some of the windows, removed when last rebuilt,
one of which is in the Churchyard wall. Towards the end of the same
century the Decorated Style was introduced, to which the two north
windows may be considered to belong. The next style introduced was the
Perpendicular, which prevailed in the fifteenth century till near the
Reformation. To this belongs the east window, which, from being badly
proportioned and not in character with the rest of the architecture,
is somewhat objectionable. To about the same period also belongs the
architecture of the Threlkeld Arch and Chapel. The steeple window is
another specimen of this style, but of a later period. There is a
traditionary record that this tower was built about the same time as
that of Shap Abbey, some time in the latter part of the reign of Henry
VII.

The next most important change in its architectural history was
in 1811. In this and the following year it was in a great measure
rebuilt. The roof of the old church was leaded, and where the present
new chancel arch is, near to the roof, were twelve small round-headed
windows, representing numerically the twelve apostles; these were
entirely removed. Most of the other windows were also taken out and
replaced by the present ones, which are of a character that deservedly
comes under the style The Debased. At this time the embattlements were
removed from the tower, and some elaborate work introduced surmounted
by pinnacles ornamented with crotchet work; many of the buttresses are
also surmounted by similar ones. The porch and chancel doorway were
ornamented with elaborately carved work, which though highly creditable
to those engaged in the good work of remodelling the sacred edifice,
are far from being in accordance with ecclesiastical architecture of
the present day. The interior sittings, pulpit, &c., were refitted at
the same time, and the interior decorated with texts from Scripture,
scroll work, &c., chiefly done by George Gibson, Esq.

Another change in its history took place about 1849, when G. F. Weston
was instituted vicar. He began by having the whitewash and plaster
removed from all the columns and arches, which were re-hewn. At the
expense of himself and friends he built the lofty chancel arch in
place of what was before but temporary woodwork, and another arch
between the north transept and the small chapel belonging to Crosby
Hall. The sittings were rearranged and the handsome seats introduced
in the choir. By the voluntary contribution of landowners, residents,
&c., money was raised for erecting a vestry and heating the Church by
the circulation of hot water; at which time the body of the Church
was somewhat lowered, while the chancel was raised to its proper
proportions. Previous to rebuilding in 1811, it was entered by a
descent of three or four steps, and was then filled up.

The next objects demanding attention are the monuments. The oldest
of these are the Threlkeld tomb and a small incised slab bearing the
Hastings arms before noticed. These are in the small side chapel.
There is also another, lately removed from the Churchyard into it,
having an inscription of a Puritanical character; and from the half
obliterated letters it has been to the memory of Ann Wharton, probably
one of that family resident at Reagill Grange. Long ago a number of
throughstones stood in front of the Church; but these were removed when
it was rebuilt, and the stones used as flags, which, with their half
obliterated inscriptions, may be seen in different parts of the Church.
On one near the doorway may be seen an hour-glass and on another a
small cross, and several others of individuals, who, although their
names may be still engraven on stone, are themselves quite forgot.

Of modern monuments there is a large one in the south transept to
the memory of George Gibson, Esq., of Crosby, erected by public
subscription. It displays a good deal of artistic taste, having affixed
to it three pieces of sculpture in marble, representing the figures
Faith, Hope and Charity.

The pulpit bears record to the memory of John Salkeld, Esq., of Meaburn
Hill; it is tastefully designed in the early English style, and well
executed. The stone is a beautiful sandstone, brought from Hause
Quarry. The window and its masonry is the work of the Rev. G. F.
Weston, in memory of Mary, his first wife. The architecture is very
tasteful, and the colouring of the window rich--in the group, Christ
receiving little children--are to be seen family likenesses.

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF THE CHURCH SHOWING THE THRELKELD TOMB.]

The coloured window in the steeple was lately put up in memory of some
of the Thwaytes family. A number of neat monuments have of late years
been added to the Churchyard, chiefly introduced by the present vicar,
to whom not only are the inhabitants indebted for the neatness and
comfort of the sacred edifice, but for many material good works as well
as spiritual benefits which he has done amongst them; and our earnest
wish is that he may still be induced to dwell among us, and that he may
long live to fulfil his parochial duties.




CROSBY HALL.


Of the architecture and character of the Hall little can be said, as
it was almost wholly rebuilt about forty years ago. According to a
manuscript history of Crosby written by Mr. George Gibson in 1801,
he says:--"In the time of the Pickerings it is said to have been a
building of stately dimensions in the form of a lofty tower; but this
ancient fabric being suffered to decay was totally taken down and
removed almost within memory," so that it may now be about 120 or 130
years ago. "The place was fortified with walls, ditches and ponds of
water, and numbers of beautiful sycamores were planted all round." If
this was the case, these trees must now be upwards of 260 years of age,
and are, according to the same author, of the same age as those around
Gaythorn Hall. Burn, in describing the Hall in his day, says:--"In
the entrance tower are two windows, one above the other, of no mean
workmanship; above the door are the letters I.D. for John Dodsworth,
who repaired the tower, and cut those letters in the old work. There is
a coat of arms, quarterly of eight, which seems to have been put up by
the Pickerings." This is now above the door of the present house, and
in the window above are some portions of stained glass with a coat of
arms, Lowther impaling Fleming. A great portion of the moat is still
to be seen; it encloses an area of an irregular oblong; the moat is
supplied with water by a spring at the north corner. The entrance, a
mantle tower and drawbridge were on the north side, next the Church,
where the moat is now completely levelled up. Within this outer moat
was another, immediately around the building, which is also still
partly traceable.

Associated with the Hall is a curious legend which has been handed
down in firm belief for two or three generations. The Hall was almost
nightly visited by what was called a dobbie, a supernatural being
which was no small terror to the inhabitants, and which made a great
excitement in the village at the time. Various accounts are given of
its form, sometimes a sheeted skeleton, sometimes a white bull, which
was wont to lick the window-panes at night; it chiefly frequented the
old tower, and when that was pulled down, it ceased its nightly walks;
but not till it disclosed to the old man of the Hall the whereabouts
of some hidden treasure, and also the exact time and manner of his
death, which, it is affirmed, happened accordingly. Another account
is that the old farmer had some hand in making away with the lawful
heir, and as a consequence was haunted by the apparition. This version
says nothing about the treasure; but his death was foretold, and when
it happened the dobbie also departed. The story is well told by Mr.
Whitehead, in his Westmorland Legends,--ending thus:--

    Sometimes it lick'd the window pane,
      In shap of a girt white bull;
    Sometimes it shak'd the mantle tower,
      Sometimes it towl'd the bell:

    And thus it carried on for years,
      To think on't maks yan whidder,
    Till't auld man cock'd his teas--an' than
      They beaythe went off togidder.

[Illustration: THE DOBBIE OF CROSBY HALL.]




MANOR OF MAULDS MEABURN.


The first historic record of Meaburn is in the reign of Henry II, at
which time the Barony of Westmorland was in possession of the Morville
family. Roger de Morvill had a son and heir, Hugh, and a daughter,
Maude. This daughter was married to William de Veteripont, and carried
with her in marriage to her husband part of the manor of Meaburn. This
manor previously included both the Meaburns (sometimes spelt _Medburn_
or _Mayburn_), and all the lands between, called Meaburn Field. The
other portion of the manor belonged, in the right of succession, to
Sir Hugh; he, being one of the four knights who assassinated Thomas
a Becket, his lands were confiscated, and became the property of the
King; whence the two divisions of Meaburn were afterwards known as
_King's_ Meaburn and Maud's or Maulds Meaburn. William de Veteripont
then held the manor in right of his wife, and gave four oxgangs of land
at Maulds Meaburn to the Hospital of St. Leonard at York. Ivo their son
also gave lands to the same hospital, circumscribed by the following
limits:--

"From the nether or lower head of Undercot gill, into the syke which
is in the upper head, and so all along by the same sike southwards on
to the ditch by the highway side which leads from Appleby to Tibbay,
and so, nigh unto the public way or street westwards unto the boundary
of Askeby, unto the mills, and unto the ground which the said Ivo had
before given to aforesaid hospital."

Ivo de Veteripont was brother to Robert, to whom King John granted
the confiscated lands of Sir Hugh de Morville, and made him Baron of
Westmorland. Ivo was succeeded by his son Robert, who gave to the Abbey
of Shap 22s. yearly, to be paid out of Maulds Meaburn in the name
of alms corn. In 1243 Robert granted the manor to John le Fraunceys,
son of Hugh, to hold to him and his heirs, rendering yearly for all
services one pound of cumin.

This payment was to Ivo, but there were other services to be performed
to the Barons of Westmorland, paramount lords of the fee. John le
Fraunceys granted on the other hand that Johan, daughter of Ivo, should
peaceably have and hold the several lands and tenements granted to her
by her father, with the service of villans and bondsmen.

In 1257 Philip le Fraunceys had a grant of free warren in Westmorland
and Cumberland. He had a son Gilbert, whose son Richard married a
daughter of Sir Michael de Harclay, then the King's ward, about 1278.

In 1292 occurs the name of John Franceys of Cliburn, of an ancient
family there, as a juror in a case at Appleby, and also in 1307; so
that it is probable the family of Frauncis holding Meaburn, and holding
and living at Cliburn were of the same stock. In 1315, at the death
of Robert de Clifford, the inquisition finds that Richard de Frauncis
held of him the manor of Meaburn Maud and Whale, by homage and fealty
and the cornage of 33s. and the wardship, worth 40s. In 1342 Isabella
de Vernon held Meaburn, the family of Frauncis having doubtless ended
in a daughter married to Vernon. The name Richard de Vernon occurs as
holding the manor in 1370, 1392 and also in 1423, including Whale, by
cornage of 33s. In 1519 we find a Richard Vernon of Nether Haddon,
Derby, holding lands in Newby and succeeded by a son George, doubtless
of the same family. In 1553 we find Sir George Vernon, Knight, lord
of the manor of Maulds Meaburn by the like previous services. He was
succeeded by Sir Thomas Stanley, Knight, who sold it to Sir Richard
Lowther, Knight, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir Richard Lowther gave his tenants of Maulds Meaburn their choice to
hold their tenancies after the customs of any one of a certain number
of manors. They chose Ravenstonedale, then under Philip, Lord Wharton,
and the copy of an indenture made between Philip, Lord Wharton, and
his tenants in the 3rd and 4th of Philip and Mary and also in the 22nd
of Elizabeth was to stand as an indenture between Richard Lowther and
his tenants of Maulds Meaburn. Sir Richard Lowther, during his life,
gave the manor to his eldest son, Christopher, and he also confirmed
the indenture; but when he came into possession he was so heavy in his
exaction of service from his tenants that they refused in many cases to
comply, alleging that such was not the custom in Ravenstonedale, nor
named in the indenture. The consequence was an appeal to some court of
law.[13]

The land at that time was for the most part unenclosed, and was known
as Oxgang, Demain and Improved Lands, or lands enclosed. The most
important of the last were the Cow Pasture and the Ox Close; the latter
had been enclosed sixty years previous to this period, and contained
about 100 acres. The Cow Pasture, 250 acres; they were both used as
common pasture. Another large enclosure was the Park, at that time
fenced half way round with a wall of stone, and the other half with
quickset hedge. Dryevers, Mires, Flass, Garth and others were enclosed
about thirty years previously. For these improved lands the lord
demands 12d. an acre and eight years fine; the tenants refuse, and it
is proved that such were laid on in his father's time, and the Demain
lands were raised 13s. 4d. in lieu. Then again he wishes the tenants
of all lands that were Demain to pay eight years fine. In this he is
defeated, it being ordered that they were to enjoy them for one year's
fine, on account of having compounded with his father, and paying L500
and so having the customs alleviated.

According to the relation of John Lambe of Kirkby Stephen, aged
ninety years, there were, when he lived at Maulds Meaburn, sixty
years before, seventy-four oxgangs of land (the oxgang land was the
greatest portion), and that then, and in the time of his father, the
tenants paid 5s. for each oxgang as rent due to the lord yearly, paid
at Pentecost and St. Martin's, and 7d. likewise as a mylne ferme, in
respect of grinding corn; for this reason, their moulter was very
light, only one peck of meal for ten bushels, and also the same for
every ten bushels of shillings. The Demain lands also paid the same.

This Christopher denies, claims the 7d. as part of the rent, and that
they ought to pay moulter after the rate his witnesses say is done
in Ravenstonedale, namely, for all corn ground at the lord's mylne,
except oats, they pay the 30th part of corn unground, and one 30th
part in meal after being ground, and for shilling oats one 13th part
for shilling and for making groats of the same one 30th part and for
grinding the same into meal one 30th part. The tenants refuse, and
the miller, at the command of Mr. Lowther, refuses to grind; so they
carry to the neighbouring mills of Barnskew, Crosby, King's Meaburn
and Rutter, at the same time saying they are not compelled to grind
at his mill at any rate, except for a certain portion of land. This
rouses his anger considerably, and he reminds his oxgang tenants that
it is their duty to keep in repair the millstones, wheels, hopper, and
race pertaining to the mill. The case was brought before the Queen's
Counsellors at York, and it was ordered that suit be done to Mr.
Lowther's mill only for 154 acres and 32 perches of the oxgang land;
that for oats only are they bound to Mr. Lowther's mill; and for all
other grain they can go where they will. This order is dated 31 Queen
Eliz., 1589, and as affirmed, was publicly read to and served upon
about thirty of the wayward tenants on Meaburn Green, hard by The
Crosse thereupon; but they were either not there, or being a stubborn
set, heeded it not; for Mr. Lowther's mill was still deserted; law
was again referred to, and from the evidence given there were various
infringements of the order; amongst the rest Thomas Kitchen of
Wickerslack borrowed a peck of big of a neighbour, and got half of it
ground at Crosby and the other half at Barnskew. However, to set all
right a commission was ordered to set out the 154 acres, 32 perches.
After much difficulty it was settled and a list drawn out of the
occupiers, areas and names of the lands where each piece was situated.
They are scattered all over the township, each tenant having a portion,
and curiously enough the names are those retained by fields at the
present day, with scarcely any alteration.

Mr. Lowther requires a general fine of one year's rent on the change of
the lord, in lieu of which it is agreed: The tenants to pay 100 nobles
on St. Peter's or Lammas next at the Feast of Pentecost, if Christopher
Lowther and his brother Jerrard will be bound that it shall not be
changed for eight years after October 11th, 1592. He next wishes to
have imposed a running fine or gressome, which in Ravenstonedale is L12
15s. 5d., paid by a certain number of the ancient customary or oxgang
tenants every seven years. The tenants of Oxgang land had to pay 25s.
8d. as boon rent yearly, and those of the Demain; after the rent they
took their tenements with or without boon. The lord demandeth boon days
over and beside, but in this case is defeated.

Another complaint is that the tenants do not comply with the following
custom in Ravenstonedale, namely: If the lord or his officers cause a
tree to be felled on any man's tenement, whoever gets the tree has to
pay 2d. to the tenants, who also had the top, and was bound to fence up
the gap or stoven till it was out of harm from cattle; if he neglected
this, he had to pay 6d. to the lord for each stoven not fenced up. Also
each tenant had to plant three ashes on his tenement each year, and two
for every tree felled, for the increase of wood. Some of these demands,
however, he could not succeed in having fulfilled.

Another grief is that the Demain tenants have unlawfully felled scores
of ash trees in the park, and spoiled the coppice or young wood for
spring. The tenants say it grew on part of their own tenements, and if
they had gone beyond bounds, they had been cleared at the late court.

Another service disputed was the carrying of coals. The tenants of
Maulds Meaburn had to carry sixty horseloads, every and each horseload
containing two bushels after the measure used at the pit; they had to
bring them from wherever Mr. Lowther chose to buy them, which was on
Stanemore, and to carry them to his residence, which was at Lowther.
They had to give notice to Mr. Lowther, each when he was going to bring
his share, and Mr. Lowther was bound to pay the bringer the price he
paid for them at the pit. Christopher complains that they do not bring
their yearly suit, and are behindhand for the last year, twenty-five
bushels. The tenants say he refused to pay them for the coals they
brought. To remedy this Mr. Lowther has to pay for the coals at the pit
first, which if not done, the tenants shall not be obliged to carry
them.

Another grief is that Mr. Lowther had felled trees in the park, and
wished the tenants to spring and fence; this they refused to do, and
even pulled down the fences there were, and thus it remained for some
time. It was finally concluded by a commission being sent to set out
what ought to be springed. The first part was the lower part of the
park, next the Lyvennet, which was to be cut and then well fenced for
seven years. The next portion is the north part of the park, which was
to be cut at the lord's pleasure, and then fenced as spring for seven
years. The next was the south corner of the park, to be cut, also at
the pleasure of the lord, and then fenced for seven years; but only
one of the three parts to be fenced at one time, and at any time after
these springs have had sixteen years growth. Mr. Lowther or his heirs
may cut down the hazel and birks at twenty-one years growth, and the
ashes at thirty years growth; it was also ordered that the tenants
should fence the first, as their cattle were most likely to have the
grass, Mr. Lowther being resident at a distance, but who was to fence
the other two was not decided.

The fiercest squabble of all was the following. Christopher Lowther
caused to be erected, as he and his witnesses affirm, a little
court-house, on the middle of Meaburn Green; a number of workmen were
at work upon it, and it was on the point of being finished, the frame
and timber was set up; lathed and sparred, and thatched with straw on
one side. At this time, being the 22nd October, 1585, a large number
of the wives of the tenants, instigated by their better halves, abused
the workpeople and Mr. Lowther, and even threw stones at them. This
did not cause them to desist building, so on the night of the 28th,
a number of the tenants, headed by James Fletcher, armed themselves
with pitchforks, handsaws, axes, long-piked sticks, swords, daggers,
and other unlawful engines, and levelled it to the ground. Mr.
Lowther wished to have recompense for the timber destroyed, and the
pullers-down punished. This trial is held at York, where the tenants
and their wives had to appear in defence; in which they say that what
Christopher affirms is all utterly untrue about their unruly conduct:
that according to the indenture the lord could not build on the waste
without general consent of the tenants; that if he was allowed to
build this he would build others: they had spoken to him quietly, but
he refused to listen, and so they pulled it down, for by so doing he
was infringing upon the green within the town gates on which they
grassed their horses for service upon the Borders; they say the house
was a large one, intended for a court-house and for Mr. Lowther to put
his horse in when he visited the town. A recompense of L8 seems to have
been awarded him, and the pullers-down fined, some to L3 6s. 2d. and
some to 40s. This does not satisfy, and he brings the trial on again,
but does not seem to succeed, only in obtaining a decree to have a
piece of waste ground on which to build a court-house.[14]

These disputes have been examined before commissioners who held courts
at different places, some bearing date from Kirkby Stephen, Morland
Church and Brougham Chapel; but when the cases were brought before the
Queen's Counsellors, they are dated at "Eboracum."

The names of those called as witnesses give some light as to the
residence of the neighbouring gentry, or those who lived in the
manorial houses. At Reagill Grange lived Anthony Wharton, who some
time was in tenure and occupation of Meaburn Mill. At Shap Abbey lived
Richard Wharton, gent., who, as well as he at Reagill Grange, were
members of the Wharton family to whom the lands of Shap Abbey were
granted. At Little Strickland lived John Rigg, Esq.; his father was
steward of the manorial courts at Maulds Meaburn in Sir George Vernon's
time. At Craik Trees lived Ambrose Lancaster, aged eighty years, and
also Thomas Lancaster, both of whom were strenuous supporters of
the lord of the manor. The disputes have evidently been very warmly
contested by both parties, some of the cases standing on for five or
six years. There are also accusations of base and wilful perjury.
Whether the courts granted justice in every case or not, we know
not; but the truth seems to have been often tampered with. At last
Christopher Lowther, in summing up his griefs, concludes by praying to
have an end of suits, and says he has been kept so for ten years by his
tenants, that he has become impoverished, and having so many children
he is utterly unable to do Her Highness' service upon the Borders,
according as he is bound, as others of his calling. The tenants humbly
reply that they too wish an end of suits; they too are impoverished;
but that Mr. Lowther has always been plaintiff against them.

Another important service due to the lord, but about which they have
not had dispute, was the Border service. When this service was required
by the Prince, the lord's steward sent a letter to the bailiff and
constables telling them what service was required, and with how many
men. These they appoint and muster in great haste, some on horse and
some on foot, according to their rate. Four men were also sworn to
rate the charges for victuals and carriage in such journeys as going
to the Borders required. This tax was levied only when summoned to go.
Those who refused to go when warned were sent by the bailiff to the
warden to receive what punishment he chose to inflict. In 1595 a list
has been made out bearing the date February 19th of that year, of all
men musterable in the Lordship of Maulds Meaburn for this service,
of tenants and young men from sixteen to sixty years of age, levied
by the constables, James Fletcher, Robert Atkinson, Anthony Wharton,
Richard Hodgeson and John Winter, and Mr. Christopher Lowther, Esq.,
Landlorde of ye Lordship, and Leader of ye men; 39 on this list are
entered as "archers furnished," each having to serve with "a nag;" one
of these, it appears, is "deceased," two "under age," and three having
substitutes entered as "his son."

The next list is "Tenants that are footmen" 59 in number, of whom 18
are archers furnished, 7 entered as archers, 2 as billmen, 16 not
furnished, and 15 before whose names is the letter F. These were
the fighting men, besides whom is a list of 28, who are "sons, and
men not being tenants." From an abstract of the muster for Border
service within the counties of Cumberland and Westmorland, taken in
1584, that of the two counties amounted to 8350, of whom Westmorland
furnished 4142; 1400 of these were archers furnished, 1300 billmen
furnished, 1342 able men unfurnished, and 100 light horsemen furnished
amongst the gentlemen and their household servants. The mustering
places were Sandford Moor, where mustered 1981, Greenholme 2669, and
Strickland Moor 1269. The last place was the rendezvous of the Maulds
Meaburn tenants. There is still a lingering tradition of the last as
a mustering place. In 1618 Mr. C. Lowther was in a special commission
with Lord Wharton and Lord William Howard and others for repressing
disorders on the Borders. When King James I came into England on his
accession to the Crown, in 1603, he attended him with a gallant company
from the Borders of Scotland to Newcastle, where the King conferred
upon him the order of knighthood, and there is little doubt but that
in that gallant company were some of the staunch yeomanry of Maulds
Meaburn. In the list of names for those deputed to serve on the Borders
are five Robinsons, five Parkins, five Winters, five Harrisons, four
Teasdales, four Whartons, three Fletchers, two Salkelds, two Kitchens,
&c. But by far the most numerous are the Addysons, who mustered 16; a
name now quite extinct in the parish.

[13] It seems that the documents from which Mr. Bland gathered
these curious particulars, represent the defendants', that is the
tenants', side of the question; and it is very hard to tell whether
the oppression they allege was real or imaginary. On the other hand,
Mr. Lowther undoubtedly had cause for complaint, for on Mr. Bland's
showing, the tenants more than once did wilful damage, and refused to
comply with the order of the court.

A possible explanation is this: the Vernons were absentee landlords,
and left things to take care of themselves; Sir Richard Lowther
expected things to be managed properly, and saw that they were; and the
change would not be popular, though perfectly just and fair. Something
about the story suggests that the trouble was organised by some
individual who possessed professional knowledge; perhaps the former
steward had been dismissed by Sir Richard, and was taking his revenge
in this way.

[14] We are inclined to think that this result, which Mr. Bland rates
rather low, constituted a decisive success. The court had already shown
that the tenants' method of redress was unlawful, had punished them for
it, and made them pay compensation for the damage they had done. It
might be argued at this point that they had a genuine grievance, and
were merely wrong in their choice of remedy; but the decree deprives
them of this excuse; for the court would not have permitted Mr. Lowther
to have a piece of waste land for this purpose, if by building there he
would be infringing the rights of the tenants. Hence his position is
justified from the very beginning.




MAULDS MEABURN HALL.


The Manor House of Maulds Meaburn originally stood on the site of the
present Hall, but we have no record of any of the manorial families
residing at it. The present Hall has been built at different times.
The oldest portion is the north part of the body of the Hall. It has
originally been nearly square, and lofty, somewhat in the character
of a tower. This has been strongly built of hewn sandstone. This
old portion may be traced by having around the bottom a champhered
basement. This portion, has, however, been so much altered, re-roofed
and built around, that it is difficult to form a correct idea of its
original features. Afterwards the buildings have been extended; the
south side has been partly pulled down and extended in that direction,
forming an oblong, to the ends of which have been added wings. The
south wing has two large rooms on the ground floor, one of which is
wainscoted in the old Elizabethan style, and also one of the upper
rooms; these are gained by a broad oaken staircase, which forms a
projection on the west end of the wing. These rooms are lighted by
large mullioned windows, and a tall projecting chimney gives a marked
feature to the south front. A corresponding wing has been built at the
other end, which projects beyond the north end of the old building.
This has been used as a subordinate part of the house, in which were
the wine-cellars, store-rooms, &c. At the same time also has been added
to the north-west side of the old part a series of lower buildings,
serving as kitchens, laundry, &c., and servants' rooms in general.
Still later, the central part or large hall, between the old Hall and
south wing has been pulled down, and again rebuilt in a mere vulgar
and temporary style; at which time the present door and chief entrance
has been made. Above it, in bas-relief, a date of 1610, but at some
after time it has been changed; the 10 being made to represent 76, by
incising a top to the 1, making it 7; and also a top to the 0, making
it 6.

[Illustration: MEABURN HALL, SOUTH FRONT.]

This date in its present form raises a query: Is it a doorway of the
oldest part of the Hall, removed to its present position, and recording
the date of its first erection? If so, it must have been built in Sir
Christopher Lowther's time, three years after he came into possession
of his father's estate. The date, however, is not very reliable, but
it is very probable that it was built by his son, John Lowther, Esq.,
afterwards Sir John, upon whom, and his wife Ellinor, daughter of
William Fleming, Esq., of Rydal, a settlement was made of the manor of
Maulds Meaburn in 1615; and after coming into possession he purchased
eight tenements, which make up the present demesne of Maulds Meaburn
Hall; for in his time there was scarcely any left, the lands having
been previously so parcelled out amongst the religious societies. Sir
J. Lowther was one of the knights of the county in 21st James I, and
also in three Parliaments in Charles I's reign. He bought the manor
and part of the demesne of Crosby of Thomas Pickering, Esq., and then
gave it in marriage with his daughter Frances to John Dodsworth.
He also bought half of the demesne of Reagill. For his second son
Christopher he bought the Whitehaven estates. This Christopher married
a coheiress, daughter of Christopher Lancaster of Craik Trees, and by
purchasing the interest of the other two sisters added the whole of
the Lancaster property to the Lowthers of Whitehaven. Sir John died in
1637, and according to a memorandum extant, his widow lived afterwards
at Maulds Meaburn Hall, where she died in 1659; and by her last will
and testament left the sum of L35 to the poor of Maulds Meaburn. The
returns of this not being used till 1687, the person on whose land it
was, was required to make it up to L40, and pay 40s. yearly; which
was done: from which time it was regularly divided up to 1770. The
first few years there were between 20 and 30 recipients, but they have
dwindled down to 15, 12, and as low as nine.

Sir John was succeeded in the estates by his eldest son, Sir John
Lowther, who in 1640 was created a Baronet of Nova Scotia. He was a
great sufferer for the royal cause in the reign of Charles I, and
during the usurpation lived retired; but was one of the Knights for
Westmorland in the Parliament which restored Charles II. His eldest son
died during his father's life, so that he was succeeded in the family
estate by his grandson, Sir John Lowther, who afterwards received the
epithet of "The Rich." To his second son Richard he gave the manor of
Maulds Meaburn. This Richard lived at Meaburn Hall, and was chosen
Member for Appleby in 1688 and 1690. To him may we attribute the
general enlargement and extension of the Hall, and the laying out of
the grounds in the way in which they still remain. These improvements,
to all appearance, correspond in character to about the time of the
altered date--1676.

At a short distance to the north of the Hall are a number of
subordinate buildings, of barns, stables, &c., of more or less modern
erection, the oldest of which is a well-built block on which is a
square tablet having the initials R.L., Richard Lowther, and the date
of their erection, 1693.

Another remarkable building stands near the road, known as Fletcher
Hall; it is a lofty building, of about seven yards square, containing
one lower room and one upper; it is entered by a door on the east side,
and the lower room lighted by a window of three lights in the north;
the upper story is lighted by two similar windows on the east side. Its
use was probably as a residence for the stewards or managing bailiff
of the lords of the manor, and from this has derived its name "The
Fletcher" from families of that name. These have been an influential
family in Meaburn for many generations. In 1618 we find record in the
register of the death of James Fletcher of Meaburn Hall Fold, and
there are Fletchers recorded so far back as 1588. The present Fletcher
has been rebuilt at the same time that the buildings of the Hall were
extended.

The grounds have been laid out in the then fashionable Elizabethan
style, and tradition yet affirms that they were at one time the finest
gardens in the north. The entrance from the road is by a doorway with
cheeks of solid masonry surmounted by balls, and a court on each side,
mantled with ivy. Within this is a large level area in front of the
Hall, flanked on each side with a row of now ancient yews; passing
to the left through another doorway we come to the south front. Here
is another large open quadrangle, laid out as a bowling green with a
raised terrace on three sides; at the south-east and south-west corners
are two garden houses in which the players might regale themselves
in the intervals of the play. Running between these is a row of yew
overhanging the once gravelled esplanade, which is ascended from the
green by a few ornamental steps. Along the lateral terraces were
also at one time yews and spruces; the former are all gone, and the
latter represented by a few remarkably tall and half-blasted trunks
of spruces, towering far above the surrounding trees. To the south of
the green is an area covered with a number of remarkably tall trees;
this is surrounded by a high wall, alongside of which on the south
side are a row of yews overshadowing what have once been neat walks.
After making an angle, this wall, forming the western boundary of the
grounds, runs direct to the north, where the road forms the boundary.
The garden is entered from the field outside by three postern doors.
Within the wall is a broad, raised terrace, running the whole length;
ornamented with here and there a holly, yew or laburnum, all of which,
like the other trees, have gained a large size. Along the north wall
are also rows of yews, some of which have fallen victims to the axe.

In the back garden is a large well, walled around, five yards by three.
This supplies a large stream which flows direct north; on the east bank
is a row of yews, and on the other, laburnums, which in summer enliven
with their gay flowers their dark and sombre neighbours. Overtopping
these on each side is a row of gigantic Scotch firs, the largest in
the surrounding district. The extensive area included in these grounds
have been ornamented by walks and shrubs, the latter of various kinds,
fantastically cut. The last which disappeared was two rows of box,
forming a long walk amongst lawns or flower beds. All the different
rows of yews, hollies, &c., have in the times of the Hall's splendour
been trimmed and kept cut, and afterwards allowed to grow their own
natural way, which in their present neglected state are perhaps finer
than when they received the tender nursing care of the gardeners. All
this was no doubt done by Richard Lowther, when wealth was pouring into
the hands of the family, at a time when a princely residence was the
great ambition of the nobility and gentry.

After these tasteful decorations of the residence followed the
beautifying of the neighbourhood. The park was planted with the present
trees, which though now few, are noble specimens of what were, in the
memory of those still living, so close and thick and dark that no
vegetation flourished beneath them. The thick forest of oaks in the
Mains would also be planted, with the avenues of yews and holly. The
oaks have disappeared, and a young spring has overgrown the whole.
The most remarkable neighbouring feature is the avenue on Morland
Bank. This is a long, elevated piece of land, stretching out into the
low-lying holmes, and probably its name is a corruption of Mer--or
Mireland, from the marshes around. This has been planted on each side
with Scotch firs, forming an avenue of about a mile in length. The
trees are traditionally said to have been brought from Lowther, and
were, at the time of planting, a cart load each. From being so large
when planted, they never attained so great a height. At the north end
are Ratla Park and Hard Bank plantations, of about the same age. Of
this we have a good guess: a man of the name of Wharton, who died about
55 years ago, aged 90, assisted in his youth to plant them; so that
it will be about 130 years ago; while the yews and park at Meaburn
Hall, if planted soon after the erection of the present Hall, may be
about 180 or 190 years old. We are no doubt indebted also to Robert,
afterwards Governor Lowther, son of Richard, who would follow in the
footsteps of his father in beautifying the lovely valley, in which it
was their lot to be placed. Nature had formed a district having great
capabilities, and with all respect to the memories of those men, they
have done their duty towards it with most praiseworthy taste, and
what is chiefly to be regretted is, there are none to follow their
footsteps, but "hewers of wood and drawers of water."

In the year 1700, Richard purchased Crosby Hall and the manor of
Margaret Bayly. He married Barbara, daughter of Robert Pricket,
Esq., of Wresal Castle, Yorkshire, and died about the year 1704. He
was succeeded by his eldest son, Robert Lowther, who was sometime
store-keeper of the Tower, and in 1716 was appointed Captain-General
and Governor-Chief of Barbadoes. He married a lady by whom he
became possessed of an extensive property in Barbadoes. She died,
and it appears he returned to reside at Meaburn Hall, and brought
with him a great quantity of sugar and rum, which was stored in the
wine-cellar; and tradition still retains a vivid recollection of the
superior quality of the Governor's rum. For his second wife he married
Catherine, daughter of Sir Joseph Pennington, Baronet; and issue two
sons and three daughters.

Robert Lowther, Esq., from his patrimony and landed property, no doubt
was an influential man in the neighbourhood. According to a valuation
made the year before his death, his property in Meaburn is valued at
L105; the next highest is John Salkeld, L41; the whole valuation of
the lordship being L698 10s. It was his intention to rebuild the Hall;
with this in view he had plans made, and a new site chosen amongst
the yew trees in the south-east corner of Stonycrofts, opposite the
Mills. He had kilns erected for burning bricks in Eelmires, for that
purpose, the remains of which may still be seen, and got so far as to
pull down the middle part of the Hall; but his schemes were doomed
never to be perfected, all further advance being stopped by his death,
which took place in 1745. His death is said to have been caused by the
Rebellion. The Lowthers were ever staunch Royalists, and either himself
or his son James held out some favourable support to the encouragement
of the Pretender; after whose misfortunes Robert, being of a very
nervous and timorous disposition, became so perplexed and afraid of the
consequences that it injured his health and was the cause of his death.
He was buried beneath the Threlkelds' tomb in Crosby Church. He was
succeeded by his eldest son James, afterwards known as Jammy Lowther.

This James, by the death of his father, by the death of Henry, Viscount
Lowther, of Lowther, who died without issue, and by the death of Sir
William Lowther, Bart., of Whitehaven,[15] who also died without issue,
became possessed of the three great estates of Meaburn, Lowther and
Whitehaven. James Lowther represented the counties of Cumberland and
Westmorland for several years in Parliament, and was elevated to the
peerage in 1784 by the titles of Baron Lowther of Lowther, Viscount
Lowther, and Earl of Lonsdale; consequently he was the first Earl. He
was born at Meaburn Hall, where he resided at different times while the
Hall at Lowther was in ruins, being burnt down about 1720. There is
every reason to believe Meaburn was his favourite residence, where he
kept a large establishment, of which the dairy over the bridge bears
unmistakeable evidence. He also stocked the park with deer; and there
are many yet living who can remember the last of them being removed to
Lowther.

[Illustration: RUINS OF LOWTHER HALL FROM A SKETCH BY LADY MARY LOWTHER.]

In 1761 he married Lady Mary Stewart, daughter of John, Earl of Bute.
Lady Mary appears to have been an accomplished lady, and extremely fond
of sketching in water colours; some of her sketches are tolerably well
executed. There is at Lowther a large portfolio containing numbers of
her sketches, generally in the neighbourhood of Lowther, Ullswater,
Shap and Meaburn; some of which are extremely interesting as depicting
places now either gone or greatly changed.[16] He died in the year
1802, leaving no issue, and after his day, Meaburn Hall passed into the
hands of farmers.

James Lowther was a man of noble qualities, but of very eccentric
character, and many are the remarkable stories about himself and his
spirit after death, yet lingering in the country.[17] One of the most
noteworthy, illustrating his eccentric character, is that, on his once
passing through the streets of London he saw a woman crying, with a
child in her arms. His feelings being touched, he had enquiries made
respecting her, and found her to be a handsome and beautiful woman,
though of no high station; she had been seduced and deserted. He so
much admired her that he induced her to become his mistress, and had
her installed in one of his establishments. It so happened, when he
was absent, she died; and for some time none of the household durst
communicate the intelligence to him on his return. However, the body
so much requiring burial, his favourite valet presumed to tell him;
upon which he was immediately kicked out, and expelled his service. So
great, however, was his affection for the deceased, that he had her
embalmed, and put into a leaden coffin with a piece of glass over the
face, and placed in his own private room. Two ladies' maids, who were
attendant on her in life, Sir James brought to Meaburn Hall, where
they lived for some time as sole mistresses of the establishment; and
tradition still remembers their names as "Miss Francis" and "Miss
Oliver."

Another character associated with the Hall, and almost as famous as
his master in his own sphere, was Jos o' t' Ha', a sort of steward or
bailiff for his lordship. He was a privileged favourite, and often used
to drive his master over the moors to or from Lowther and Whitehaven;
and sometimes, on the return journey, would indulge in John Barleycorn
to a great extent. One story is told of one of these occasions, when he
had imbibed too freely at Shap, in going past Scarr he saw some sheep
in a young plantation cropping off the young shoots. Ever thinking
of duty he drove them out, but soon discovered that two individuals
put them in again. These he soon found out to be the Devil and Cross
Jown, a notorious character, who had lived at Ploverigg, but was lately
dead. Jos remarked that "as soon as he saw them he set off, and they
efter him, lick for smack, over Harbyrn Rigg, an' they niver gained a
yard on him till he gat to Howbeck Brigg, when he lost seet o' them."
Sometimes he carried his drinking propensities so far as to become
blue-devilled; in which state he was wont to whip them about in the
stables, requesting any bystanders to turn the door. One old man who
was called upon, did his work so badly that Jos cursed him for allowing
to escape now a horned 'un and now a cowed 'un. The old man in despair
replied "Let me dew ill or dew weel, I's always cursed."

Jos was one of those who had nothing to fear from the reproof of his
master. A story is told of his lordship, who, to tease Jos, taunted him
with allowing the old women and children to get sticks in the wood.
"Lord, yer honour" says Jos, "If ye were at teay end an' me at tudder,
an' the Divil etween us wi' a fiery stick, we couldn't aw turn them."
But Jos was no neglecter of his master's property, as the following
anecdote will tell. A neighbour of his being dead, the bearers were
passing along past the court wall with the corpse, when crack went the
report of a gun, and immediately Jos' broad face was seen above. "Oh
Jos," said one of the attendants, "what for dud ye dew that? ye suddent
shut at a corpse, man." "Dam the rascal" was his reply, "He's stown
many a yat loop and crewk fra me; I was determined to give him a crack
at last!"

Jammy Lowther was more famous after death than in life, for no sooner
was he dead than his spirit, ranging about in the gloomy hours of
night, caused quite an uproar in the country. At the Hall was heard
his loud call and order, and his footsteps sounded in the rooms at
midnight. At other times he rushed along the tops of the trees on
Morland Bank, a headless driver driving his coach, drawn by six
headless horses in a blaze of fire. Similar sights also occurred about
Lowther and Whitehaven, and so great was the fear of him in the country
that it was determined, with the assistance of a Roman Catholic priest,
to lay his spirit.

The ceremony took place in Lowther Church at midnight, and so furious
and boisterous was the spirit when called, that the priest, on coming
to the words in the ceremony "forever and aye" was confounded by the
spirit blustering, and calling "For a year and a day," "A year and a
day," and he unconsciously said "For a year and a day." The spirit was
content, and the terror of him somewhat abated; but at midnight after
the appointed time, he again broke loose, and played his pranks with
greater terror than ever. This could not be endured; a priest was again
called, the ceremony again gone through, and Jammy Lowther's rebellious
spirit was "forever and aye" conjured to abide beneath the frowning
cliffs of Wallow Cragg.

Before closing the history of this interesting old place, there is a
legend connected with it worthy of record. In what is called the Green
Room, two brothers of the Lowther family disagreed on some family
matters beyond reconciliation. As no agreement could be come to,
neither being willing to succumb to the other, they parted and went
abroad, with the mutual determination never to see each other again.
Previous to leaving, the doors of this room were blocked up, and seals
placed upon them, which of course none durst break; everything in the
room being left just as it was when last occupied by the brothers.

The room was thus sealed up for many years. Part of the wax was to be
seen on the door not many years ago, and tradition speaks of curious
people going to the window of this mysterious room, through which were
to be seen the chairs, tables, and open secretary, just as when left by
the estranged brothers.

[15] The owner of Whitehaven was Sir James, his father's second cousin,
son of Sir John, the great maker of the town. Sir William Lowther was
his fourth cousin, and left him Marske. Lowther came to him from his
second cousin. His eventual heir, Sir William Lowther, was the son
of his third cousin; the latter also inherited the title of Viscount
Lonsdale under a special and remarkable limitation; this had been
conferred on "Sir Jammy" when it was seen that his earldom was going
to die out. The new peer was created Earl of Lonsdale in 1807; it was
reported in 1828, correctly or otherwise, that he had the offer of a
dukedom.

[16] A sketch of Shap Stones, made by her in 1775, is reproduced in
Cumberland and Westmorland Antiquarian and Archaeological Society's
_Transactions_, vol. xv., article 4.

[17] Few men have been more bitterly attacked than James Lowther has
been, both during his life, and after his death. He was masterful
and capricious, a combination of qualities which does not make for
popularity; he was devoted to electioneering, which earned him
enemies; and it is worth noting that his chief detractors have a
distinct political bias. They include Horace Walpole; Boswell, whose
Parliamentary ambitions he disappointed, and above all, Rev. Alex.
Carlyle, who devotes a page of his memoirs to a compilation of the
worst epithets and opinions permissible to a Doctor of Divinity. Some
of this is quoted in the _Dictionary of National Biography_ article,
omitting, however, the fact that the passage begins by showing the
writer's sympathy with his great rival, the Duke of Portland.

Sir James was a benefactor to the town of Whitehaven, and it was he
who secured the first return to Parliament of the younger Pitt--from
Appleby. An amusing tale is told of him that he once fought a duel
with a learned serjeant-at-law, who had made free with his character
in a case. At the meeting, the learned serjeant is said to have shot
his own toe! It is hard to believe that he would have been called "Sir
Jammy" till his death, though he had long been a peer, had he really
been "more detested than any man living" as Carlyle asserts he was; or
the suggestion that he was a tyrant over his dependents and tenants
in view of the fact that his funeral, which was, by his direction,
strictly private and unannounced, "a large crowd of people from the
neighbourhood were assembled, and behaved with the greatest respect,
decency and decorum," as the _Gentleman's Magazine_ quaintly puts it.




CRAIK TREES.


Craik Trees is one of the oldest buildings in the parish, having
originally been of the class known as Tower Houses. The tower was at
the south end, where the groundworks may be seen. It has been pulled
down, and the material used in the farm buildings. In one of these is a
small ogee tower window, and in the modern porch is a slab with rudely
cut and almost obliterated arms of the Lancasters. There still remains
in the interior the lower portion of a turnpike stair, by which the
tower has been ascended.

It was a residence of the Lancaster family. The first of whom there is
any record are Ambrose Lancaster and Thomas, aged respectively 80 and
52 years in 1591; they were sworn as witnesses in some law transactions
between Christopher Lowther, Esq., and his tenants of Maulds Meaburn.
Ambrose was the 6th son of Lancelot Lancaster, Esq., of Sockbridge. The
next who is recorded is Christopher Lancaster, great-grandson of the
before mentioned Lancelot; in him the male heirs of the family failed;
he had four daughters, the first married to Sir Christopher Lowther of
Whitehaven, who by paying out the other sisters, swept away the whole
of the Lancaster property. Some of the Pickerings of Crosby afterwards
resided at Craik Trees, but it is now in the hands of farmers. The name
has originated from the cry of rooks; these are all gone, with the
trees in which they must have built, with the exception of one ancient
gnarled ash.

A little below is a spring of somewhat a sacred character, from which,
in Catholic times, it is said water was taken to baptise infants in
Crosby Church; it is now grown up, being a complete quagmire; but by
thrusting a stick in, stones can be found at the bottom.

On Meaburn Hill is a large stone obelisk, erected by Thomas Bland of
Reagill on the site of the house in which resided for many generations
the ancestors of the celebrated Joseph Addison, whose father, Lancelot
Addison, was born here. Lancelot Addison was the son of Lancelot
Addison. He was educated at Queen's College, Oxford; and afterwards
passed many years in travelling through Europe and Africa, and was
known as an author on various subjects. He was afterwards Rector of
Milston in Wilts, then Archdeacon of Coventry and Dean of Lichfield.
He married for his first wife Jane, daughter of Nathaniel Gulston,
Esq., and sister of Dr. Gulston, Bishop of Bristol; and had issue
Joseph, his eldest; Gulston, Governor of Fort St. George; Lancelot,
Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford; and three daughters. For his second
wife he married Dorothy, daughter of John Danvers, of Shakerston,
Leicestershire. He died in 1703, aged 71. Joseph, his son, is well
known in the periodical productions of _Tatler_, _Spectator_, and
_Guardian_, and also from his tragedy of Cato, whose dying soliloquy is
enough to immortalise any one author.

He was in succession Commissioner of Appeals, UnderSecretary of State,
Secretary to Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, and Keeper of the Records;
Secretary to the Lords Justices, and finally one of His Majesty's
principal Secretaries of State.

He died in 1719, aged 49 years. He left behind an only daughter by the
Countess of Warwick, whom he married in 1716.

       *       *       *       *       *

 NOTE.--On the next page, viz.: page 79, there is a drawing of "Flass
 House, Maulds Meaburn, the seat of Wilkinson Dent, Esquire," giving a
 view of the house, with the gardens in front, and the Lyvennet in the
 foreground. This occupies the upper half of the page. The remainder
 has been kept for a description, but it has never been written.




GAYTHORN MANOR, ETC.


The first record of Gaythorn Hall is that the whole, or part of it,
belonged to the Hospital of St. Leonard at York. In 1281 they had a
grant of free warren in Docker and Gaythorn. According to Burn it was
next in possession of the Pickerings, and sold by Sir Christopher
Pickering of Ormshead in the reign of James I. to Sir James Bellingham
of Over Levens. This cannot have been the case, for in the reign of
Henry VII., this manor, Levens, Helsington and Fawcett Forest were
bought by Alan Bellingham, 8th son of Sir Robert Bellingham, Knight,
of Burnshead. Alan was treasurer of Berwick, and deputy warden of the
marches. He was succeeded by his son Thomas, who died previous to
1550. Thomas left two sons, Alan the elder, and Thomas, who married a
daughter of Thomas Blenkinsop of Helbeck, Esq., and sister of the wife
of Lancelot Pickering, Esq., of Crosby Hall. He resided at Gaythorn
Hall.

After the Dissolution, the Bellinghams became possessed of the advowson
of Crosby Church, and in 1597, Thomas Bellingham made a presentation of
the living to William Willan. Gaythorn then passed to James Bellingham,
Esq., of Helsington, eldest son of Thomas' elder brother Alan. James
lived at Gaythorn as early as 1604, and it is believed he was the
builder of the present Hall. He was knighted by King James I. at
Durham on his first coming into England in 1603. He died in 1641. The
property descended to his eldest son, Sir Henry Bellingham, baronet;
he was knight of the shire in Charles I.'s reign. He was succeeded
by his brother Alan, who represented the county in 1661 and died in
1672. Then followed James of Levens, his son, who died in 1680, and
succeeded by his son Alan. He was knight of the shire in 1681 and 1685.
Being a wild and gay young man, he consumed a vast estate, and sold
Levens, Gaythorn, etc., to Col. James Graham, privy purse to James II.;
who represented the county for many years, and left an only daughter,
Katherine. She married Henry Bowes Howard, Earl of Berkshire. They had
issue William, Viscount Andover; he died in the lifetime of his father,
but left issue Henry Howard, Earl of Suffolk and Berkshire, in the
descendants of whose family it still remains.

Gaythorn Hall is situated in a wild and dreary district, far away from
any other habitation, and it is rather surprising to find so stylish
a building in such an isolated situation. It is a large building, in
the Elizabethan style, with large mullioned windows of six and eight
lights each. There is a projection on the front side, supported by an
arched doorway with three large mullioned windows in the upper story,
and above the arch are the Bellingham arms. Within this is the door,
above which is a rudely carved figure of a mermaid, and the footstones
are curious grotesque heads. The lower rooms are large and spacious;
the ceiling of one is beautifully ornamented with vine leaf and branch
work, with the family arms in the centre. The upper rooms are also very
spacious; in these are one or two very handsome stone chimneypieces.
Behind the Hall was, at one time, the remains of a private chapel, but
it is now all gone, and no record of it is left, excepting the upper
part of a mullioned window, more ancient in style than the present
Hall, which no doubt occupies the site of a previous building.

There is a curious legend connected with Gaythorn Hall, respecting a
family who lived there. The husband was a Protestant, the wife a Roman
Catholic. Their first born son the mother insisted should be reared
according to her faith; the father objected, and wished him to be a
Protestant. The mother, being a determined woman, insisted that if
it might not be as she wished, the child should not be brought up to
any religion. The consequence was, the heartless mother had the child
put down into a cellar below the house, without any clothing. Into
this place she threw it some straw and old rags to lie upon, and for
its food, potato peelings, paste and dirty washings. These she threw
in at a hole without even herself entering the place. Here the child
remained unknown to any but themselves till it was six years old,
when by accident a man about the building heard a peculiar cry. There
being always curious suspicions respecting this child, he was induced
to compel its mother to disclose its hiding-place, and it was brought
forth, a hideous looking monster, unable to walk. The nails of its
hands and feet were grown like eagles' claws, and its body was almost
covered with hair, which was matted with dirt and filth. The child was
then cleaned, clothed and properly fed, sent to school, and eventually,
though enduring such hard treatment in infancy, grew up to manhood,
occupied a respectable position in society, and lived to a good old
age.




MANOR OF REAGILL.


The first notice recorded of Reagill is that Maude, the sister of Hugh
de Morville and wife of William de Veteripont, gave a ploughland of her
demesne of Renegill in frank marriage with her daughter Christian to
Robert son of Derman; which land was called Hynthornham. There is no
land at the present day bearing such a name; but it may have been the
lands now known as Thornbank, a number of fields lying near Hard Bank.
She afterwards gave the whole vill of Renegill to her son Robert, he
rendering to her for all service one hawk; which he was to hold of Ivo
his brother. Ivo confirmed the same to Robert and his heirs in 1208.
This Robert, in 1212, granted it with the appurtenances to the Abbey of
Shap.

The next account met with is concerning the chapel of Reagill. The
Abbot and convent of Whitby despatched a messenger to Rome to complain
to the Pope that the Abbot and Convent of Heppe over-exacted their
tithes of Renegill Chapel in the parish of Crosby Ravensworth. His
Holiness appointed certain persons to examine into these grievances,
and wrote in 1224 settling the matter thus: that the Abbot and Convent
of Heppe were to pay to the Church at Crosseby in the name of tithes
6 skepfuls (_skeppas_) of merchantable oatmeal for the tithes of
their land at Renegill (a skepful is a quarter), from land which is
cultivated at their own expense, and by their own hands, at that time;
but new land hence broken up, by whomsoever, not to pay. It was to be
paid, 3 skepfuls at Martinmas and 3 at Easter; but if they let these
lands out after improving, they had to pay to the full. Also it is
lawful for the Convent of Heppe to celebrate divine service in the
Chapel of Renegill, saving harmless the mother church of Crosseby
Ravensworth, with regard to oblations, obventions, confessions,
communions and burials. This is drawn up and settled at Gisburn on the
20th Kalends of May, in the year of Incarnation 1225.

There is nothing more respecting Reagill until after the dissolution of
the monasteries, when the revenues of the Abbey of Shap were granted
in 1545 to Thomas, Lord Wharton, who had been advanced to the dignity
of Baron by Henry VIII., for the signal defeat which he gave the Scots
at Sollom Moss in 1542. To him was granted the monasteries of Shap,
Gisburn and Rival (Rievaulx) in Yorkshire, to hold of the King by the
service of one 20th part of one knight's fee, and paying for the whole
L41 11s. yearly, with the reversion and remainder thereof in the Crown.
In 1612, King James, for the faithful services of Sir George Wharton
and other considerations, granted also the remainder and reversion to
Philip, Lord Wharton. The particulars of the former grant of Renegill
were divers rents and services issuing out of divers lands and
tenements, and all messuages, mills, tofts, cottages, lands, tenements,
meadows, pastures and other hereditaments in the tenure and occupation
of the tenants, amongst whose names are Winter, Blamire, Furness,
Hugil, Addison, etc., to the number of 22. The descendants of some of
these have lived in Reagill for several generations afterwards. The
Abbey, after the Dissolution, was valued at L154 7s. 7-1/2d. a year;
and in the computation made by Henry VIII. is the following return of
property in Reagill:--


  Shappe nuper Monasteriu Com' Westm'

                                                 L  s. d.
  Ranegill reddit' grang'                        8  0  0
  Ranegill firma vocat' Threplands               2  0  0
  Ranegill liber' firm'                             3  0
  Ranegill lib' reddit' iij quart' lib' piperis
  Ranegill lib' redd' terr' etc.                   13  6
  Ranegill reddit' divers' bovat' terr' etc.     9  5  0
  Barnskew redd' mol' aquat' blad'                 13  0




REAGILL GRANGE.


The ancient manor house of Reagill, or more properly the Grange,
occupied nearly the same site as the present house, except that
it has been a little more to the north, where, on excavating for
the foundation of some outbuildings, were found various remains of
groundworks and old floors. This position is immediately on the edge of
a deep and rocky ravine, down which runs a stream.

On the opposite or north side of this stood the chapel, in a small
field called Chapel Garth. Other fields near are still called Chapel
Lands. Its site may still be seen as an irregular rectangle of about
22 yards by 6 or 8, formed by banks of earth, etc., on which are a
number of large boulders; but it is nearly all covered with brushwood.
This, after the Dissolution, would be pulled down, and the material
used for building the present Grange. This manor being solely in the
hands of the monastery of Shap, a lay brother would be located here as
bailiff, (the lands above Grange are still known as the Bailiff lands),
to collect and transfer in kind the different products of the manor to
the Abbey. There are also traces of other branches of work having been
carried on, for at the bottom of the field, in front of the Grange,
were remains of tanpits, and some of the refuse. Other remains are also
to be seen, to which we cannot now attribute any use, but it evidently
seems to have been a place of active industry.

The manor house was at Barnskew, and what is called the Mill Road is
still traceable from Grange past the Chapel through Byesteads and away
by Hardbank to Barnskew. The mill is now quite gone, though the race
is yet traceable, having fallen into disuse about 60 or 70 years ago.
The present house bears the date 1676, being then in the possession of
a family of the name of Holmes, whose descendants still reside there,
but now as tenants of the Earl of Lonsdale.

[Illustration: REAGILL GRANGE.]

Reagill Grange, after the Dissolution, became the property of the
Whartons, and a branch of the family resided at it. According to the
Register at Crosby, Anthony Wharton of Reagill Grange died in 1590; he
was previously in the occupation of Meaburn Mill. In 1630 is another
entry of the death of Mr. Thomas Wharton, an ancient gentleman. The
next date we find connected with Reagill Grange is 1652; it is cut
above a fireplace in an upstairs room, but whether it records the
erection of the present building, its position renders somewhat
doubtful.

The present Grange is one of those antique cross houses of Elizabethan
style, massively built, with small, single mullioned windows, having
dripstones above. Another feature peculiar to such houses is the stacks
of tall, circular chimneys. On the north side is a small addition,
up which winds the staircase; and on the south side is a picturesque
porch, overshadowed by a gigantic sycamore, which might be almost
coeval with the house itself.

According to tradition, the house when built was left unfinished, there
being merely the shell without ceilings, and having unplastered walls,
in which state some of the upper rooms remained till about 50 years
ago. This was undoubtedly erected by the Wharton family. The Whartons
(in what year there is no record), sold Reagill Grange and half the
demesne to Dr. Lancelot Daws of Barton Kirk, and the other half to Sir
John Lowther. Dr. L. Daws was educated at Queen's College, Oxford, and
afterwards took the degree of Doctor of Divinity at one of the Scotch
Universities. He was instituted vicar of Barton in 1608. He was also
rector of Asby, instituted in 1618. He was likewise prebendary of
Carlisle, and, according to Dr. Burn, died in 1653; so that the date,
1652, for the erection of the Grange, is somewhat questionable, if
built by the Whartons.

[Illustration: PLEASURE GROUNDS AT REAGILL

LAID OUT BY THOMAS BLAND.]

But the vicissitudes of life and fortune are sometimes curious. It is
well known that the Wharton property "never did any luck," and it is
quite possible Reagill Grange had to be sold under some strain as soon
as built, and it might be purchased by Dr. Daws just before he died. It
remained in the possession of this family up to 1700, at which time an
addition has been made to the north side, where there is a lintel of
a doorway bearing that date, with the initials T & E D., with a bird,
partly intended as heraldic. This must have therefore been done by
Thomas Daws, nephew of Lancelot. Soon after this, the Grange, with the
remaining half of the demesne, was sold to Sir John Lowther, to whose
descendants it now belongs, and has ever since been in the occupation
of the Thwaytes family as tenants.


 (HERE THE TEXT ENDS).

 [The view of the pleasure ground, no description of which was written,
 is taken about half way from the entrance. The recumbent figure on
 the right is Venus, which, with the lion, is now almost hidden by
 bushes. Beyond was the "Shakespeare corner," with scenes from his
 plays; facing the reader stands Sir Walter Scott, and below him three
 bas-reliefs illustrating his characters. The paintings are gone, and
 the arch is covered with a mass of ivy; it will be seen that one was
 mounted even in the wall of the farm house.

 To the left is a corner of the terrace, beyond which the lower lawn
 continues between the two great vases. The panel below and to the left
 of the further vase represents Science trimming the lamp of Life.

 The grounds fall far short of their former glory: only an artist could
 have kept them what they were; but though it misses "the touch of a
 vanished hand," the quiet garden is still a place of great interest
 and beauty.]




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE:

Obvious printer errors have been corrected. Otherwise, the author's
original spelling, punctuation and hyphenation have been left intact.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Vale of Lyvennet, by John Salkeld Bland

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VALE OF LYVENNET ***

***** This file should be named 46319.txt or 46319.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/3/1/46319/

Produced by sp1nd, Chris Whitehead and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
