The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Journal of the Proceedings of the
Linnean Society - Vol. 4, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Journal of the Proceedings of the Linnean Society - Vol. 4

Author: Various

Release Date: August 3, 2014 [EBook #46491]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOURNAL--LINNEAN SOCIETY--VOL 4 ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Wayne Hammond and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by the Posner Memorial Collection
(http://posner.library.cmu.edu/Posner/))






  JOURNAL
  OF
  THE PROCEEDINGS
  OF
  THE LINNEAN SOCIETY.

  ZOOLOGY.

  VOL. IV.

  LONDON:
  LONGMAN, GREEN, LONGMANS AND ROBERTS,
  AND
  WILLIAMS AND NORGATE.
  1860.

  PRINTED BY TAYLOR AND FRANCIS,
  RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET.


  LIST OF PAPERS.


                                                                  Page

  GARNER, ROBERT, Esq., F.L.S.
    On the Shell-bearing Mollusca, particularly with regard to
      Structure and Form                                            35

  HANLEY, SYLVANUS, Esq., F.L.S.
    On the Linnean Manuscript of the 'Museum Ulricae'                43

  HUXLEY, Prof. T. H., F.R.S., F.L.S., F.G.S., Professor
      of Natural History, Government School of Mines.
    On the Dermal Armour of _Jacare_ and _Caiman_,
      with Notes on the Specific and Generic Characters of recent
      _Crocodilia_                                                   1

  SALTER, S. J. A., Esq., M.B., F.L.S., F.G.S.
    On the Moulting of the Common Lobster (_Homarus vulgaris_)
      and Shore Crab (_Carcinus maenas_)                             30

  SANDWITH, Hon. H., M.D., C.B., Colonial Secretary of
      the Mauritius.
    On the Habits of the "Aye-Aye" (_Cheiromys madagascariensis_,
      L., Cuv.)                                                     28

  WALKER, FRANCIS, Esq., F.L.S.
    Catalogue of the Dipterous Insects collected at Makessar, in
      Celebes, by Mr. A. R. Wallace, with Descriptions of New
      Species                                                       90

  WALLACE, A. R., Esq.
    On the Zoological Geography of the Malay Archipelago           172

  INDEX                                                            185




JOURNAL OF THE PROCEEDINGS

OF THE

LINNEAN SOCIETY OF LONDON.




On the dermal armour of _Jacare_ and _Caiman_, with notes on the
Specific and Generic Characters of recent _Crocodilia_. By T. H. HUXLEY,
Esq., F.R.S., F.L.S., Prof. of Nat. History, Gov. School of Mines.

[Read Feb. 17th, 1859.]


In the course of a recent investigation into the nature of the singular
extinct reptile, _Stagonolepis_, I was led to inquire somewhat
minutely into the character of the exoskeleton, or dermal armour, of
the existing _Crocodilia_. To my surprise, I found that very little
detailed information on the subject was to be obtained from the standard
repertories of Comparative Anatomy, or even from the special monographs
on Crocodilian structure and classification; but I was still more
astonished to discover, among whole genera of recent _Crocodilia_,
an exoskeleton possessed of characters such as have been universally
supposed to be peculiar to long extinct forms of the order, and whose
existence in any recent species has hitherto, so far as I can ascertain,
been completely overlooked.

The attempt to discover the limits within which this remarkable
exoskeleton is to be found, led me to look, more critically than I had
previously done, into the arrangement and specific characterization
of the recent _Crocodilia_. I have thereby arrived at results which,
imperfect as they are, may be of service by leading others to inquire
into the exact characters of species not at present within my reach;
and I therefore propose to preface my account of the peculiarities of
the exoskeleton in two of the genera of recent Crocodiles with some
remarks on the classification of the group, and with a few notes upon
the characters of the species and the limits of the genera.

Everyone is acquainted with the great improvement effected in this
branch of Herpetology by Cuvier, who divided the Crocodiles, which he
regarded as constituting only a single genus, into the three subgenera
_Alligatores_, _Crocodili_, and _Longirostres_. Subsequent writers
have admitted these highly natural subdivisions; but there has been a
constant tendency to raise their rank. The genus _Crocodilus_ has become
the order _Crocodilia_; the subgenera _Alligatores_, &c., have been
elevated into families; Dr. Gray has shown that the _Alligatores_ must
be divided into three genera, and that there are at least two genera of
_Crocodili_; and, while one of Cuvier's species of _Longirostres_ has
been suppressed, the group is very generally retained with a changed
name (_Gavialis_), a very important addition having been made to it in
the _Crocodilus Schlegelii_ of Mueller and Schlegel.

Unless the considerable materials contained in the British Museum, the
Hunterian collection, the collection of Dr. Grant, and the Christchurch
Museum at Oxford had been freely placed at my disposal, I should have
been wholly unable to acquire the information contained in the following
pages. It is only right, therefore, that I should take this opportunity
of offering my thanks to my friends Dr. Gray, Prof. Quekett, Dr. Grant,
and Dr. Rolleston for the many facilities they have liberally afforded
me.

The recent species of the order _Crocodilia_ are divisible into three
families, which correspond with the original subgenera of Cuvier, and
may be termed the _Alligatoridae_, the _Crocodilidae_, and the
_Gavialidae_.

I. In the ALLIGATORIDAE the teeth are strong and unequal, and the
posterior ones differ greatly in shape from the anterior. The anterior
pair of mandibular teeth, and the fourth pair (or the so-called canines)
are received into pits in the margins of the premaxilla and maxilla;
while the mandibular teeth behind these pass inside, and not between,
the maxillary teeth. The mandibular symphysis does not extend back
beyond the level of the fifth tooth, and often not nearly so far. The
line of the premaxillo-maxillary suture on the palate is straight,
or convex forwards. The wide posterior nares look downwards, and are
situated forwards on the palate.

This family embraces three genera, readily distinguishable by
osteological characters--_Alligator_, _Caiman_, and _Jacare_.


Genus 1. ALLIGATOR.

Dental formula, 20-20/20-20. 9th maxillary tooth the largest of
its series. The snout is very broad, flattened, and rounded at the
end. There is an indistinct longitudinal interorbital ridge; and there
are two short ridges along the line of junction of the prefrontal
and lachrymal bones. The aperture of the external nares is divided
into two parts, by the prolongation forwards of the nasal bones. The
supra-temporal fossae are well-marked and open, though not large. The
vomers do not appear in the palate. The feet are well webbed. The dorsal
bony scutes are not articulated together; and there are no ventral
scutes.

This genus contains only one species, the well-known _Alligator
Mississipiensis_, or _lucius_, which is exclusively North American.

Cuvier (Oss. Foss. ed. 4. vol. ix. p. 211) gives the appearance of the
vomer in the palate as a general character of the _Alligatores_; but
this bone is not visible in the palate of any of those _Alligatores_
which Cuvier would have referred to his _A. lucius_ or _A. palpebrosus_,
and which form the genera _Alligator_ and _Caiman_ as here defined. The
vomers are in fact as slender and delicate as in the Crocodile, and
extend only between the level of the tenth maxillary tooth anteriorly
and the descending processes of the prefrontal posteriorly.

What may be called the median nares, or the arch formed by the
postero-lateral part of the vomer and the anterior and superior lamina
of the palatine bone on each side (which would constitute the posterior
boundary of the posterior nares, if the palatine and pterygoid bones
gave off no inferior or palatine processes), are situated nearly on a
level with the twelfth tooth, or with the palato-maxillary suture.


Genus 2. CAIMAN.

Dental formula 20-20/22-22 (Natterer). The face is without median
or transverse ridges, but it is sharply angulated along a line which
extends from the orbit forwards along the sides of the snout. The
anterior nasal aperture is undivided in the dry skull. The vomers do
not appear in the palate. The supra-temporal fossae are obliterated,
the circumjacent bones uniting over them. The webs of the feet are
rudimentary. The dorsal scutes are articulated together by lateral
sutures and anterior and posterior facets; and there is a ventral
shield, consisting of similarly articulated scutes.

Natterer[1] has described three species of _Caiman_--_C. palpebrosus_,
_C. trigonatus_, and _C. gibbiceps_. The Caimans abound chiefly in
tropical South America; but they are found as far north as Mexico, a
specimen of _C. palpebrosus_ in Dr. Grant's collection coming from that
country.


Genus 3. JACARE.

The snout is broad, and rounded at the end[2]. Each prefrontal bone
is traversed close to its anterior extremity by the ends of a strong
transverse ridge, which then curve round and pass forwards on the
lachrymal and maxillary bones, to subside opposite the ninth tooth.
The anterior nasal aperture is not divided by bone. The vomers,
separated by a longitudinal suture, appear in the palate between the
premaxillaries and the palatine plates of the maxillaries. The temporal
fossae, though not large, are open. The webs of the feet are small. The
dorsal scutes are articulated together, as in the preceding genus; and
there are similarly-articulated ventral scutes. There are 18-20 teeth
on each side, above and below; and the fourth tooth in the upper jaw is
the largest. The mandibular symphysis extends back nearly to the fifth
tooth.

In a skull of _Jacare_ (_fissipes?_), 19 inches long, in the British
Museum, I find that part of the vomer which is visible in the palate to
be a rhomboidal plate, somewhat truncated anteriorly, and rather more
than 1-1/2 inch long and 1 inch wide. Its anterior end comes within
3/8ths of an inch of the posterior margin of the anterior palatal
foramen. Its posterior margin reaches to the level of the eighth tooth.
The visible portion of each vomer is only its anterior end, which forms
a thick and solid wedge-shaped plate, broader in front than behind, and
articulating by a rough anterior and outer face with the premaxilla, by
an obliquely ridged posterior and outer face with the maxilla, and by
its internal face with its fellow. Its upper, rounded surface projects
but little into the nasal passage. 2-1/4 inches behind its anterior
end, the posterior and upper extremity of the vomer passes into a thin
and narrow plate of bone, whose plane is at first inclined at an angle
of 45 deg. to that of the anterior part of the bone, but gradually becomes
vertical; as it does so it deepens, until, 3 inches behind the anterior
extremity, the vomer is a thin vertical plate of bone, 5/8ths of
an inch deep, which articulates below with the palatine plate of the
maxilla, and, about 1 inch behind this, with the palatine plate of the
palatine bone. The upper edge of this plate nowhere extends to one-third
of the height of the nasal chamber. It gives off a horizontal process
outwards, which, gradually increasing in width, inclines downwards until
it comes into contact, first, with the inner surface of the maxilla,
and, 3/4ths of an inch behind this, with the nasal plate of the
palatine bone. In front of its junction with the maxilla, the horizontal
plate of the vomer presents a long free edge, concave externally; and
this bounds the median nares internally and posteriorly. Throughout its
junction with the maxilla, the horizontal plate is parallel-sided; but
after it joins the palatine bone, it gradually narrows posteriorly,
in consequence of the gradual increase in width of the palatine, and
ends almost in a point, 6-1/4 inches behind its anterior end. The
posterior edge of the vertical plate is extremely thin, and 7/8ths
of an inch deep. It articulates with the anterior end of the vertical
plate of the pterygoid, while the straight inferior edge articulates
throughout with the palatine plate of the palatine bone. The vomers
terminate midway between the median nares and the descending process of
the prefrontal. The median nares are bounded entirely by the vomer and
the maxilla. They correspond with the nasal face of the palato-maxillary
suture, but are rather behind its palatine face, and they are about on
a level with the interval between the tenth and eleventh teeth. If the
anterior edge of the palatine bone bounded them, they would be a little
behind the twelfth tooth. The posterior nares, 2-1/8 inches wide, by
7/8ths of an inch long, look altogether downwards, are completely
divided by a bony septum, and have the form of a rhomboid with its
narrowest side posterior. They are surrounded by a strong raised ridge,
incomplete only at the anterior and outer angles of the rhomboid.

Five species of _Jacare_ are enumerated by Natterer--_J. fissipes_, _J.
sclerops_, _J. nigra_, _J. punctulata_, and _J. vallifrons_. They have
met with only in South America.

    [1] "Beitrag zur naeheren Kenntniss der Sudamerikanischen
    Alligatoren," 'Annalen des Wiener Mus.,' Band i.

    [2] According to Natterer, the dental formula of _J. nigra_ and
    _J. fissipes_ is 18-18/18-18, of _J. sclerops_ 19-19/20-20, of _J.
    callifrons_ and _J. punctulata_ 20-20/18-18.


       *       *       *       *       *

II. In the family of the CROCODILIDAE the teeth are usually strong and
very unequal in size, and there is always a considerable difference
between the anterior and the posterior teeth. The two anterior
mandibular teeth are received into pits in the premaxilla; but the
canines pass into grooves (which may be converted into fossae) situated
at the junction of the premaxilla and maxilla. The other mandibular
teeth are received between the maxillary teeth. The symphysis of the
lower jaw does not extend beyond the level of the seventh or the eighth
mandibular tooth. The premaxillo-maxillary suture may be either straight
or strongly convex backwards. The divided vomers do not appear in
the palate. The posterior nares look more or less backwards, and are
transversely elongated. The supra-temporal fossae are always open, and
the feet are distinctly webbed. The dorsal scutes are not articulated;
and there are no ventral scutes.

Two genera, _Crocodilus_ and _Mecistops_, are distinguishable in this
family.


Genus 4. CROCODILUS.

The teeth are always strong and very unequal, the strongest in the upper
jaw being the tenth. The mandibular symphysis does not extend beyond the
level of the sixth tooth. There are usually six cervical scutes, in two
rows, or forming a rhomb, and separated by a distinct interval from the
tergal scutes. There are 18 or 19 teeth above, and 15 below, on each
side.


1. _Crocodilus vulgaris._

As Cuvier has remarked, it is extremely difficult to find good
distinctive characters for all the species of this genus. My first
difficulty was to ascertain the precise characters of that species which
has been misnamed _vulgaris_, inasmuch as I could find neither in the
British Museum, nor in the Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons, any
_authentic_ skeleton or skull of this, the so-called Nilotic Crocodile.
This difficulty subsisted up to the time that the chief statements
contained in the present essay were laid before the Linnean Society; but
since then I have been enabled, by Dr. Gray's permission, to examine the
skull of a small stuffed specimen, brought to this country from Egypt
by Sir Gardner Wilkinson, and to study the splendid entire skeleton of
a _Crocodilus vulgaris_ in the Christchurch Museum at Oxford, presented
to that Institution by the gentlemen who shot it on the Nile, and set
up with great care under the auspices of my friend Dr. Rolleston, Lee's
Reader in Anatomy and Curator of the Museum. Fortunately the entire
skin has been preserved; so that this is the most complete record of
the hard parts of any individual crocodile with which I am acquainted,
besides being, so far as I am aware, the only authentic entire skeleton
of _Crocodilus vulgaris_ in this country. I subjoin the chief points
of interest which I noted in my brief examination of this valuable
specimen:--

                                                       Inches.

  The total length of the skeleton is                     114
      "       "      "    skull                            16
  Between the outer edges of the posterior ends of
      the quadrate bones                                    8-3/4
  From the snout to the middle of the canine notch          2-3/4
  Transverse diameter of snout opposite 10th tooth          4-7/8
  Long axis of orbit                                        2-1/4
  Short axis of orbit                                       1-5/8
  Interorbital space opposite the middle of the orbit       1-3/4
  Anterior edge of the orbit from end of snout             10-1/2
  Syncipital[3] area in length, about                       2-1/2
      "          "   in breadth anteriorly                  3-3/4
      "          "       "      posteriorly                 4
  Supra-temporal fossae, wide                                 7/8
      "     "           long                                1-1/8
  Least width of parietal                                    7/16
  Total length of mandible                                 20-1/2
  Its greatest depth                                        3
  Length of cervical region (or anterior 8 vertebrae)       10-1/2
     "      dorso-lumbar region                            27
     "      sacral          "                               3-3/4
  Length of humerus                                         7-1/2
     "      ulna                                            5-1/4
     "      fore foot, extreme length                       6
     "      femur                                           8-1/2
     "      tibia                                           6
     "      hind foot, extreme length                       9-1/4

From the above measurements it will be seen that the skull is somewhat
slender. Behind the canine groove it widens to the tenth tooth, which
is 5-3/4 inches behind the end of the snout. It retains about the
same diameter to the twelfth tooth, and then slowly widens again,--a
sudden increase in size, to the extent of half-an-inch, taking place
opposite the posterior margin of the orbit, owing to the flanging-out
of the jugal. On the whole, however, there is a slow and even increase
in breadth, from the canine groove to the ends of the ossa quadrata.
The nasal aperture is pyriform, its wider end being forwards, and its
narrow posterior extremity, into which the pointed ends of the nasal
bones project, attaining the level of the first tooth behind the canine
groove.

    [3] By this term I denote that squarish flat area bounded by
    the postfrontal and squamosal bones laterally, by the occiput
    posteriorly, and by a line joining the outer angles of the
    postfrontals anteriorly.

On the left side there is only a pit for the reception of the
anterior mandibular tooth, while on the right side this pit is
converted into a complete foramen. On the upper face of the skull, the
premaxillo-maxillary suture runs vertically upwards through the canine
groove, and then passes obliquely backwards to a point 5 inches behind
the end of the snout. The anterior part of this suture lies in a strong
ridge, which is continued downwards and forwards on the premaxilla to
the level of the fifth tooth, a groove separating it from the margin
of the nasal aperture. Posteriorly this ridge dies away, but a curved
irregular elevation, convex inwards, arises opposite the tenth tooth. It
is wholly confined to the maxilla, not extending on to the nasals.

There is a distinct, rough, irregular elevation, bounded on its
outer side by a sharp groove, which extends back to the orbit, on
the lachrymal bone. The profile of the skull is convex as far as the
posterior boundary of the nostril, and very slightly concave from that
point as far as the twelfth tooth. It then passes back as a straight,
slightly ascending line, only interrupted by the lachrymal ridge, to
the margin of the occiput. The inferior margin of the maxilla is convex
downwards as far as the canine groove, whose lower end is indicated by
a deep sinuation. It then becomes convex again, the crown of the curve
being at the ninth and tenth teeth, and its posterior end sweeping into
a concavity whose summit is at the twelfth tooth. Behind this the edge
of the maxilla is only slightly convex. The inferior contour of the
jugal bone is very concave; but the articular end of the quadrate bone
descends to the level of the edge of the ninth alveolus.

The orbits have a sort of heart-shape, their apices being turned
forwards, and their more convex sides inwards.

The supra-temporal fossae are half-moon-shaped, their straight sides
being external and so inclined that, if prolonged, they would decussate
upon a line joining the anterior margins of the orbits.

On the palatine surface of the skull, the premaxillo-maxillary suture
runs backwards from the canine groove, as far as the level of the middle
of the second alveolus behind the groove (or that of the seventh tooth),
which point it reaches at about the junction of the middle with the
inner third of the palatine plate of the maxilla. The suture then turns
abruptly forwards until it reaches the level of the anterior margin of
the alveolus of the sixth tooth, when it bends suddenly inwards to meet
its fellow. The whole suture, therefore, has the form of a W. The vomers
are completely hidden.

The posterior nares look downwards and backwards; their aperture is,
from the incompleteness of the septum, single, and has a transversely
elongated crescentic form. It measures 1-1/8 inch in width by
3/8ths antero-posteriorly. The basi-sphenoid is seen for about
1/8th of an inch on the base of the skull behind it, bounding the
sides of the eustachian tube. The dental formula is 18-18/15-15.
The fourth and tenth teeth are largest in the upper jaw, the first and
fourth in the lower. The eight posterior teeth on each side in the upper
jaw, and the five posterior in the lower, have a marked constriction
between the short crown and the fang of the tooth. There are deep
interdental pits for the reception of the mandibular teeth between the
third and fourth, and fourth and fifth teeth above, and between the
succeeding teeth from the sixth to the thirteenth.

The hyoidean cornua are very strong curved bones, the chord of whose arc
measures 3-1/2 inches. They are concave inwards, convex outwards,
concave posteriorly, convex anteriorly; they are flattened from side to
side below, but they end above in subcylindrical styloid extremities.

In the ninth vertebra the neurocentral suture passes just above the
base of the parapophysis; it traverses the parapophysis in the tenth
and eleventh vertebrae, while in the twelfth the parapophysis suddenly
rises to the root of the diapophysis, and the suture lies far below
it. The centra of the dorsal vertebrae, as far as the thirteenth
inclusive, have hypapophyses. The diapophyses of the ninth vertebra pass
almost horizontally outwards, but are a good deal inclined backwards.
In the succeeding vertebrae up to the fourteenth or fifteenth, the
diapophyses are, in addition, inclined upwards, the upward inclination
being most marked in the tenth, eleventh and twelfth vertebrae. From
the fifteenth vertebra onwards, the transverse processes pass almost
directly outwards, without either upward or backward inclination. The
span of the transverse processes is greatest in the eighteenth and
nineteenth vertebrae, in which the distance between the extremities of
these processes is 7-1/4 inches, a length about equal to that of the
longest vertebral rib.

The rib of the ninth vertebra is terminated by a single long and slender
semicartilaginous process which does not unite with the sternum.
Each of the vertebral ribs from the tenth to the seventeenth vertebrae
inclusively, on the other hand, is united with the sternum, or its
continuation, by two such semicartilaginous costal elements, which
may be respectively termed sternal and lateral. The sternal elements
of the ribs of the tenth and eleventh vertebrae are united with the
sternum proper; those of the next five vertebrae are connected with its
median backward prolongation, while those of the seventeenth vertebra
are attached to the processes into which this prolongation divides
posteriorly.

The sternal costal elements are very broad and flat, and though the
lateral ones are less so, they are wide and expanded. The lateral costal
pieces of the eleventh to the sixteenth vertebrae inclusively, give
attachment to very large and flat, triangular, _processus uncinati_.
Those of the twelfth are 3-3/4 inches long and 1-3/8 inch wide at
their widest part. The transverse processes of the twentieth vertebra
bear rudimentary ribs. The centrum of the thirteenth vertebra is
1-3/4 inch long, and the vertebra is 3-3/4 inches high from the
lower edge of the centrum to the summit of the neural spine. The centra
of the vertebrae retain nearly the same length to the twentieth caudal;
but behind this vertebra they are shorter, as are the anterior dorsal
vertebrae. The first caudal vertebra is provided with two styliform
bones, which represent the chevron bones of the other caudal vertebrae,
but are not united below.

The dorsal scutes have the arrangement which his often been described.
They are separated (except perhaps the median rows) by integumentary
spaces, neither overlapping nor uniting by sutures; and there are no
ventral scutes.

Among the osteological characters which have been detailed, the
peculiarities of the tergal armour, the proportions of the skull,
combined with the characters of the ridges upon its surface, and the
form of the premaxillo-maxillary suture amply suffice to diagnose this
species. Even in the small skull, only 5-1/2 inches long, lent to
me by Dr. Gray, the characteristic features of the species are well
exhibited, although age appears to give rise to many differences. Thus
the posterior margin of the external nostrils does not extend so far
back as in the adult, and the facial is smaller in proportion to the
syncipital region, whose anterior and posterior transverse dimensions
are very nearly equal. The orbits are proportionally larger, the
interorbital space more excavated; and the outer straight margins of
the supra-temporal fossae are parallel with the longitudinal axis of the
skull. Still more important differences are visible on the palatine
face of the skull. The premaxillo-maxillary suture reaches back, indeed,
to the line of the seventh tooth; but it forms an even curve whose
summit is in the middle line. The aperture of the posterior nares,
again, has a totally different form from that which it assumes in the
adult. It is somewhat heart-shaped, with its apex forwards, measures
1/4 inch long by 3/16ths at broadest, and looks altogether
downwards, while its anterior margin is situated far more forward in the
palate than that of the adult.


2. _Crocodilus biporcatus._

This, the best-known Crocodile, is a very well-marked species,
characterized (beside the peculiarities of its dermal armour) by a
comparatively slender skull, similar in shape to that of _C. vulgaris_,
and, like it, without any sudden enlargement immediately behind the
canine groove; and by the strong ridge which arises on each lachrymal
bone close to the anterior edge of the orbit, and is continued forwards
on to the line of junction of the nasal and maxillary bones, so that
the naso-maxillary suture traverses the axis of the ridge, and then
CURVES outwards, descending towards the alveolus of the tenth tooth.
The premaxillo-maxillary suture is W-shaped; and its salient angles
reach backwards even to the level of the posterior margin of the
seventh alveolus.


3. _Crocodilus Americanus_ (_acutus_, Cuv.)

has the slenderness of snout (even more marked) and the form of the
premaxillo-maxillary suture of the preceding species; but it is at once
distinguished from this and all other Crocodiles (except _C. rhombifer_)
by the marked longitudinal and transverse convexity of the middle of the
face, which gives the profile a totally different aspect from that of
the other species, which are flat or concave in this region.


4. _Crocodilus Journei_

is another unmistakeably distinct and very remarkable species. The
descriptions and figures given by Graves, Bory de St. Vincent, and
Dumeril and Bibron, of the unique specimen of this Crocodile to the
Bordeaux Museum, would alone have compelled me to differ entirely from
the view taken by Dr. Gray of the affinities of this species. These
observers agree in stating that _Crocodilus Journei_ has six cervical
scutes, arranged as in the other Crocodiles, and, as Graves says,
"separated by an interval of four inches" from the commencement of the
tergal scutes, whence it is obviously impossible that it can be a
_Mecistops_. But, in addition to this, I had the good fortune to find,
among the recent additions to that excellent osteological collection
which Dr. Gray has gradually formed at the British Museum, the skull of
a Crocodile obtained from a dealer in Paris, and labelled by him "Croc.
de l'Orinoke." I at first imagined this Crocodile to be a _Mecistops_;
but on careful investigation it turned out to be no other than the skull
of a _Crocodilus Journei_, somewhat larger than the Bordeaux specimen,
but, as the subjoined measurements will prove, agreeing with it in all
its proportions:--

                                                             Inches.

  Length from end of snout to end of ossa quadrata           22-1/2
  Breadth between outer margins of ossa quadrata              9-3/4
  ---- at the level of the anterior margins of the orbits     5-1/2
  ---- at the tenth tooth                                     3-1/2
  ---- at the end of the snout                                2-3/4
  ---- of the interorbital space                              1-3/4
  Length of mandibular symphysis                              5

Now Dumeril and Bibron expressly state that the length of the head of
_C. Journei_ equals 2-1/2 times its greatest transverse diameter,
that the width of the jaws at the anterior margins of the orbit equals
one-fourth the length of the head, and that at the tenth tooth it equals
one-sixth the length of the head; and these are as nearly as possible,
it will be observed, the relations of the same dimensions in the above
list.

In the specimen in the British Museum there are eighteen teeth on each
side above, and fifteen below. The Bordeaux specimen is stated to have
the same dental formula, except that there are sixteen teeth in the left
ramus of the mandible. The fourth and tenth maxillary teeth are stated
by Graves to be as large again as the others; and the corresponding
alveoli have these proportions to one another in the British Museum
specimen. In fact, there can be no doubt that this skull is that of a
true _Crocodilus Journei_.

But its general characters at once prove the close affinity of _C.
Journei_ with the other true Crocodiles, from which it differs only in
its elongated and gradually tapering skull, and in the more backward
extension of the mandibular symphysis[4], which attains the level of the
posterior margin of the sixth tooth.

In this character, and in the extreme slenderness of the snout, there
is doubtless an approximation to _Mecistops_; but _Crocodilus Journei_
is sharply separated from that genus by the characters of its teeth, and
by those of its dermal armour.

    [4] The greater proportional length of the symphysis is noted by
    Dumeril and Bibron.


5. _Crocodilus bombifrons_ (_palustris?_).

All the species of _Crocodilus_ which I have hitherto mentioned have,
in common, the backward curvature of the premaxillo-maxillary suture to
the level of the seventh tooth. But there is a species of Crocodile,
about whose proper specific name I am by no means clear, in which this
suture passes straight across the palate, or may even be a little convex
forwards.

And not only do the skulls of this species exhibit this approximation
to those of the _Alligatoridae_, but they resemble them still further in
their rounded snouts, their great width immediately behind the canine
groove, and in the fact that, in young specimens, one or the other
canine may be received into a pit instead of into a groove[5].

In the Hunterian Collection there are seven skulls, varying in length
from 5-1/4 inches up to 16 inches, in none of which does the crown of
the premaxillo-maxillary suture extend beyond a line joining the sixth
pair of teeth. In all there are two short ridges (convergent in young
specimens, nearly parallel in old ones) upon the lachrymal bones, which
end before reaching the anterior limits of those bones. They all have
an oblique ridge on the upper jaw above the tenth tooth; and the snout
attains the width which it has opposite this tooth immediately behind
the canine groove. In the British Museum there are five middle-sized
skulls with the same characters; but two of these have a pit on one
side of the upper jaw, and a groove on the other, and one has something
between a pit and a groove on each side.

Dr. Gray, has in his 'Catalogue[6],' mentioned the peculiar transverse
disposition of the premaxillo-maxillary suture in his _Crocodilus
bombifrons_; and on examining the two crania thus named in the British
Museum collection, one of which is 20 and the other 21 inches long, I
can discover no distinguishing character between them and those already
described. There can be no doubt then, I think, that these constant
and well-marked characters, exhibited by fourteen skulls which vary in
length from 5-1/4 to 21 inches, prove the existence of a distinct
species of Crocodile, which I would provisionally term _bombifrons_.

    [5] In a skull of this species 14-1/2 inches long, in the British
    Museum, the vomers are completely excluded from the palate, and
    their anterior ends do not extend for an eighth of an inch beyond
    the palatine part of the palato-maxillary suture, which lies on a
    level with the anterior margin of the twelfth alveolus. Each vomer
    is 2-3/8 inches long, and presents the same general form as that
    of _Jacare_; only the anterior division is but a very small, flat
    and thin plate, not a quarter of an inch long. The boundary of the
    median nares is formed in equal proportions by the vomer and the
    palatine, and is opposite the fourteenth tooth. The hinder end of
    the vomer articulates with the end of the descending process of
    the prefrontal.

    [6] 'Catalogue of the Tortoises, Crocodiles, and Amphisbaenians in
    the Collection of the British Museum,' 1844, p. 59.

I believe that this species has been constantly confounded with
_biporcatus_, from which it may be at once distinguished by the
direction of the premaxillo-maxillary suture, and by the shape of the
snout behind the canine groove. I have found these distinctions to hold
good at all ages; but the last-mentioned difference is far more marked
in middle-aged than in either young or old specimens.

All the skulls named _Crocodilus palustris_ which I have seen are
referable either to _C. biporcatus_ or to _C. bombifrons_. With respect
to the _C. palustris_ of Lesson and Dumeril and Bibron, the latter
authors consider it to be only a variety of _C. vulgaris_. Their
description would, however, apply very well to _C. bombifrons_, as I
have defined it above; and they expressly state ('Erp. Generale,' t.
iii. p. 113) that all their specimens (twelve in number and varying in
length from 30 centimetres to more than 3 metres) came from the East
Indies or the Seychelle Islands. Now, Dumeril and Bibron enumerate only
three Asiatic Crocodiles--_C. biporcatus_, _C. palustris_, and _C.
galeatus_, the last of which was only known to them by description; so
that all the numerous Asiatic crocodiles which passed through their
hands belonged either to _C. biporcatus_ or _C. palustris_. On the other
hand, all the skulls of crocodiles from Asia which I have met with
(amounting to at least twenty) are either those of _C. biporcatus_ or
of the species which I have called _bombifrons_; so that I suspect the
latter title will turn out to be a synonym of _palustris_.


6. _Crocodilus rhombifer._

I have not been able to obtain any skull of this species, which,
according to Cuvier's account and figures ('Oss. Fossiles,' t. ix. p.
102), resembles _C. Americanus_ in the great convexity of its nasal
region, but differs from it in the greater breadth of the skull, and in
the strong converging preorbital ridges, which appear to be limited to
the lachrymal bones. If the figures are to be I trusted, however, there
are other very important distinctive characters about the cranium of
this species; for Cuvier's, fig. 2, pl. 331, which gives a view of the
palate, shows the premaxillo-maxillary suture forming a nearly straight
transverse line.

       *       *       *       *       *

There remain several species of _Crocodilus_ whose skulls I have not
been able to examine, and of which no sufficient descriptions exist. Of
these, (7.) _C. galeatus_ and (8.) _C. Gravesii_ (_planirostris_) would
appear to be very distinct forms. (9.) _C. marginatus_ is considered by
Dumeril and Bibron to be only a variety of _C. vulgaris_; and they take
the same view of (10.) _Crocodilus suchus_. Professor Owen, however, has
figured the cranium of an Egyptian mummy under this name ('Monograph on
the Reptilia of the London Clay,' Pal. Soc., 1850). In the under-view
of this skull (tab. i. fig. 2), the junction of the premaxilla and the
maxilla in the palate seems to be broken away; but on the left side, the
palatine process of the maxilla is entire, as far as the level of the
anterior margin of the sixth tooth, and there is not a trace of a suture
behind this point. Are there, then, two or more species of Crocodile in
Egypt, as Geoffroy St.-Hilaire supposed?

With regard to the distribution of the species of _Crocodilus_, _C.
vulgaris_, _C. marginatus_, and _C. suchus_(?) appear to be exclusively
African; all the crocodiles from other parts of the Eastern hemisphere,
which I have met with, belong, as I have stated above, either to _C.
biporcatus_ or _C. bombifrons_, both of which species are found in
the Ganges. _Crocodilus galeatus_ appears to be peculiar to Siam.
_Crocodilus Americanus_ and _C. rhombifer_ are undoubtedly American. _C.
Journei_ has been supposed to be African; but such positive evidence as
exists tends rather to prove it to be an American species. Thus Bory de
St. Vincent states that the Bordeaux specimen is "suspected to have come
from America;" and, as I have said, the skull in the British Museum is
labelled "from the Orinoko."

_Crocodilus Gravesii_ (_planirostris_) is supposed by Bory de St.
Vincent to have been brought from the Congo; but its real origin is not
known.


Genus 5. MECISTOPS.

The cranium is elongated, and the snout slender and Gavial-like. There
are eighteen slender and subequal teeth above, and fifteen below, on
each side. The mandibular symphysis extends back to the level of the
seventh tooth. The cervical scutes are arranged in two transverse rows,
each of which contains two scutes; and there is no space left between
the posterior row and the tergal series.

This excellent genus, as established by Dr. Gray, includes Cuvier's
_Crocodilus cataphractus_ (which Dr. Gray considers to be the young of
a species whose full-grown form was discovered by Mr. Bennett in West
Africa), _Crocodilus Journei_ and _Crocodilus Schlegelii_. As I have
endeavoured to show, however, _C. Journei_ is a true crocodile; and, as
I shall point out below, Mueller and Schlegel have satisfactorily proved
_C. Schlegelii_ to be a Gavial. Consequently _Mecistops_ is at present
represented by only one species, which must be called _M. cataphractus_
if _M. Bennettii_ of Gray is really the adult of the form which Cuvier
described.

       *       *       *       *       *

III. In the family of the GAVIALIDAE, the snout is always very long and
slender; the teeth are for the most part slender, sharp-edged, and
subequal. The two anterior mandibular teeth pass into grooves, one of
which lies on each side of a beak-like prominence of the premaxillae,
which carries the two anterior upper teeth. The canines are received
into grooves. The mandibular symphysis extends back to at least the
fourteenth tooth, and is partly formed by the junction of the splenial
bones. The premaxillo-maxillary suture is always strongly convex
backwards. The posterior nares are situated more forward than in the
_Crocodili_. The temporal fossae are large. The feet are strongly webbed.
The dorsal scutes are not articulated; and there are no ventral scutes.

I distinguish two genera in this family, _Rhynchosuchus_ and _Gavialis_.


Genus 6. RHYNCHOSUCHUS.

There are twenty teeth above, and eighteen or nineteen below, on each
side; the mandibular symphysis extends to the fifteenth tooth. The
posterior teeth of the upper jaw, and almost all those of the lower jaw,
are received into interdental pits; the orbital margins are not raised;
and the premaxillae are hardly at all expanded. The premaxillo-maxillary
suture does not reach the third tooth behind the notch.

I propose the name _Rhynchosuchus_ to indicate that generic type which
is at present represented by the solitary species called by Mueller
and Schlegel _Crocodilus_ (_Gavialis_) _Schlegelii_, and admirably
described and figured by them in their essay, 'Over de Krokodilen van
der Indischen Archipel,' in the 'Verhandelingen over de natuurlijke
Gesch. der Nederl. overzee. Bezittingen,' 1839-1844. Under the title
_Crocodilus_ (_Gavialis_) _Schlegelii_ (p. 18), they say--"The Gavial
from Borneo, when compared with the Indian one, is principally
distinguished by the following characters:--

"1. By its stronger form and better developed limbs.

2. By its much less slender head and snout, which last does not narrow
so suddenly in front of the eyes as in _G. Gangeticus_.

3. By the smaller number of teeth, of which there are twenty above and
eighteen below on each side, while _G. Gangeticus_ has 28/26 or
27/25; furthermore, the teeth are stouter, less curved, and less
sharp, and are disposed more perpendicularly, and the ninth tooth of the
upper jaw (reckoning from the front) is considerably larger and stronger
than the others; whence it follows that, just as in the true Crocodiles,
the snout at the level of this tooth exhibits a lateral projection.

4. By the shorter symphysis of the under jaw.

5. By the absence of the swollen nasal prominence (neusklep), which
characterizes the Gangetic Gavial.

6. By the less expanded form of the tabular upper surface of the hinder
part of the skull.

7. By the very slight production of the edges of the orbit.

8. By the large eyes.

9. By the presence of a number of small nuchal shields, while _G.
Gangeticus_ has but one pair.

10. By the strongly developed keels of the dorsal scutes.

11. By the much larger scales on the under parts and on the legs of the
animal.

12. By the different colours with which it is variegated."

       *       *       *       *       *

These authors further point out that the vomers appear for a small space
in the posterior part of the palate, that the opercular or splenial
bones join in the symphysis of the lower jaw, and that the cervical and
dorsal scutes form one continuous shield; and they represent the two
anterior mandibular teeth passing in grooves on either side of the end
of the premaxilla. In fact, they fully and completely establish the fact
that their new species belongs to the _Longirostres_ of Cuvier, or to
the Gavials of later writers.

Under these circumstances, it is somewhat surprising to find the
deliberate conclusions of these careful investigators set aside in the
following brief passage:--

    "This Bornean species (_C. Schlegelii_) was, in fact, originally
    described as a new species of Gavial; but the nasal bones, as in the
    fossil from Sheppey, figured in t. ii. 15, extend to the hinder
    border of the external nostril."--_Owen_, _Fossil Reptilia of the
    London Clay, Crocodilia_, p. 15: 1850.

Mueller and Schlegel give remarkably clear and beautiful figures of the
skull of their Gavial; and these show at once that the nasal bones do
not "reach the hinder border of the external nostril," but meet the
premaxillaries at a point very distant from that border, viz. opposite
the ninth tooth. Even did the nasal bones reach the posterior boundary
of the nostril, such a character would not outweigh those derived from
the relations and number of the teeth, the structure and extent of the
mandibular symphysis, and the disposition of the dermal scutes,--all of
which are so clearly and definitely set forth by Mueller and Schlegel,
that it seems difficult to understand how any one who had consulted the
original memoir could have overlooked them.

It was possible, however, that Mueller and Schlegel, notwithstanding
their great opportunities, might have erred in their statements; and I
therefore gladly seized the opportunity of testing their description by
comparing it with an authentic skull of the species in question, from
New Guinea, in the collection of the British Museum.

I have found the statement of Mueller and Schlegel minutely accurate
in almost all points; and there cannot be the slightest doubt, not
only that the Schlegelian crocodile is one of the _Gavialidae_, but
that it forms a distinct generic type in that family, as different
from _Gavialis_ as _Caiman_ is from _Jacare_, or _Mecistops_ from
_Crocodilus_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following are the most important measurements of the skull of
_Rhynchosuchus Schlegelii_ in the British Museum collection:--

                                                       Inches.

  Length from the end of the premaxilla to that of
      os quadratum                                        23
  Breadth from outer edge of one os quadratum to that
      of the other                                         8-3/4
  Breadth across the face in front of the orbits           4
     "    at the 9th tooth                                 2
     "    at the 5th tooth                                 1-1/2
     "    at the 3rd tooth                                 1-3/4
     "    of the beak-like curved process which carries
      the two anterior teeth                               1
  Mean width of lower jaw from symphysis to extremity      1-5/8
  Length                                                  12
  No tooth measures transversely more than                  3/16

The face is very smooth; but a slight longitudinal groove runs down on
each side from the anterior margin of the orbit for about two inches.
Anteriorly to this point the snout retains a nearly even diameter as
far as the ninth tooth, in front of which it suddenly narrows a little,
retaining nearly the same dimensions to the fourth tooth, where it
widens a very little, and then suddenly narrows to the terminal beak.
The lower jaw does not expand at all at its extremity. The nasals join
the premaxillaries opposite the ninth tooth, and the splenial bones, in
the lower jaw, end opposite the tenth mandibular tooth, as the figures
of Mueller and Schlegel show. The vomers appear between the inner edges
of the palatines posteriorly, as a thin bony band 1-3/8 inch long
by 1/8 inch wide, which tapers at each end and is divided by a
longitudinal suture. The ninth tooth of the upper jaw is stronger than
the rest.

The only point in which the description of Mueller and Schlegel seems
to me to be incomplete[7] is with regard to the disposition of the
teeth. They say--"The teeth of _C. Schlegelii_, as regards their form
and development, more nearly resemble those of the true Crocodiles;
but in the way in which the teeth of the two jaws are opposed, there
is the most complete resemblance between our species and the Gangetic
Gavial,--both which species differ from all other crocodiles in the
circumstance that when the mouth is shut, all the teeth of the under jaw
project outside the lateral margin of the upper jaw" (_l. c._ p. 22).

What I find is this:--The anterior teeth of both the upper jaw and
the mandible are long, slender, sharp-edged, and slightly curved. The
posterior eleven, on each side, in the upper jaw, are short, straight,
conical, and constricted below their crowns. There are deep interdental
pits between the ten posterior mandibular teeth, into which the opposed
teeth of the maxilla are received when the jaws are closed. All the
mandibular teeth, except the two anterior and the fourth pair, pass into
like pits in the upper jaw. The anterior eight teeth on each side of
the upper jaw pass straight down outside the lower jaw. In the Gangetic
Gavial the relations of the teeth of the two jaws appear to me, as I
shall state below, to be very different.

_Rhynchosuchus Schlegelii_ inhabits the inland lakes of Borneo, and is
found in New Guinea.

    [7] Or it is possible that the _Rhynchosuchus_ from New Guinea,
    which I have examined, is specifically distinct from the Bornean
    form.


Genus 7. GAVIALIS.

There are twenty-seven or twenty-eight teeth in the upper, and
twenty-five or twenty-six in the lower jaw. The mandibular symphysis
extends to the twenty-third or twenty-fourth tooth. The lateral teeth
of both jaws are, all but the very hindmost, directed obliquely
downwards (or upwards), forwards or outwards, and are not received
into interdental pits. The anterior margins of the orbits are raised.
The premaxillae and the end of the mandible are greatly expanded. The
premaxillo-maxillary suture reaches the level of the fourth tooth behind
the canine notch.

The only true _Gavialis_ is the well-known _G. Gangeticus_ from the
East Indies. In this 'Gavial,' or 'Garrhial,' the vomers are slender
bones which do not extend further forwards than the level of the
twenty-second or twenty-first tooth, and have but a very short and
slender representative of the anterior flattened division of the bone in
_Jacare_; posteriorly they extend back to the level of the descending
processes of the prefrontals. In a skull 25 inches long the vomers
have a length of about 4 inches, extending as they do a little further
forward than the palato-maxillary suture. The median nares are opposite
the twenty-fifth tooth.

       *       *       *       *       *

All the _Crocodilia_ which I have enumerated are provided with two
perfectly distinct kinds of dermal armour,--the one consisting of
plates of horn, produced by a modification of the superficial layer of
the epidermis; the other composed of discs of bone marked by a peculiar
pitted sculpture on their outer surfaces, and developed within the
substance of the dermis. To the former I shall apply the term "scales;"
the latter are what I have denominated "scutes."

All recent _Crocodilia_ have both scales and scutes in the dorsal
region of the body, the scutes underlying, and having the same general
form as the scales. In all, the ventral region of the body is also
covered with scales which have a very definite shape; but in no recent
Crocodilian which I have examined, save those species which are
included in the genera _Caiman_ and _Jacare_, are there any scutes in
the ventral region.

Again, in the genera _Alligator_, _Crocodilus_, _Mecistops_,
Rhynchosuchus, and _Gavialis_, the edges of the scutes, except those of
the two median longitudinal rows, are hardly ever united by sutures,
nor do the posterior margins of those in each transverse row overlap the
anterior margins of the succeeding row. At any rate, there is no flat,
bevelled, articular facet on the outer surface of the anterior margin of
a scute, for articulation with the inner surface of the posterior margin
of its predecessor. In the genera _Caiman_ and _Jacare_, however, the
lateral edges of all the scutes of the dorsal and ventral shields are
united by serrated sutures; and the anterior end of the outer face of
each is provided with a well-marked smooth facet, which is overlapped by
the smooth under-surface of the scute in front of it.

I first noticed the remarkable structure of the dermal armour of these
_Alligatoridae_ in the skin of a _Jacare_ (_sp. incerta_), wanting the
end of the tail, but which must have belonged to an animal between five
and six feet in length. It had long been in my possession; but I had
never before had occasion to study its characters minutely.

The horny scales, which had the appearance of thin tortoise-shell,
could be readily peeled off (especially by the aid of a little caustic
potash); and then the white surface of the subjacent bony scute upon
which they were modelled came into view. It is to be understood,
however, that the inner surface of the scale corresponded only in its
general form with the outer surface of the scute; for it did not dip
into the pits with which the latter is sculptured. These are in fact
filled by the dry dermis which extends over and encloses the scute, a
very thin layer (bearing the rete mucosum) being interposed between it
and the scale; so that the pitted sculpture does not come out well until
the scutes have been boiled.

The _dorsal_ scutes are both carinated and angulated. By the application
of the former term, I mean to indicate that, along a median or submedian
longitudinal line, their substance is more or less elevated, so as, in
many cases, to form a very prominent crest. This crest always subsides
before it reaches the anterior margin of the scute, though it may extend
beyond the posterior margin. Its highest point is always behind the
centre of the scute, and is devoid of sculpture. The sculpture however
seems to radiate from this point, inasmuch as it consists, on the
greater part of the scute, of distinct pits, which are usually round
towards the centre, but towards the periphery become ovals with their
long axes directed towards the point in question.

The smooth inner surfaces of the scute shelve towards a depression
which corresponds with the external ridge, under which the sides of
the scute seem to meet in an angle. This may be called the 'angulation'
of the scute. From before backwards, the inner surface of the scute is
a little convex. The scute is thickest in the middle; posteriorly, it
thins off to an edge and overlaps its successor; anteriorly, its outer
surface is bevelled off at an acute angle with the inner, so as to give
rise to a smooth shelving surface--wide from side to side, narrow from
before backwards--forming the 'articular facet,' which is overlapped by
the inner surface of the posterior edge of the preceding scute. I have
termed this the 'articular facet;' but it must not be supposed that
there is anything like a true joint between the opposed facets of the
overlapping and overlapped scutes; on the contrary, they are at once
separated and connected by the dermal connective tissue.

The posterior margin of the articular facet is separated by a deep
transverse groove, divided by little partitions into as many pits,
from the rest of the sculptured surface; but there is no trace of any
suture dividing the scute into two portions. The lateral margins of each
scute are united by serrated sutural edges with those which lie next to
them in the same transverse row; so that each row forms a nearly solid
flat bony bar, composed, in the middle of the back, of as many as ten
distinct scutes. The outer edges of the outermost scutes only, thin off
and exhibit no sutural serration, inasmuch as they are not directly
connected with ANY other scutes.

The median line of the back corresponds in general with the suture
between the two middle scutes of each transverse row; so that the scutes
are disposed symmetrically on either side of that line. Furthermore,
the anterior part of the inner surface of each of the two middle scutes
is connected by ligament with the extremity of the spinous process of a
vertebra; at least, this is the case in the dorsal, lumbar, sacral, and
anterior caudal regions.

The scutes which protect the _ventral_ side of the body, from the
throat backwards, are four-sided and similar in their ornamentation
to the dorsal scutes; but they exhibit neither ridge nor angulation,
their outer and inner surfaces being parallel, and either nearly flat
or evenly curved. Each forms, in fact, a segment of a large cylinder,
inasmuch as the whole ventral shield is convex transversely, being
nearly flat in the middle and much bent up at the sides. The dorsal
shield, taken as a whole, is, on the contrary, nearly flat. The lateral
edges of the ventral scutes interlock suturally; and their anterior and
posterior edges are overlapped and overlap, just like the dorsal scutes.
The outer edges of the outermost ventral scutes thin off and are not
united with any bony element; and the ventral, like the dorsal scutes,
are usually arranged symmetrically on either side of the median sutural
line. There may be as many as twenty-two scutes united by their lateral
sutures into a single strong, curved, transverse, bony, bar-like segment
of the ventral armour.

Throughout the neck and body, and as far as the commencement of the
tail, the ends of the dorsal and ventral bony bars, whose sum may be
regarded as a dorsal and a ventral shield respectively, are separated
by an interval of integument, in which only small scattered scutes are
visible. The physiological import of this arrangement becomes obvious
when we consider in what manner the animal breathes; and indeed the
integumentary interval answers very precisely to the leather which
connects the two boards of a bellows. Again, though the limbs are
themselves covered with articulated scutes, they are afforded free
play upon the body by this flexible interspace. Immediately behind the
hind legs, the ventral and dorsal shields unite; and the tail is from
that point surrounded by a succession of bony hoops, each of which
corresponds with a vertebra, the segments of the exoskeleton answering
to those of the endoskeleton.

The most remarkable feature about the ventral scutes, however, and that
in which they differ most widely from the dorsal ones, consists in the
fact that each scute is composed of two distinct pieces, an anterior
and a posterior, which unite together by a transverse serrated suture.
The anterior piece or 'semi-scute' may attain to three-quarters the
length of the posterior, and it has exactly the same width. The anterior
semi-scute bears the articular facet and the transverse pitted groove,
whose posterior wall is just in front of its hinder edge, or in other
words, of the suture, when the two semi-scutes are united.

Such are the general characters and mode of arrangement of the dorsal
and ventral armour of _Jacare_. But there remain many noteworthy
peculiarities in the disposition and number of the components of each
band of the armour.

Thus, in the _dorsal shield_ there are two rows of nuchal scutes, each
containing eight separate keeled bony plates; and of cervical scutes
there are five rows, the two anterior of which contain four angulated
and carinated scutes each, while the three posterior contain only two
scutes each. All these scutes, except the anterior row, have articular
facets; and all those of each row are united suturally. Of dorsal scutes
there are thirty transverse rows up to the median keel of the tail,
which commences with the thirty-first row. The number of scutes in each
row is as follows:--

   Rows.                         Scutes.
  1, 2, 3, 4                        6
  5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11            10
  12, 13                            8
  14, 15                            6
  16, 17, 18                        4
  19                                6
  20                                8
  23, 24                            6
  25, 26                            5
  27, 28                            4
  29, 30                            4

  31, 32, 33, 34                    5
  The rest of the tail is wanting.

Throughout the dorso-lumbar and sacral regions (_i. e._ up to the
nineteenth row), the median scutes are hardly keeled at all, while the
outer ones are the more strongly carinate the more external they lie.

In the caudal region, the second scute from the middle line, in the
twenty-third row, has a strong keel and angulation, which grows stronger
in the corresponding scutes up to the thirtieth inclusive, until the
superior and lateral faces of these scutes, in the twenty-ninth and
thirtieth rows, are inclined to one another at a right angle and
very strongly keeled. I have said that, as a rule, the median line
is occupied by a suture between two median scutes; but in the caudal
region[8], in the twenty-fifth row (which corresponds with the sixth
caudal vertebra) the two median scutes are replaced by one flat scute,
so that there is no suture in the middle line. In the twenty-sixth row
there is a similar arrangement, but the flat scute is smaller; and in
the twenty-seventh no trace of it is left, so that the strongly keeled
lateral scutes meet in the middle line, which is again occupied by a
suture. This continues up to the thirty-first row, when the median scute
reappears as a thin vertical plate, broader below and in front, where it
articulates with the median lateral scutes, than above and behind, where
it exhibits a free edge only covered by the horny epidermis. It is thus
that the serrated dorsal crest of the tail is formed. The scutes of the
crest exhibit only very small round and distant pits.

The _ventral shield_ begins in the neck just behind the level of the
anterior margins of the orbits: the fifteen anterior rows may be termed
subcervical, as they lie in front of the thorax. In the first six rows
the scutes are very small, and increase in number up to twelve in a row.
In the next six rows there are ten scutes in a row, and in the last
three, twelve. All these rows are symmetrically divided by the median
line. In the three hinder rows the inner scutes are longer than the
outer ones; and this is most markedly the case in the fifteenth row,
whose innermost scute is half as long again as the corresponding one of
the preceding row, and more than three times as long as the outermost of
its own row.

    [8] The second and third cervical rows in _Caiman palpebrosus_ and
    _trigonatus_ also contain a median scute, and consequently an odd
    number of scutes. In _Caiman trigonatus_, the third to the ninth
    supra-caudal rows have each a median single scute.

The sixteenth row differs from its predecessors and successors, and may
be termed the axillary row. It is bent upon itself with an angle open
forwards, and is divided into two halves (each of which contains seven
scutes) by the union of the middle scutes of the fifteenth subcervical
with those of the first row of what may be termed the subdorsal scutes,
or those which lie under the thorax and abdomen. Of subdorsal and
subcaudal scutes there are, up to the broken-off end of the tail,
thirty-seven rows, with the following numbers of scutes:--

  Rows.           Scutes.

   1                12
   2                10
   3, 4, 5,         12
   6, 7, 8, 9,      14
  10                16
  11                14
  12-17             14
  18-20             12
  21                14
  22                18
  23                22
  24                22
  25                20
  26-28             18
  29-31             16
  32-34             14
  35                12
  36, 37            10

It will be noticed that there are three more rows of ventral than of
dorsal scutes. On endeavouring to ascertain how this came about, I
observed that the first subdorsal was a good deal behind the first
dorsal row, though the eighth to the twelfth dorsal corresponded exactly
with the eighth to the twelfth ventral rows. In the anterior part of the
body, therefore, there is a clear general correspondence between the
segments of the dorsal and those of the ventral armour.

In the caudal region, again, I found that the twenty-fourth ventral
row, which is the first of the caudal rows not excavated by the vent,
corresponded exactly with the twenty-first dorsal row. It was clear,
therefore, that three ventral rows wore interpolated somewhere between
the twelfth and twenty-first dorsal rows; and on close examination I
found this interpolation to arise from the doubling of the fourteenth,
fifteenth, and sixteenth ventral rows.

I have examined _Jacare fissipes_ and _nigra_, _Caiman trigonatus_,
and _C. gibbiceps_, in the British Museum; and I find, in all, dorsal
and ventral armour having the same essential arrangement as that just
described. A specimen of _Caiman palpebrosus_ about two feet long, the
opportunity of examining which I owe to Dr. Grant, exhibits the dorsal
and ventral shields (whose scutes are in the main similarly arranged)
very beautifully; and a young _Jacare_ of about 18 inches in length,
for which I am indebted to the kindness of the same gentleman, proves
that the scutes are developed even in specimens of this age. I have
no hesitation therefore in expressing my belief that this singularly
complete dermal armour will be found to be characteristic of all the
species of the genera _Caiman_ and _Jacare_. On the other hand, I
have examined _Alligator Mississipiensis_, _Crocodilus vulgaris_, _C.
biporcatus_, _C. Americanus_, _C. rhombifer_, and _C. bombifrons_,
_Mecistops cataphractus_, and _Gavialis Gangeticus_, of various ages and
sizes, without having been able to discover a trace of ventral scutes.
This is the more remarkable, as the well-marked ventral and dorsal
shields of many of the ancient _Teleosauria_ would lead one to expect
a corresponding exoskeleton (if anywhere) in their nearest allies, the
modern _Gavialidae_. However, _Goniopholis_, with its strong armour, is
more like an ordinary Crocodile; and I have recently discovered that a
true Crocodile in some respects curiously similar to _C. bombifrons_
(_C. Hastingsiae_) was covered with scutes exceedingly like those of the
modern _Caiman_ and _Jacare_.

In minute structure the bony scutes of _Jacare_ closely resemble those
of such a fish as a Sturgeon: a middle layer, containing so many canals
as to appear almost cancellated in longitudinal or transverse section,
is covered externally by a thin, and internally by a thick, layer
composed of bony lamellae, nearly parallel to the plane of the scute.
Round the canals of the middle layer, the bony lamellae are disposed
concentrically, to a greater or less extent. The lacunae are of very
various shapes; and there are perhaps as many short as elongated forms.
The canals of the middle layer communicate by large branches with the
inner, by smaller and fewer branches with the outer surface of the
scute.

In the young _Jacare_ mentioned above, I found the dermis to be
distinguishable into two layers. The more superficial of these is thin,
made up of irregular or formless connective tissue, and contains many
ramified pigment-masses. Its smooth outer surface underlies the rete
mucosum. Internally, it passes into the second or deep layer, which
consists of successive layers of distinctly fibrous connective tissue,
disposed in definite parallel bundles, and having a very regular
arrangement. Throughout a space corresponding with the area of each
scale, in fact, the bundles of each layer cross those of the succeeding
layer at right angles; and the successive tiers of bundles are tied
together by short cords disposed perpendicularly to the planes of the
tiers. A corresponding arrangement of the bundles of connective tissue
has long been known to obtain in the dermis of Fishes and _Batrachia_.
At each end of this small "mat" of connective tissue, the bundles, if
I may so say, fray out; and at the anterior end, the layers, loosened
in texture, bend upwards, spreading out at the same time to become
continuous with the fibres of the "mat" in front. In consequence of
the matting under the quadrate surface of each scale, the dermis has a
peculiar facetted aspect, quite apart from any osseous deposit. Where
bony scutes are formed, they appear as very thin perforated plates in
the most superficial portion of the deep layer of the dermis; so that
there is a single thin layer of dense connective tissue above them,
while below them are all the rest of the denser and deeper lamellae of
the dermis. Through the apertures in this primitive osseous plate (the
rudiment of the middle layer of the future scute), bundles of connective
tissue extend, connecting the deep with the superjacent lamellae.

If a thin section is made and decalcified with weak acid under the
microscope, the calcareous matter, as it is dissolved away, leaves an
obscurely fibrous matrix of a different aspect from the surrounding
connective tissue, and the endoplasts, or nuclei, of this matrix are
seen each to have occupied the centre of a lacuna.

Again, the rudimentary scute lies in the dermis as in a sort of pocket,
the superficial and deep walls of which separate from it with great
ease; and in good thin sections made through the dermis and scute, there
seems to be no direct connexion between the substance of the scute above
and below, and the connective tissue with which it is in contact. Nor
could I satisfy myself that the margins of the scute were continuous
with the surrounding bundles of connective tissue. However, the specimen
had been a very long time in spirit; and I am unwilling to lay too much
stress upon these observations, which tend to negative the supposition
that the scute proceeds from the direct calcification of the connective
tissue of the dermis.

On the other hand, I must remark that horizontal sections of the scutes
have presented oblique parallel fissures, sometimes crossing one
another, which might readily be supposed to correspond with the lines of
separation of ossified bundles of connective tissue.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE.--During a recent visit to Paris, my friend Mr. Busk was kind
enough to examine the specimens of recent _Crocodilia_ in the Museum
of the Jardin des Plantes, with reference to certain points to which
I requested his attention. Mr. Busk informs me that there is no doubt
about the transverse direction of the premaxillo-maxillary suture in
_Crocodilus rhombifer_; and his statements lead me to entertain no
question that _C. bombifrons_ is a synonym of _C. palustris_.

In the typical specimens of _C. marginatus_ and _C. suchus_ of Geoffroy
St.-Hilaire, the premaxillo-maxillary suture extends back to the level
of the seventh tooth.

Mr. Busk has furthermore pointed out to me the existence of another
American species of Crocodile--_C. Morelettii_, which has been described
by M. Auguste Dumeril in his "Description des Reptiles nouveaux ou
imparfaitement connus," &c., 'Archives du Museum,' t. vi. 1852.

This species inhabits lake Flores, in Yucatan; and it is said by M.
Dumeril to approach _C. Americanus_, from which it differs in the
proportions of the skull and in the characters of the dermal armour.

    June 21st, 1859.

       *       *       *       *       *




On the Habits of the "Aye-Aye" (_Cheiromys madagascariensis_, L.,
Cuv.). By the Hon. H. SANDWITH, M.D., C.B., Colonial Secretary of the
Mauritius. Communicated by Prof. OWEN, F.R.S., V.P.L.S.

    [Read April 7th, 1859.]


    "Mauritius, Jan. 27, 1859.

"MY DEAR MR. OWEN,--After very great difficulty and much delay, I have
at length obtained a fine healthy male adult _Aye-Aye_; and he is now
enjoying himself in a large cage which I have had constructed for him.

He is a most interesting little animal; and from close observation I
have learnt his habits very correctly. On receiving him from Madagascar,
I was told that he ate bananas; so of course I fed him on them, but
tried him with other fruit. I found he liked dates,--which was a grand
discovery, supposing he be sent alive to England. Still I thought that
those strong rodent teeth, as large as those of a young Beaver, must
have been intended for some other purpose than that of trying to eat
his way out of a cage--the only use he seemed to make of them, besides
masticating soft fruits. Moreover, he had other peculiarities,--_e.g._,
singularly large, naked ears directed forward, as if for offensive
rather than defensive purposes; then, again, the second finger of
the hands is unlike anything but a monster supernumerary member, it
being slender and long, half the thickness of the other fingers, and
resembling a piece of bent wire. Excepting the head and this finger, he
closely resembles a Lemur.

Now as he attacked, every night, the woodwork of his cage, which I was
gradually lining with tin, I bethought myself of tying some sticks over
the woodwork, so that he might gnaw these instead. I had previously
put in some large branches for him to climb upon; but the others were
straight sticks to cover over the woodwork of his cage, which _alone_ he
attacked. It so happened that the thick sticks I now put into his cage
were bored in all directions by a large and destructive grub called here
the _Moutouk_. Just at sunset the Aye-Aye crept from under his blanket,
yawned, stretched, and betook himself to his tree, where his movements
are lively and graceful, though by no means so quick as those of a
squirrel. Presently he came to one of the worm-eaten branches, which he
began to examine most attentively; and bending forward his ears, and
applying his nose close to the bark, he rapidly tapped the surface with
the curious second digit, as a woodpecker taps a tree, though with much
less noise, from time to time inserting the end of the slender finger
into the worm-holes, as a surgeon would a probe. At length he came to
a part of the branch which evidently gave out an interesting sound,
for he began to tear it with his strong teeth. He rapidly stripped off
the bark, cut into the wood, and exposed the nest of a grub, which he
daintily picked out of its bed with the slender tapping finger, and
conveyed the luscious morsel to his mouth.

I watched these proceedings with intense interest, and was much struck
with the marvellous adaptation of the creature to its habits, shown by
his acute hearing, which enables him aptly to distinguish the different
tones emitted from the wood by his gentle tapping; his evidently acute
sense of smell, aiding him in his search; his secure footsteps on the
slender branches, to which he firmly clung by his quadrumanous members;
his strong rodent teeth, enabling him to tear through the wood; and
lastly by the curious slender finger, unlike that of any other animal,
and which he used alternately as a pleximeter, a probe, and a scoop.

But I was yet to learn another peculiarity. I gave him water to drink
in a saucer, on which he stretched out a hand, dipped a finger into it,
and drew it obliquely through his open mouth; and this he repeated so
rapidly, that the water seemed to flow into his mouth. After a while he
lapped like a cat; but his first mode of drinking appeared to me to be
his way of reaching water in the deep clefts of trees.

I am told that the _Aye-Aye_ is an object of veneration at Madagascar,
and that if any native touches one, he is sure to die within the year;
hence the difficulty of obtaining a specimen. I overcame this scruple by
a reward of L10.

I quite despair of obtaining the bones of the _Dinornis_ or _Dodo_,
though I have made every effort. I shall always be proud to be of
service.

  Believe me, yours very faithfully,

  H. SANDWITH."

       *       *       *       *       *




On the Moulting of the common Lobster (_Homarus vulgaris_) and Shore
Crab (_Carcinus maenas_). By S. JAMES A. SALTER, M.B., F.L.S., F.G.S.

[Read April 7th, 1859.]


I am induced to bring this subject before the Linnean Society, on
account of the singularly perfect specimen of the thrown-off slough of
a Lobster which I have now an opportunity of exhibiting, and because
the process by which it was shed was witnessed and carefully watched by
two competent observers--by my friend Mr. Robert Cooke, of Scarborough,
a Fellow of this Society, and by the intelligent wife of the Curator
of the Scarborough Museum, in an aquarium in which institution the
occurrence took place.

The methods by which certain of the Decapod Crustaceans cast their old
shells in the process of renewal and growth have already been made the
subject of observation and record.

Reaumur, as early as 1712, and again in 1718, saw and described the
sloughing of the common freshwater Crayfish (_Astacus fluviatilis_).

It was witnessed in the common edible Crab (_Cancer Pagurus_) by Mr.
Couch, in 1833.

Subsequently the moulting-process was observed by Mr. Gosse, in the
Spinous Spider-crab (_Maia Squinado_).

Beyond these three recorded examples, I believe that the actual
operation of moulting in Decapods has never been seen, though the
sloughs of our common Crustacea, and the animals themselves but recently
emerged from their old shells, are familiar to all marine zoologists.

There is no recorded account of the moulting of the Lobster, that I have
been able to discover.

The Lobster from which the slough was obtained, and whose operations
are the subject of this communication, was an inhabitant of a large
marine aquarium in the Museum at Scarborough. The period was July 1857.
The aquarium contained the ordinary assemblage of sea-shore animals,
and a considerable collection of vegetation, which consisted of _Ulva_,
_Fucus_, and other common sea-weeds.

For two days previous to its throwing off the shell, the Lobster was
observed in a very peculiar attitude, and to be very busily engaged.
Its abdomen was permanently and stiffly erected and straight; while the
animal, in this rigid attitude, was hard at work detaching and carrying
all the soft sea-weed it could collect to one end of the aquarium, where
it thus accumulated a large mass of vegetation, which was afterwards
destined to become a screen and protection for its soft body. At the
same time, and by the same means, a clearing was made at the other
end of the tank, in which it had space for the evolutions which were
subsequently necessary for the extrication of its body.

The Lobster remained in the peculiar rigid attitude I have described,
during the entire two days previous to the moult. On the third day, a
crack was observed along the membrane which unites the dorsal surface
of the first abdominal ring with the carapace; and when these parts
became separated by about half an inch, the bright-blue membrane of the
new shell being plainly visible beneath, the operation of extricating
the abdomen commenced. By a strong vibratory action of the whole
abdomen, principally in a lateral direction, one segment was, at first,
protruded through the split; and this was followed by an interval of
complete repose, during which the animal remained quite motionless.
Then, by another vibratory action, the second segment was extricated;
then followed an interval of repose, when the third was withdrawn; and
so on till, at last, the entire abdomen, after having been bent double
upon itself, was turned completely out backwards, and then, elongated
and compressed, remained above and parallel to the empty shell that it
had occupied, and which was still attached to the under surface of the
cephalothorax. Hitherto the only orifice of escape consisted in the
transverse splitting of the first abdominal segment from the carapace,
on the dorsal surface. None of the abdominal segments separated from
each other.

Thus far the extrication had commenced at the front of the abdomen,
and had progressed from before backwards. It was now observed that
the carapace had split from behind forwards, the fissure commencing
posteriorly at the transverse split between _the_ carapace and the
first abdominal segment, and reaching forwards to the apex of the
rostrum, which, however, it did not absolutely divide. The two halves
of the carapace then separating posteriorly, the interval between
them, together with the original transverse slit, constituted a trifid
opening, through which the rest of the animal escaped.

The escape of the cephalo-thoracic portion was effected from behind
forwards. First the posterior ambulatory legs were loosened and
withdrawn; then followed the next pair; and this process was continued
from behind forwards, pair by pair--the withdrawal of each pair of legs
being followed by an interval of repose. The limbs were withdrawn very
readily from the old shell, slipping out of it as a leg would from a
loose boot. No apparent effort accompanied these operations so far.

The extrication of the claws, however, was attended with much and
violent exertion. This consisted of two powerful and sudden tugs, the
soft abdomen of the Lobster pressing by its under surface upon the
upper surface of the empty shell. By this means the soft chelae were
drawn through the narrow joints of the old shell, exhibiting strong,
unmistakeable marks of the violence and pressure to which they had been
subjected. The escape of the chelae from their unyielding incasement
was not aided by any splitting of the old shell, the large soft hands
being drawn by compression through the narrow joints, as a wire is drawn
through the contracting holes of a draw-plate.

The efforts for the withdrawal of the chelae were the last, and succeeded
in completely freeing the Lobster from its old case. Not only the
claws, but the parts of the mouth, the antennae, and the eyes, were
all unsheathed; and with the last tug the regenerate Lobster plunged
backwards, and entirely escaped, above and behind the now empty
shell--its former tenement.

The operation, from first to last, occupied about twenty minutes, and
was performed entirely in view, in that part of the aquarium which the
Lobster had cleared of sea-weed.

Immediately after emerging from the old shell, the Lobster, was much
deformed: there was a general elongation of the whole animal; but this
was most remarkably the case with the claws, which were quite drawn out
of shape. During the few subsequent hours, both the body and the claws
became shorter and much enlarged. This increase of size did not result
from any unfolding of membrane of the shell previously plicated, as no
folds were observable immediately after the emergence of the animal,
but from a simple distension, apparently from the imbibition, either
by swallowing or by endosmosis, of considerable quantities of water.
The membrane of the new shell was perfectly soft, and of a bright blue
colour. At first the Lobster was shy and quite inactive, retiring to
and remaining concealed among the accumulated sea-weed; but in a few
hours it emerged from its retreat, and moved freely about the aquarium.
The membrane of the new shell remained soft for some days, but on the
seventh it appeared to have become perfectly calcified.

These are the details of the exuviation of the Lobster whose cast-off
shell is before the Society. By a happy accident, the same observers had
an opportunity of witnessing the sloughing of another Lobster, in the
month of November following. The process was identically the same in
every particular; but it was observed that the subsequent calcification
of the shell did not take place till after the lapse of about fourteen
days,--a circumstance probably dependent on a lower temperature and a
less active nutrition. These are, I believe, the only two instances in
which the exuviation of the Lobster has been actually witnessed; but
there exist specimens of sloughs which are entirely in keeping with this
description. In the fish-house of the Zoological Society of London there
are two specimens which were cast in the tanks there; and in each there
is the same transverse splitting of the carapace from the abdomen, and
the longitudinal splitting of the carapace itself, without any other
opening for the escape of the animal.

One or two general observations are suggested by the foregoing
description. In the only examples of the exuviation of macrourous
Decapod Crustaceans, there exists a singular diversity in the
process itself. In _Astacus_, as described by Reaumur, the process
commences with the escape of the cephalothorax; in _Homarus_, as I
have now described it, it begins by the emergence of the abdomen. In
_Astacus_ the carapace is detached and thrown off bodily and unbroken,
being severed from its attachments with the lateral portions of the
cephalothorax, as is the case in the Brachyura; whereas in _Homarus_ the
lateral attachments of the carapace remain, whilst the plate itself is
split up the centre. In _Astacus_, as is also the case in the Brachyura,
the thrown-off slough is uniformly left resting on its dorsal surface;
in _Homarus_ the reverse is uniformly the case. But the most striking
dissimilarity is to be found in the circumstances _stated_ to attend the
liberation of the chelae. Prof. Bell, in the Introduction to his 'History
of the British Stalk-eyed Crustacea,' remarks--"It is impossible to
imagine that the crust of the legs, and especially of the great claws
of the larger species, could be cast off, unless it were susceptible of
being longitudinally split" (p. 35), and he then proceeds to give the
account detailed by Reaumur of the longitudinal splitting of the shell
in the neighbourhood of the joints of the claws in _Astacus_, so as to
allow of the extrication of the hands. Nevertheless, however impossible
it may appear for the chelae to escape without this splitting, no such
circumstance occurs in the exuviation of _Homarus vulgaris_; and when
we consider that the hands of _Astacus_ are small in proportion to
the wrist-joints, and that in _Homarus_ they are larger in proportion
to those joints than in any other of the Macroura, this dissimilarity
in the mode in which the claws escape is the more remarkable, and, I
confess, to my own mind it suggests the suspicion that the distinguished
and usually most accurate French naturalist to whom I have referred may
possibly in this instance have been led to consider as a fact that which
was to him a supposed necessity[9].

Since the foregoing account of the moulting of the Lobster was written,
I have dredged a specimen of the common shore-crab (_Carcinus maenas_),
in the act of casting its shell. This little crustacean had taken
refuge, no doubt for the safe and secret performance of sloughing in
a forest of _Zostera_, on one of the mud banks in Poole Harbour, and
while scraping these weeds with a keer-drag it fortunately fell into my
net. It shows how the Brachyura leave their old shells by the horizontal
splitting away of the carapace from the other portions of the shell--the
carapace itself remaining entire; and it also shows (and this was my
principal object in exhibiting the specimen) the enormous amount of
increase of size upon emerging from the shell, and the rapidity with
which that increase takes place. The animal, as now seen, is in exactly
the same state as when taken out of the water, and its bulk is probably
some four times larger than the area of the shell in which it had been
encased only a few minutes before. I retained the Crab in connexion with
its old shell, and prevented its further escape by wrapping it in paper,
so that it could not move its limbs. I thought such a specimen would
be telling and illustrative, and that the old shell, being in contact
with the new, would afford facilities for contrast. In this condition
the Crab died, and, being out of water some time, it became dry, and
the soft new shell collapsed and bulged in; but, upon placing the dead
Crab in sea-water, the soft shell very speedily imbibed sufficient
fluid to distend it to its previous dimensions. This of course was
simply the effect of endosmosis. Mr. Couch, in describing the moulting
of the common Edible Crab (_Cancer Pagurus_), speaks of its _drinking_
large quantities of water, and _thus_ becoming distended; but I rather
think that the distension takes place by endosmosis, even during
life. There are two circumstances which militate against Mr. Couch's
opinion:--first, the rapidity with which the distension occurred in the
Crab I have just exhibited, while still in the act of moulting; and
secondly, that after death the same distension occurred when the Crab
was immersed in sea-water; in which case it could only be by endosmosis.
Indeed to me it seems very probable that this very endosmosis, when the
water once comes in contact with the new, uncalcified shell, may, by
distending it, be the main agent in the breaking open and dissevering of
the elements of the old shell.

    [9] The suspicion above expressed has been fully confirmed by
    observations made by Mr. J. J. Bennett, the Secretary of the
    Linnean Society. Mr. Bennett informs me that, in an aquarium in
    his possession, an _Astacus fluviatilis_ has twice cast its shell,
    and the process of moulting was on each occasion accomplished
    without any splitting of the shell at the joints of the claws.

       *       *       *       *       *




On the Shell-bearing Mollusca, particularly with regard to Structure
and Form. By ROBERT GARNER, Esq., F.L.S.

[Abstract of a Paper read before the Society.]


The author commences the paper, of which the following is the substance,
with some general observations on the morphology of animals. He thinks
that the idea of an ascending and successive scale or chain of creation
is, in the main, correct, when the great classes, and not species or
genera, are made the links,--the disturbing or modifying influences
being due to modes of life, food, habitat, &c., and causing a different
(say the quinary) distribution. He is an advocate, too, for the doctrine
of one fundamental plan of organization, and thinks that, in the
zoophyte, there is a real union of both the animal and vegetable
_nisus_.

The great divisions of this chain, the _radiate_, _articulate_,
_molluscous_, and _vertebrate_, constitute an ascending series; the
links of the chain, so to speak, being in each case, for such an
extent, of a particular pattern; but, nevertheless, one of the highest
mollusks may surpass in organization one of the lowest fishes, or an
articulate creature a mollusk. The author considers such great divisions
of animals, as well as minor ones--the gasteropodous mollusks, for
instance--as realities, and not mere abstractions; and that they are
independent of the circumstances of food, habitat, locomotion, &c.,
just referred to. So great, however, are these disturbing influences,
that they often produce an extraordinary external resemblance or
pseudo-analogy between animals of a very different nature, as between
a _Chiton_ and an _Oniscus_, and they are connected intimately with,
though not the cause of, what we call specific or generic distinctions.
Aerial life, in contradistinction to aquatic, raises much the character
of the locomotive organs; yet this is subordinate to type: hence the
creeping Mollusk appears to have commonly a higher organization than the
flying Insect.

The cartilages of _Sepia_ have a true resemblance to those of a Skate,
and the Cirrhipede truly connects the Mollusk with the Crustacean.
The author regards _Dentalium_ as a gasteropod, differing in this
respect from Lacaze-Duthiers, whose beautiful paper, however, renders
it supererogatory to say anything more on this animal, except that
the author believes that the presence of the spiniferous tongue, of a
proboscis, and the nature of the food, are favourable to his view: he
also takes the feathery tufts to be the branchiae.

The anatomy of _Aspergillum_ is similar to that of _Pholas_; its mantle,
however, is all but closed in front, and ends in an obliquely-set
muscular disk, applied to the internal surface of the rose of the
so-called _arrosoir_, the openings of this part of the shell giving exit
to certain processes and fimbriae of the fleshy disk,--a narrow slit
being also left in both the muscular and shelly disks for the exsertion
of the small, compressed and curved foot. The animal is enveloped
within the shell by a rather horny, general membrane.

The author touches upon the anatomy of some other genera of
Lamellibranchiata. _Solemya_ has its firm, horny, dark cuticle doubled
inwards from the valves over the tubular mantle; behind, it has an anal
opening, and a second fringed branchial slit lower down: the branchiae
and tentacles are single on each side, the former being remarkably
feather-like. The foot is similar to that of the Solens, but crenate
round its anterior disk. _Cyrenoidea_ has the mantle closed below, but
with two openings behind, the upper one with a semicircular internal
fringe, incomplete above; a callous rim and fringe surround the mantle,
which has also a third opening for the long, compressed, bent, and
blunt foot. This last has a remarkable crystalline body, directed from
the stomach to the pedal pore, apparently, as in _Cardium_, subserving
by its elasticity to the extension of the foot, and consequently to
locomotion; at any rate, it is not a sexual distinction. The external
branchiae are short, and the upper or internal branchial cavity does
not communicate with the lower one. The renal organ opens near the
branchial nerve, and the ovary at the base of the abdominal mass.
_Trigonia_ is remarkable for its beautifully fringed, open mantle,
its pectinated pits for the secretion of the teeth, and the large
scythe-shaped foot, trenchant before and peaked behind, and having a
fringed disk. _Vulsella_ is allied to the Oyster, but more so to the
Pectens, having a small cylindrical grooved foot and appended visceral
mass, but no byssus; the rectum perforates the heart, and has a tentacle
above its opening. _Perna_ has a similar foot, and a very bulky byssus,
with a large muscle attached to their base; the lips resemble those
of the Oyster. The anatomy of _Crania_ is little different from that
of _Orbicula_, as described by Owen,--the beautiful arms folded in
several coils, with a simple mouth at their base, the stomach and short
intestinal canal surrounded by the liver and hearts, and terminating
by a lateral bend; the ovaries ramifying in the mantle; the adductor
muscles being four in number, with some bands to the mantle; and on
the latter, glandular markings corresponding with the microscopic
sculpture of the shell. With respect to _Anomia_, the author has again
been anticipated by Lacaze-Duthiers, though he has already given, in
another paper, most of its anatomy and morphology: he would simply call
attention to its very long and curious crystalline stilette, unconnected
with the minute foot.

With respect to that _quaestio vexata_, the sexes of the
Lamellibranchiata, he observes that any number of individuals of
_Cyclas_ may be examined, and young fry will be found in the branchial
laminae in all; that all Oysters have ova, and also all individuals of
_Pecten maximus_, the subpedal mass being visibly composed of an ovary
and a testis. He is obliged to believe that one species of British
_Anodon_ is universally oviferous. But the common Edible Cockle appears
to have the individuals of different sexes, and the same may be said
with regard to _Mytilus edulis_ and _Patella_.

The spermatozoa in the Cockle are oblong and a little curved, and
torulated, as it were, whilst they are pear-shaped in _Mytilus_; they
are also extremely minute, and their appendages must be very fine, for
with a power magnifying 500 diameters they are scarcely to be seen.

In the shell of a _Patella_, _Emarginula_, or _Haliotis_, we have the
two conjoined valves of a lamellibranchiate mollusk; and through such
forms as _Calyptraea_, _Hipponyx_, _Navicella_, and _Nerita_, we arrive
at the ordinary form of the gasteropod with its operculum.

Then follows a disquisition on the progressive tendency to a spiral
geometry in these animals, due to a varying plan of conformation,
and not to the force of the heart, there being generally an atrophy
of the left side of the body. In _Nautilus_ and _Argonauta_, the
shell and mantle are reversed in position to what they are in the
Gasteropods, whilst _Sepia_ and _Hyalaea_ agree rather with the latter.
The symmetrical shell of the lower Gasteropods undergoes a lateral
torsion in the higher, spiral forms, to become again symmetrical in
the Cephalopoda. The branchiae in _Patella_ retain a position analogous
to that of the same organs in the Lamellibranchiata; in some Chitons
they have a tendency to retract towards the anus, as in _Doris_; in
_Fissurella_ they waste at the sides and become developed above the
neck, as in the spiral Gasteropods; but in them, the right branchia,
and right side of the mantle are principally developed. From this
torsion arises the form and spire of the shell. In _Aplysia_, where
the branchial fissure is far back and to the right side, the right
respiratory nerve preserves a superior position, and passes backwards to
form its ganglion at the front of the branchial opening; the left, on
the contrary, passes under the oesophagus to form a second ganglion,
not mentioned by Cuvier, behind the first. In the more spiral Gasteropod
the torsion is greater; the right nerve, for instance, mounts upwards
over the digestive canal to form its ganglion quite in the left flank,
whilst the left goes below the digestive canal to attain the right
flank. In _Sepia_ the branchiae are again symmetrical and abdominal.

The shell of the young _Sepia_ is composed of distant plates, only
connected by minute transversely striated laminae or flattened tubes,
producing by their insertion a beautiful appearance of sinuous lines,
very like those of a Baculite or Ammonite; and the spongy part of the
shell, so constituted, is probably filled with air from the cavity of
the body situated immediately in front, the intervening membrane having
a peculiar structure. This cavity of the body exists in much lower
mollusks; air being apparently secreted in it, to lighten the animal.

The author thinks that, in considering the anatomy and form of the
body of the Gasteropoda, about ten species may be taken as types of
corresponding families.

1. PATELLA _and its congeners_.--He claims to have been one of the
first to show the termination of the oviducts and renal organs between
the processes of the branchiae in the Chitons. As they are commonly
phytivorous, the intestine is often very long and disposed in large
coils, in double apposition; the buccal apparatus is very remarkable.
_Chitonellus_ differs but slightly from _Chiton_, the central elements
of its tongue, however, being little developed, though having the same
tessellated basement membrane. The tongue of _Emarginula_ differs much
from that of _Patella_, having an immense number of serrated side-hooks
and a dilated middle portion.

2. CALYPTRAEA, _&c._--The mollusks of this division have often
supranuchal branchiae, as have some of the last; the sexes also are
frequently separate, rendering copulation necessary; and they are
sometimes partially spiral, with a tendency to form an operculum.
However, the little _Ancylus fluviatilis_ appears to be what is commonly
called hermaphrodite, with a branchial lamina on the left side, together
with the heart and openings of the genital organs; the stomach has a
caecum, and the penis a long filiform appendage; the female parts opening
near the rectum and behind the male organs. It must respire by water
rather than by air, for, in a rapid stream, the stones at the bottom
are covered with _Ancyli_ (upon which also its round oothecae, each
containing four or five ova, are deposited), and it appears impossible
for them to get to the surface to breathe. On the contrary, the
lake-_Ancylus_, though the margin of its mantle is ciliated, may perhaps
come to the surface, ascending the stalks of the Water Persicaria, on
which it is mostly found, and on which its oothecae are deposited. When
the dark cuticle of this last minute creature is removed, its organs
may be seen to be reversely disposed to those of the larger species, the
heart being placed to the right, before the apex of the shell, and the
rectum also on the same side.

3. DORIS, _&c._--The little _Doris aspera_ swims, back downwards,
on the surface of a glass of sea-water, copulates, and deposits its
semicircular oothecae. The brain of the common Lemon Doris is of a fine
orange colour, enveloped in a glandular matter, and is constituted by
a complicated assemblage of ganglia: there are acoustic sacs and dark
ocular spots upon it. There are six ganglia on the buccal mass, and
about six or eight minute ones on the stomach. The anal sac appears
to be a purple- or ink-bag; and the so-called matrix is composed of a
peculiar substance, swelling enormously in water, of which it renders
a large quantity viscid, and being also coagulable by alcohol and
bichloride of mercury, but not by heat. Spermatozoa were found in the
genital vesicle, as well as in the epididymis and its caecum. The spines
of the lingual plate are uniform, and in number about 10,000.

4. APLYSIA, _&c._--_Aplysia_ has been before alluded to. Cuvier, in
his generally beautiful drawings, has scarcely done justice to (5)
_Ianthina_, nor to its beautiful float and ootheca; it is peculiar
for its fins, and the disk at the back of the foot. With respect to
_Magilus_, it should be removed from the (6) Tubulibranchiata, its
animal being a _Purpura_ in structure, with a bent horny operculum, and
a very long linear appendage on the right side of the head, leading to
the supposition that the animals are of different sexes, though there
seem to be difficulties in the way of sexual congress. In the specimen
examined, the spire of the shell was not solidified; the animal had a
short proboscis, with rather bent subulate feelers, and eyes on the
outside; it had also a rich purple secretion near the rectum on the
right side.

7. TROCHUS, _&c._--Some of the species of _Trochus_ surpass even
_Emarginula_ in the beauty of their lingual apparatus. The renal
organ opens into the bottom of the branchial cavity, contrary to its
disposition in _Helix_ and _Lymnaeus_, where its exit is near the
respiratory orifice. In _Planorbis_, that part of the respiratory cavity
receiving the excretions seems separated by an imperfect valve from the
right portion. With respect to the secretion of this organ, it consists,
in both Gasteropoda and Lamellibranchiata, of numerous pellucid globular
bodies, containing opaque earthy nuclei or granules, and presenting
different appearances in _Anodon_ (for instance), _Cyclostoma_,
_Buccinum_, and _Helix_. When these bodies are incinerated, lime is
left, which in some cases appears to have been combined with oxalic
acid. The little _Nerita litoralis_ presents the structure of the
Turbonidae very prettily and in small compass, particularly in the very
long spiral tongue. _Delphinula_ has the fringed mantle and sides and
very wonderfully armed tongue of the other Trochidae. _Melania_ is of
similar organization to our well-known _Paludina_, the stomach compound,
the mantle and bilobed head fringed, and the latter marbled like that of
_Paludina_. _Ampullaria_ appears to be truly amphibious.

8. BUCCINUM, _&c._--_Natica_ presents much the same structure as the
common _Buccinum_, but has a muscular disk anterior to the mouth,--a
disposition, with some variations however, found in other mollusks. The
first and second stomachs are at a distance from each other, the tongue
is little developed, and the branchiae (often single in the Turbonidae)
two in number. _Purpura_ also differs but little from _Buccinum_.
_Ovula_ is a less attainable mollusk: the foot is long and rather
narrow, and subventral rather than subtrachelian, with a sinuosity on
the right of the neck, where also is a short hooked penis in the male,
receiving a vas deferens from near the rectum behind; there is a large
and small branchia, and the reflected portion of the mantle is covered
with tubercles and tentacles,--no doubt a fine garnish in the living
animal; the mouth has a muzzle, and there are small eyes on the external
sides of the curved, awl-shaped tentacles; the elements of the tongue
are beautifully toothed and serrated.

9. LYMNAEUS, _&c._--Of the air-breathing aquatic and (10) terrestrial
gasteropods the most interesting particulars are their generative
organs, which the author proposes to re-examine. The brain of _Helix
aspersa_ is composed internally of pyriform or oval ganglionic vesicles,
each giving origin to one or more nervous fibres. The acoustic sacs
are similar to those of _Doris_. The nerves from the upper part of the
ring are enveloped in a darkish neurilema, and comprehend no doubt
olfactory, optic, and tactile twigs; there being the buccal ganglia for
taste, and the acoustic sacs for hearing; the twigs, however, forming
the buccal or pharyngeal ganglia have a broad double root on each side,
near the origin of the above three nerves. The lower part of the brain
is very analogous to that of _Sepia_, giving off nerves to the foot,
and external and internal respiratory ones to the mantle, respiratory
opening, branchiae, &c. _Lymnaeus_ has the cephalic ring formed by about
twelve ganglia, exclusive of two large and two minute ones on the buccal
mass. The upper portion of the ring has ganglionic swellings, but in
other respects the nerves are as in _Helix_. Its lower portion consists
of two pedal nerves, and has the acoustic spot and a minute ganglion
upon it; behind, this lower portion consists of five ganglia connected
with both the anterior and upper swellings by a cord, but separated from
the former by the aorta, as usual, and giving nerves to the flanks,
pulmonary orifices and sac, heart, stomach, and viscera. The lower
ganglia are bright yellow.

With respect to the Pteropoda, the branchiae in _Hyalaea_ exist as a
delicate membrane under the swollen part of the shell, in structure
much like the same part in the Ascidians, the inlet being through the
anterior opening of the mantle. There are eyes at the fold of the
mantle behind, and two small tentacles above the mouth; the heart and
rectum being on the left side, and the generative opening at the base
of the right ala. _Cleodora_ is a very beautiful creature, with the
same disposition and structure of viscera; brain-spots but no eyes
were visible; the mantle had beautiful muscular bands; the branchiae as
above; the buccal apparatus is imperfect in both. _Cleodora_ has similar
membranous expansions with _Hyalaea_, and also a sort of triangular lip.

_Argonauta_ has a lachrymal pore before and beneath the eye. The
beautiful and obvious respiratory mechanism in the Cephalopoda needs
not to be described. There is a large sac behind the viscera of the
Argonaut, which opens on each side; it is perhaps of some hydrostatic
use. There are at least three pairs of salivary glands, of which four
open on the floor of the mouth, and two or three at the commencement
of the gullet. Several small shells of Pteropoda and fragments of
Cephalopods were found in the stomach, on which was observed the large
nervous ganglion found in all these, as well as in lower mollusks.
The branchial nerves have each two ganglia, of which the last at the
root of the branchiae is rounder than the other; the branchial hearts
have processes as in _Sepia_. In _Sepia_ two openings lead from the
respiratory sac into the cavity containing the venae cavae and their
secreting appendages often imbued with glittering crystalline particles,
and from the above cavities a wider opening on each side leads into
a second sac further back, situated in front of the shell. There are
auditory sacs in the Argonaut. The oviducts have separate openings, but
originate together. Both _Sepia_ and _Argonauta_ are infested with a
subcutaneous filiform entozoon, hooked anteriorly and rolled up spirally
in the former. _Loligo media_ and _Sepiola_ have but one oviduct, and
the two large, glandular, laminated organs, opening at their summits,
are wanting in _Argonauta_ and _Octopus_. In _Sepiola_ one would almost
think that copulation takes place, for the author has taken what he
supposes to be the capsules of Needham, with dilated oval ends, tubular
and bent pedicles or processes, enclosed elastic filaments, and adhering
zoosperms, from the oviducts of the female: he has made the same
observation also in _Sepia_. The latter has very similar male organs
to _Octopus_, as described by Cuvier. In the embryo _Sepia_, the yelk
enters below the mouth and opens into the upper stomach, but the beak
of the animal also appears to be inserted into it behind. The vitellus
in reality therefore enters by the foot, as it does in _Bulimus_, and
probably in all Bivalves.

       *       *       *       *       *




On the Linnean Manuscript of the 'Museum Ulricae.'

By SYLVANUS HANLEY, Esq., F.L.S.

[Read Dec. 3, 1858.]


Not the least important result of the investigations of the Committee
appointed by the Linnean Society to examine the condition of the
collections and manuscripts of Linnaeus, was the rediscovery of a written
copy of the 'Museum Ulricae.' The volume was manifestly, from internal
evidence, a legible transcript of the original manuscript of that
work, with alterations and interpolations in the peculiar handwriting
of the author. It was, indubitably, the unpublished catalogue so
often mentioned in the tenth edition of the 'Systema,' and contains
descriptions of certain species alluded to as defined, yet, strangely
enough, omitted in the printed edition. It is worthy of notice for
many reasons: it corrects the frequent misprints; explains the many
fallacious allusions to preceding species, their sequence being very
different; it exhibits those early synonyms, which, culled from
comparison with the actually described specimens, had been eventually
supplanted by supposed better representations; above all, it imparts to
us those original headings, or diagnoses (condensed from the subsequent
details), which had been suppressed, of old, in favour of those already
published in the 'Systema.'

This wholesale substitution, adopted by Linnaeus, as a ready method of
avoiding a tedious revision of all the headings, when he absorbed in the
more comprehensive groups of his 'Systema' the members of manuscript
genera he had determined to reject, involved a serious amount of
confusion; for, oftentimes, the species of the two works, although
designated by the same appellations, were totally distinct; and the
combination of the diagnosis of the one with the details of the other
displayed an array of features not known to be associated in any object
in nature.

The generic arrangement exhibited in the manuscript differs essentially
from that which appeared in the final edition of his 'Systema Naturae.'
As a whole, it is decidedly inferior, yet it segregates certain natural
groups, such as _Lyra_ and _Cassida_, the value of which have been
acknowledged by all modern naturalists. The following list and sequence
of the genera comprised in it, cannot, indeed, be regarded as an
entire system, for certain groups, viz., _Chiton_, _Lepas_, _Teredo_,
_Sabella_, and the typical forms of _Mya_, _Mactra_, and _Anomia_, were
not at that period represented in the Museum; but it is not devoid of
interest, since it manifests a transitional stage in the progressive
advance to that matured scheme which was finally elaborated in the pages
of his revised 'Systema.'

  Dentalium.
  Patella.
  Nerita.
  Helix.
  Turbo.
  Trochus.
    Turricula.
  Buccinum.
    Lyra.
    Morion.
  Conus.
  Voluta.
    Strombus (not that of the 'Systema').
  Harpago (=Strombus).
  Murex.
    Cassida.
  Cypraea.
  Bulla.
  Haliotis.
  Nautilus.
  Cymbium (=Argonauta).
  Spondylus.
  Ostrea.
    Pecten.
  Arca.
  Pinna.
  Mytilus.
  Solen.
  Tellina.
    Chama (not that of the 'Systema').
  Cunnus (=Venus).
    Pholas (not that of the 'Systema').
  Trunculus (=Donax).
  Bucardium (=Cardium).

Besides the four genera (_Chiton_, _Lepas_, _Teredo_, _Sabella_) that
were excluded from this catalogue, either from the absence of specimens,
or from mistrust of their being veritable Testacea, six of the
remaining 32, namely, _Pholas_, _Mya_, _Mactra_, _Chama_, _Anomia_, and
_Serpula_, were likewise omitted, not being yet eliminated from _Solen_,
_Bucardium_, _Spondylus_, _Ostrea_, and _Dentalium_. To counterbalance
these, we find no less than eight subsequently abandoned groupings:

_Turricula_ (an undefined amalgam of the long-spired species of
_Buccinum_, _Murex_, and _Strombus_).

_Lyra_ (the _Harpa_ and _Purpura_ of the Lamarckian school).

_Morion_ (an unnatural compound of _Eburna_, _Auricula_ proper,
_Pythia_, _&c._).

_Strombus_ (a combination of the immature members of the received genus
with _Pyrula_, _Fasciolaria_, and other allied forms).

_Cassida_ (nearly the modern _Cassis_).

_Pecten_ (equal to _Lima_ and _Pecten_).

_Chama_ (the _Tapes_ of recent conchologists).

_Pholas_ (chiefly composed of _Artemis_ and _Lucina_).

It may be remarked, moreover, that the simple univalves commence, and
the bivalves close the series; the exact converse of the order in which
they are marshalled in the two principal editions of the 'Systema
Naturae.'

I feel assured, after a careful study of the manuscript, that the names
eventually allotted to the shells of the 'Museum' did not result from a
careful comparison of the royal specimens with the typical examples in
the private collection of our author, but were attached to the species,
either from the identity of the written and printed synonymy, or from
the general accordance of their described features with the meagre
characteristics enumerated in the prior publication.

The erased nomenclature of the species, however, was very dissimilar,
and was scrupulously based upon a supposed identity of the specimens
with those delineated by Rumphius, Klein, and d'Argenville. Assuredly
at that period of his career, our author entertained the same profound
respect for the laws of priority which is professed by all modern
naturalists; and I hesitate not to affirm that, from the crude and
inharmonious theories of his predecessors, he eliminated a system of
Conchology that was better suited to the requirements of the age he
lived in than any more elaborate arrangement would have been. For
simplicity attracts the student, whom a more complex (even if more
natural) method would repel; and for the collection of an adequate mass
of materials wherewith, eventually, to build up a more symmetrical and
widely-based structure, a multitude of comparatively unskilled labourers
is more efficacious than a small knot of the most erudite architects.

Before inviting the attention of my readers to the original headings of
the 'Museum Ulricae,' and to my brief account of the variations in the
written copy from the text of the printed version, I must premise, that
it has not been my practice invariably to notice, in the summary, such
trifling differences of construction as the preferential use of the
ablative for the nominative case, where the verbal change involved no
alteration of the precise meaning.


MUSEUM LUDOVICAE ULRICAE REGINAE.

CONCHYLIA.

CHITON, LEPAS.

Nothing relating to these two genera was found in the copy.


PHOLAS.

The _Pholas_ of the manuscript is perfectly dissimilar to that of the
'Systema.' Our author had evidently, when he first wrote the 'Museum
Ulricae,' not appreciated the remarkably striking characteristics of this
group, having located the only species he then knew (for _P. candidus_
seems a subsequent discovery) with the _Solens_.

P. CANDIDUS. Not mentioned in the manuscript.

P. CRISPATUS. _Sol._ ovatus, obtusissimus, cardinis dente depresso
rotundato.

The Appendix to Lister was not cited; "Habitat in Anglia, Suecia," was
appended to the description, which in many respects was inferior to the
published one. The account of the hinge was merely "Cardo dente dilatato
rotundato extus excavato."


MYA.

The three incongruous forms assorted as _Myae_ were not so united in the
MS.; the second being very properly placed with the _Mussels_, the other
two ascribed to _Solen_.

M. LUTRARIA. _Sol._ ovali-oblongus, cardine laterali dilatato
semiorbiculato.

In lieu of the reference to Lister (whose work does not appear to have
been consulted by our author at the period when this portion of his
manuscript was written), plate 45, figure N, of Rumphius was quoted as
illustrative. The published account of the hinge is much more complete
than the written one, which was apparently drawn up from a worn
specimen; it ran as follows: "Cardo extus vix gibbus, intus constans
laminis 2 semiorbiculatis concavis introrsum spectantibus."

By a slip of the pen, in my "Ipsa Linnaei Conchylia," I had termed
Brown's figure of the Linnean _Mya lutraria_, _L. oblonga_, instead of
_L. elliptica_.

M. PERNA. _Myt._ laevis, cardine terminali unidentato.

The intended name was _M. Magellanicus_.

M. VULSELLA. _Sol._ oblongus, linguaeformis, cardine terminali dilatato
semiorbiculato.

"Pinna linguaformis subfalcata" was written after the reference to
the 'Museum Tessinianum;' hence it seems that Linnaeus did not himself
consider that he had used the binomial method in that work, or he would
have quoted it as _P. lingulata_.

"Rumph. 148. t. 46. f. A," and "Gualt. t. 90. f. H," were the
unpublished synonyms.


SOLEN.

Testa valvulis utrinque hiantibus. Cardo dente unico inflexo recurvo.

The _Mya lutraria_, _M. vulsella_, and _Pholas crispatus_ were
originally included in this genus.

S. VAGINA. _S._ linearis rectus, cardinibus unidentatis.

"Habitat in Indiae littoribus arenosis: in mari Rubro (_Hasselquist_)"
was the recorded locality in the MS., where the European shell
delineated by Gualtieri was not then included: "Klein, 163. t. 11. f.
65" (a copy from the cited figure of Rumphius) was its substitute.

S. SILIQUA. _S._ linearis rectus, cardine altero bidentato.

The wretched drawings of Argenville were not quoted; but "Bonan. 2. f.
56" (error for 57), "Plane. t. 3. f. 6," and "List. Ang. 192. t. 5. f.
37," were cited instead.

S. ENSIS. _S._ linearis subarcuatus, cardine altero bidentato.

The final remark was not in the MS.

S. CULTELLUS. _S._ ovali-oblongus curvatus.

"Habitat in Amboinae littoribus arenosis" is an addition of the MS. The
intended name (derived from Rumphius) was _cultriformis_.

S. RADIATUS. _S._ ovalis, cardinis costa tereti.

"Habitat in littoribus arenosis Xulii(?) Amboinae" is an addition to
the published account. The intended specific name was _violaceus_, an
appellation bestowed upon it by Rumphius: "_solida_" was an emendation.

S. STRIGILATUS. _S._ ovalis, oblique striatus.

"Bonan. 2. f. 76" (error for 77) was an unpublished synonym.

S. ANATINUS. _S._ ovatus membranaceus, costa falcata.

_Rostrum anatis_ was the intended name.


TELLINA.

Testa altero latere inflexa. Cardo dentibus aliquot, raro lateralibus.

T. GARGADIA. _T._ antice rugosa, rima dentata.

The absurd "marginis posticum latus remotum" was a misprint for (dens)
"marginis posticus, latus, remotus."

T. LINGUA-FELIS. _T._ subovata scabra.

"Klein, t. 11. f. 62" (cited in the 'Systema'), and "d'Arg. t. 25.
f.G" (the description of which suits better than the drawing) are the
additions of the MS.: "sesquilatiore" was the printed emendation of
"latiore."

T. VIRGATA. _T._ ovata, striis transversis retrorsum imbricatis,
dentibus lateralibus.

The erroneous reference to d'Argenville was not present: "Klein, 158.
Tellina virgata Rumphii" had been added by Linnaeus. A very large portion
of the printed account is wanting in the MS., to wit--"aequales. Intus
radiis obsolete incarnatis picta." "Labris rugosis et scabris," "hymene
tectis. Anus est rima concava," "primores," "transversi cum cavitate pro
oppositis dentibus," "longitudinalem." The "retrorsum" was originally
"sursum"; "dextrum" was "sinistram"; "Tertius dens" was "Altera testa."

T. GARI. _T._ ovalis, striis transversis retrorsum imbricatis, dentibus
lateralibus nullis.

The G in the reference to Rumphius, and the F in the reference to
d'Argenville were misprints for D and I, and were so published in the
'Systema:' the "primoribus" was an emendation.

T. ALBIDA. _T._ ovalis, laevis, nymphis prominulis. "Primores" was an
emendation. The species was unnamed.

T. FOLIACEA. _T._ antice scabra, rima serrata.

The Rumphian name "folium" was the intended appellation: "Klein, 162. t.
11. f. 64" was cited, as in the 'Systema': "aciatum" was the reading for
the printed "acutum."

T. PLANATA. _T._ ovata plana, transversim striata, marginibus acutis.

The erroneous reference to Gualtieri (whose figure C looks more like the
species than his G) is not to be found in the manuscript. The species
was not named.

T. LAEVIGATA. _T._ ovata laevis, nymphis intractis.

The figure of _T. chloroleuca_ in Rumphius was not quoted, neither was
the hence-derived appellation attached: the "radiato" and "primoribus"
were also subsequent additions.

T. RADIATA. _T._ ovali-oblonga, longitudinaliter substriata, sutura
postica canaliculata. "Obsoletis" and "primores" were subsequent
emendations.

T. ROSTRATA. _T._ oblonga, antice angulato-rostrata.

The _T. rostrata_ of the final edition of the 'Systema' was assuredly
the _T. Spengleri_, and with that shell solely will the printed
account in the 'Museum Ulricae' accord. But the five earlier lines of
the description (save "et albus"), and the detailed dentition (except
"fossula distinctus"), with the varieties _a_, _b_, _g_, and the same
synonyms as in the tenth edition of the 'Systema,' appear in the MS.
with the name _T. petasunculus_ attached. Whether designedly or not,
there was a pictorial definition of _T. vulsella_ in the earlier
'Systema;' and if an author be not allowed to amend his description, _T.
vulsella_ is better entitled than _T. Spengleri_ to the name _rostrata_.
"Margo exterior parum repandum est" was written in the MS.

T. REMIES. _T._ rugosa, suborbiculata.

The expressions "hians," "primores," "remoti," and the last five words
of the details were absent; "utrinque" followed "duo": "non" in place of
"vix" was the earlier reading.

T. SCOBINATA. _T._ scabra orbiculata.

"Primores," and "in altera testa profunda fossula distinctus," were not
in the copy.


CARDIUM.

Cardo dentibus baseos binis, marginis solitariis remotis acutis. Valvulae
gibbae, hinc figura cordis.

BUCARDIUM was the epithet applied in the written copy to the members of
this genus, to which the _Solen bullatus_ of the 'Systema' was correctly
referred. _Mactra_ had not then been separated.

C. COSTATUM. _Buc._ sulcis costis elevatis membranaceis.

The original description has been somewhat enlarged in the press, by the
addition of "brevissimis," "et extrorsum flexis," "fossula distinctus;
at vero ille sub anno quasi duplex"; "minus vero ad latera sulcata,"
moreover, was simply "ad alterum latus": the only expression omitted in
printing was "reflexus," which followed "Anus margine."

C. CARDISSA. _Buc._ compressum, valvis carinatis, natibus contiguis.

"Colum. Aqu. 19. t. 16" (cited also in the 'Systema') was quoted in the
MS. from which the "vix," "subcontigui," "remotus, validus, fossula
distinctus," were absent. The "Rima" was termed "subrotunda" instead of
"cordata."

C. HEMICARDIUM. _Buc._ subquadrilaterum: valvulis carinatis, umbonibus
distantibus.

"Fasciis" was a misprint for the original "facies": "sulcis convexis"
was written "sulcis excavato-rugosis." There was no specific
appellation.

C. MEDIUM. _Buc._ subcordatum subangulatum; valvulis angulatis sulcatis
laevibus.

The prefatory remarks were the only portion of the printed description
to be found in the MS. The species was not named, but was quoted in the
'Systema' before the publication of its details.

C. ACULEATUM (misprinted "muricatum"). _Buc._ subcordatum, sulcis
convexis, linea cava exaratis, versus apicem dentatis.

The intended name was _verum_.

C. ECHINATUM. _Buc._ subcordatum, sulcis acutis exaratis linea elevata
ciliata aculeis inflexis plurimis.

"List. Ang. 188. t. 5. f. 33, Pectunculus echinatus," "Bonan. 2. t. 90,"
"Gesu. Aq. 131, 132," "Faun. Suec. 1339," "Rondel. Aq. 22," were the
original synonyms, to which our author had subsequently added "Klein,
139. t. 10. f. 40." "Alba" followed "gibba"; "parum antrorsum inflexis"
was the reading for the printed "erectis subulatis"; "extrorsum" for
the "uti extus": "brevioribus. Anus laevis, sutura simplici prominula,"
"recurvi," "fossula distinctus," were emendations.

C. TUBERCULATUM. _Buc._ subcordatum, sulcis obtusis nodosis transversim
striatis.

"Gualt. t. 71. f. M." was a correct additional synonym.

C. ISOCARDIA. _Buc._ cordatum, sulcis imbricatis squamis fornicatis.

"Klein, 138. isocardia fragum" had been interpolated by Linnaeus; hence
the name, which was not in the original. The "fossula distincti" has
replaced the earlier "validi."

C. FRAGUM. _Buc._ subcordatum subangulatum, sulcis notatis semicirculis
elevatis.

By the addition of "mala" to the erroneously cited figure of Gualtieri,
our author has virtually repudiated it. "Spinosae" followed "Pruni;" the
fallacious "s. rubris" was not present, nor "saepe" either; "anteriore"
stood in the place of "postico," and "postico" in that of "antico." The
descriptions of the "rima" and "anus" have been added: "recurvati" and
"fossula distincti" were amplifications.

C. UNEDO. _Buc._ subcordatum, sulcis lunulis coloratis.

C. MURICATUM. _Buc._ subrotundum sulcatum, lateribus muricatis.

C. MAGNUM. _Buc._ oblongum, sulcis angulatis latere serratis.

I had hoped to have found the 19 a misprint, but the MS. and the printed
copy agree precisely in every particular.

C. FLAVUM. _Buc._ subovatum sulcatum, latere altero scabrum, altero
dentatum.

The redundant "subovata" was not in the copy, where the remark was made
that the species resembled the shell subsequently termed _Chama cor_,
the figure of which (Gualt. t. 71. f. E.) had been cited, but erased in
the MS. The ideal hence derived is a very different shell from the one
supposed identical. No mention is made of lateral teeth: was it then a
veritable _Cardium_?

C. LAEVIGATUM. _Buc._ ovatum, striis laeviusculis longitudinalibus.

I do not consider this (the _B. striatum_ of the MS.) to be identical
with the _C. laevigatum_ of the 'Systema.'

C. SERRATUM. _Buc._ ovale laeve, antice serratum.

"Ovata" stood in the place of the printed "obovata": "curvatus" and
"parvi" were subsequent to the MS.

C. TRISTE. _Buc._ ovatum laeve, rima anoque obsolete striatis.

The 'Museum' was referred to for this shell previously to the
publication of the details. Curious to relate, the species was wholly
omitted in the twelfth edition of the 'Systema.' It was, in all
probability, a _Mactra_, which genus had not been constituted at the
period when the description of _C. triste_ was issued.

C. PECTINATUM. _Buc._ subcordatum, striis hinc longitudinalibus, illine
transversalibus.

The erroneous reference to Gualtieri was not present in the written
copy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mention was made in the 'Systema' of a _Solen bullatus_, for a more
detailed account of which the reader was referred to the 'Museum
Ulricae.' No such species appeared in the published edition; but the
omitted shell (a veritable _Cardium_) was thus described in the
unprinted version:--

BUC. BULLATUM. _B._ subrotundum, antice crenato-hians.

Rump. 143. t. 44. f. N. Pecten bullatus.

Testa subrotunda, inflata, gibba, fragilis, pellucida, substriata,
rufo nebulosa, antice hians, margine serrato. Umbones tumidi, obtusi,
reflexi. Rima minima brevissima. Ani regio obsoleta. Dens cardinis fere
unicus, minimus. Marginales solitarii, remoti, compressi, majores.


DONAX.

TRUNCULUS was the proposed name of this genus, which was thus
characterized:--

Testa compressa, antice obtusissima, retusa. Cardinis dentibus 2,
marginis unicus.

D. SCORTUM was wisely omitted.

D. PUBESCENS. _Trun._ antice spinis ciliatus.

D. RUGOSA. _Trun._ antice rugosus, marginibus crenatis.

The printed "cuneiformis" has replaced the earlier "majuscula"; and
"crenulatis" was originally "undulatis." "Intus subviolacea est" was not
in the written copy.

D. TRUNCULUS. _Trun._ antice laevis, marginibus crenatis.

The reference to Klein was not in the original, but "d'Arg. t. 25.
f. L." was quoted (as in the twelfth edition of the 'Systema'). The
last seven words printed were not in the copy. The intended name was
_gibbus_.

D. CUNEATA. _Trun._ cuneiformis, marginibus integerrimis.

The final remark was not in the copy, where "parva, ovata," preceded
"cuneiformis." The then unpublished details were quoted in the
'Systema.'

D. SCRIPTA. _Trun._ ovatus laevis scriptus.

The erroneous citation of Gualtieri (a misprint for 88. f. Q.) was not
in the copy, and, as the figure represents the _D. trunculus_ in the
page opposite, I suspect was carelessly placed here by the printer, when
our author had inserted it in his revised proof. I suspect this error
often occurred, as for instance in _Tellina planata_ and _radiata_,
where Gualtieri's figure (added during revision) was attached to the
former instead of to the latter. "Margo interne crenulatus," and nearly
the entire account of the teeth, were emendations.

D. MURICATA. _Trun._ ovatus, striis muricatis, margine denticulato.

"Postice solitarii" followed the final "utrinque": "primores" was an
emendation.


VENUS.

This genus (as a whole) was not to be found in the manuscript System.
Its components were distributed into three groups, two of which bore
names that were subsequently allotted to forms very remote from those
therein so designated.

CUNNUS. Testa subrotunda. Rima nymphis instructa. Dentes cardinis 4,
lateralibus divaricatis versus latera. This contained the bulk of the
_Veneres_, all except Nos. 63, 66, and those referred to _Pholas_ and
_Chama_.

PHOLAS. Testa lenticularis. Rima fissa, destituta nymphis. Dentes
cardinis 1 s. 2, marginalis tantum intra anum. _V. Pennsylvanica_,
_incrustata_, _punctata_, _edentula_, _exoleta_, _scripta_, _pectinata_,
_ziczac_ were its constituents.

CHAMA. Testa ovalis cum angulo. Cardo dentibus 4 confertis, quorum
unus in singula valvula bifidus. In this were located _V. literata,
rotundata, decussata_.

V. DIONE. _Cun._ cordatus, antice pubescenti-spinosus.

The same references to Petiver, Olearius, and Lister were present as in
the 'Systema.' The final remark was an addition. The proposed name was
_C. Veneris_.

V. MARICA. _Cun._ subcordatus, decussatim striatus, pube lamellosa.

V. DYSERA. _Cun._ testa subcordata, sulcis transversis reflexis, labiis
concavis incumbentibus.

Neither "Huic rugae, &c.," "laevis," nor the synonym of Lister were in
the original.

V. CHIONE. _Cun._ subovatus, laevis.

The erroneous reference to d'Argenville was not inserted in the MS.,
from which "lanceolatis," likewise, was absent.

V. MACULATA. _Cun._ testa ovato-cordata laevis.

"Lanceolata" and "ovato-oblongus" have been additions. The observation
that it was difficult to distinguish this shell (which was not named
in the MS.) from the following, would mislead one, since the remark
referred to two unpublished species, which it originally preceded.

V. MERETRIX. _Cun._ subcordatus glaber, labris gibbis, nymphis apice
hiantibus.

_C. vulgatus_ was the name originally designed.

V. CASTRENSIS. Cun. suborbiculatus glaber, characteribus scriptus.

V. MEROE. _Cun._ sutura postica hians.

V. FIMBRIATA. _Cun._ subrotundus decussatus rugosus, longitudinaliter
striatus.

D'Argenville was not referred to.

V. RETICULATA. _Cun._ subcordatus, striis crenatis decussatis, ano
cordato.

V. tigerina. Cun. suborbiculatus, striis crenatis decussatis, ano ovato.

The name was an error, having been derived from the "Lingua tigerina" of
Rumphius (his figure G., not H.): _fuliginosus_ was the one originally
intended.

V. PROSTRATA. _Pho._ orbiculata, transverse striata, labiis
scabro-membranaceis.

The unpublished details had been previously referred to in the
'Systema.'

V. PENNSYLVANICA. _Pho._ glabra, rugosa, antice sulco longitudinali.

"Habitat in Pennsylvania," and "subdiaphana," were the unprinted
additions. The "margo interne crenatus," "nates sub-recurvatae," and
"color intus versus marginem violaceus," were not in the copy. The last
character (so utterly inappropriate to the features of _Lucina P._) was,
I suspect, intended for _punctata_ on the page opposite.

V. INCRUSTATA. _Pho._ glaberrima laevissima, punctis excavata.

The details were referred to in the 'Systema' before their publication.

V. PUNCTATA. _Pho._ longitudinaliter sulcata.

The G in the reference to Rumphius was a misprint for the written
D, from which figure ("Chama pectinata") our author had proposed to
borrow the specific name, but subsequently had preferred the published
designation. "Klein, 147. Actinobolos aequilatera" has been added to the
MS. by Linnaeus.

V. EXOLETA. _Pho._ decussatim striata.

The original synonymy and details have been so transmuted in the
press, that it is manifest that the amended (!) species was perfectly
distinct from the shell originally designed. The name of the latter was
_clathrata_, and the declared sculpture was not merely "transversim,"
but "et longitudinaliter" likewise (in place of "striis retrorsis"). The
reference (added by Linnaeus) was not to Gualtieri, but to Lister, 335,
f. 172, and its copy in Klein (t. 10. f. 52), both which would have more
appropriately been assigned to _V. reticulata_. The _V. exoleta_ having
been previously defined in the 'Systema,' this confusion becomes of
little importance.

V. ZICZAC. _Pho._ striis transversis membranaceis erectis.

The number which indicates the position of this species in the 'Museum'
has been subsequently ('Syst.' ed. 12) referred to _V. cancellata_, yet,
judging from the generic appellation (and consequent dentition), it
could scarcely have been that well-known species. The "lentiformi" of
the 'Systema' (ed. 10), where the name _ziczac_ first appeared, forbids
the annexation; but, although the details of the 'Museum' were there
referred to, the obnoxious word was not mentioned in that publication.
The following are the printed emendations (?): "laevis, et quasi excisa,"
"compressa," "variat colore albissimo."

V. PECTINATA. _Pho._ sulcis longitudinalibus nodosis, antice antrorsum
ramosa.

The additional synonym of "Gualt, D. 75, f. A." appears in the MS.,
where "quam reliquae" follows "orbiculata," and in place of "In area
antica" may be read "et a primo sulco." The details there terminate with
the word "lanceolatum," "_Ramosa_" was the intended name.

V. SCRIPTA. _Pho._ striata, postice angulo recto circumscripta.

The incorrect figure of d'Argenville was not indicated.

V. EDENTULA. _Pho._ subgloboso-lenticulata rugosa edentula.

V. LITERATA. _Cha._ transversim striato-ovata.

The earlier reading of confertim was "profunde"; "striis crenulatis
antice et postice," "lanceolata," and "tres s." were absent.

V. ROTUNDATA. _Cha._ transversim striata ovata absque angulo.

The printed additions are "varius in variis," "aut albis," "lanceolata,"
and the final remark. There was no name attached in the MS.

V. DECUSSATA. _Cha._ testa ovata, decussatim striata.

"Saepe" and "minimus" are the sole printed additions.

       *       *       *       *       *

Probably the _V. Phryne_ of the 'Systema' was designed by the following
unpublished description:--

CUN. VENOSUS. C. subcordatus laevis lateribus rugosis. Testa cinerea,
nuce coryli major, gibba, glabra, antice et postice transversim sulcata.
Margo exterius tantum denticulatus, non vero apex externus, aut margines
laterales.

The _V. macrodon_ answers fairly enough to this definition.


SPONDYLUS.

This very natural genus was confused with _Chama_, and thus
characterized:--

Testa imbricata. Cardo e callo gibbo oblique inserto fossula obliqua.

       *       *       *       *       *

S. GAEDEROPUS. _S._ imbricatus auritus, cardine dentato.

"Rumph. t. 48. f. 1," "Gualt. t. 99. f. E. F. G," "Bonan. 2. f. 21,"
"Rondel. c. 40. p. 41," were the additional synonyms of the MS. The "ad
cardinem truncata" was an emendation for the previous "breviore": the
"superiore" a misprint for the written "inferiore": the final remark was
not present.

S. REGIUS. _S._ spinosus sulcatus inauritus cardine dentato.

No name was attached to this species: the previous one had been termed
_Pectinites_.

S. PLICATUS. Not mentioned in the manuscript.


CHAMA.

The members of this genus were included in _Spondylus_, except
_cordiformis_, which was referred to BUCARDIUM.

C. GIGAS. _Sp._ plicatus squamosus, ano hiante crenato.

The species as originally defined was more comprehensive in its details
than when printed; for the restricting "decussatim" had not been added,
and "Gualt. t. 93. f. B." was an additional synonym. The printed
additions were "obsoletis," "Margine reflexo," "exteriore duplicato
longiore," and the final remark. _S. imbricatus_ was the intended name.

C. HIPPOPUS. _Sp._ plicatus muricatus, ano retuso clauso dentato.

"Arg. t. 26. f. H." was an additional synonym of the MS.: the printed 20
should have been 10, as written: "ut in praecedente" was an emendation:
_S. asper_ was the proposed name.

C. LAZARUS. _Sp._ imbricatus.

Seba was not cited: "obliquam" followed "fossam" in the MS.
"Elevatis," "longitudine testae," "productiore," "instar auris" formed
no portion of the early description.

C. ANTIQUATA. _Sp._ subcordatus, sulcis perpendicularibus transversim
striatis.

No name was attached to the original details, which appear to have been
altered ("in aliis minimum cordatum impressum fuscum"), and the synonym
of Bonanni added, in order to comprise that species (_Cardita sulcata_)
which had been pictorially defined in the 'Systema.' "Gibba" was
preceded by "admodum": "obsoletis" was not present. _Cardita bicolor,
var. unicolor_ was probably intended.

C. SEMIORBICULATA. _Sp._ semiorbiculatus compressus, decussate striatus,
rudis.

"Interior" was the earlier reading of "primarius."

C. CORDATA. _Sp._ cordatus, transversim striatus, hinc elongatus,
compressus.

C. OBLONGA. _Sp._ oblongus, antice angulatus, dentibus anticis acutis.

"Unico" (error for "unicus") originally preceded "in altera valvula."

C. CORDIFORMIS. _Buc._ subrotundum laeve, umbonibus recurvatis.

The brief description in the 'Systema' had evidently been copied in the
manuscript by our author himself, who cited Gualt. t. 71. f. E. as the
sole synonym. The specimen had apparently been added to the collection,
subsequently to the drawing up of the first catalogue.


ARCA.

Testa crassa, umbonibus distantibus intus fornicatis. Cardo planus,
masticatus dentibus numerosis minimis aequalibus transversis.

A. TORTUOSA. _A._ oblonga obliqua, valvula altera oblique carinata.

"Nates, &c." and "Cardo, &c." were the printed additions to the earlier
description. The 'Systema' synonyms of Klein (t. 8. f. 16) and Bonanni
(2. f. 128) were present in the manuscript.

A. NOAE. _A._ oblonga angulata hians.

This manuscript furnishes us with the additional synonyms of

"Aldrov. 3. p. 513." and "Sloan. Hist. 2. p. 257. Musculus Matthioli,"
besides the previously published references to Lister (368. n. 208)
and Bonanni (2. t. 32). The formation of the hinge was not, however,
indicated, and the passage commencing with "Nates" has been enlarged
from "Umbones remotissimae, area interjecta concava, ad angulum rectum
striata. Margo exterior in medio hians, apertura barbata."

The intended specific epithet was _A. Noemi_.

A. ANTIQUATA. _A._ testa oblique cordata, transversim sulcata, antice
angulo compresso, rima intra rhombum transversim striata.

The admixture of two species (at the least) in the published edition
resulted from the amalgamation of two earlier descriptions. To the above
diagnosis belonged the printed details with the following important
changes. In place of "extus striata longitudinaliter sulcis crenatis,"
the reading was simply "intus striata longitudinaliter," and in lieu of
"interjecto spatio rhombeo plano," merely "rima patens."

The proposed name for this shell, from a supposition of its identity
with the _Pecten virgineus_ of Rumphius, was _A. virginea_. The other
species which Linnaeus referred to the same numerals of the 'Systema' was
not named, but was thus characterized:--

A. (Sys. n. 144). _A._ cordata, sulcis nodosis, rima decussatim striata.

List. Hist. ... Pecten polyleptoginglymus, &c.

Gualt. t. 87. f. C.

Testa reliquis magis gibba, albido-flavescens, sulcis xxx obtusis,
transversim nodosis: nodis transversis, obtusissimis, imbricatis.
Intus albida. Margo dentibus xxx argutiusculis. Rima sulco rhombeo
circumscripta, disco decussatim vix manifeste striato. Umbones distantes
ad neutrum latus flexi.

A. SENILIS. _A._ oblique cordata, octosulcata, laevis, antice hians, rima
obtusangule striata.

Lister (without numerals!) was referred to in illustration; the early
unimproved account of the beaks and ligamental area ran as follows:
"Umbones distantes, oblique incurvati. Rima hians striata transversim ad
angulos acutos": "et profunde immersis" was an addition.

A. GRANOSA. _A._ subcordata, sulcis muricatis, rima obtusangule striata,
utrinque angulum formante.

The name was evidently borrowed from Rumphius, whose _Pecten granosus_
("143. t. 44. f. K.") was referred to in the manuscript, though neither
quoted in the printed copy nor in the 'Systema' (ed. x.). "Bonan. 2. n.
73," and Lister (without numerals) were also cited.

A. DECUSSATA. _A._ lenticularis, decussatim substriata, apicibus
reflexis.

For a detailed account of this shell, to which no specific name was
attached in the MS., the 'Museum Ulricae' was referred to, previous to
its publication.

A. PALLENS. _A._ lenticulari-subobliqua, decussatim striata, rima brevi.

This was the type referred to in the 'Systema.'

A. PECTUNCULUS. _A._ lenticularis sulcata, decussatim rugosa.

"Arg. t. 27. f. B," and Lister without numerals appended, were the
unpublished synonyms. The expressions "leviter," "exteriore tenui;
sulcata," "in arcum," were not parts of the original copy, which
contained, however, the unprinted paragraph "latere interiore margine
prominente notato." There was no specific name attached to either this
or the next species.

A. GLYCIMERIS. _A._ lentiformis, transversim substriata, rima laevi.

The '_Chama glycimeris Bellonii_' of Lister (t. 247) was an unprinted
synonym.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following suppressed description of an unnamed Ark that was allied
to, if it were not, _fusca_ or _barbata_, was found in the manuscript.
The 'Museum' had been referred to in the synonymy of the latter in the
'Systema,' but the species was not mentioned in the published version.

_Arca_ ovalis, compressiuscula, apicibus subcontiguis.

Testa rudis, ferrugineo-fusca, longitudinaliter striata, striis quasi ex
punctis callosis concatenatis, alternis striis majoribus ovatis, parum
obliqua, minus lateribus gibba, rotunda absque angulis. Margo aequalis,
edentulus. Apices recurvi fere tangunt se invicem. Rima dentibus
minutissimis, antice longius extensa, nec recta.


OSTREA.

The very natural genus _Pecten_ was separated from the unsymmetrical
oysters, with the following definition:--

PECTEN. Testa subrotunda, altera planior, basis transversa, anguli
transversi (auriculae) ad basin. Cardo cavitas conica, striis utrinque 3
longitudinalibus obliquis.

The genus OSTREUM, enlarged by the addition of the true oysters
confounded with the _Mytili_, the _Meleagrinae_, _Aviculae_, and the
_Anomia placenta_, was thus characterized:--

O. MAXIMA. _Pec._ radiis 14 rotundatis longitudinaliter striatis.

In place of Gualtieri, "List. Ang. 184. t. 5. f. 29. Pecten maximus,"
and "Faun. Suec. 1343" were referred to: these synonyms had been added
subsequently to the description.

O. JACOBAEA. _Pec._ radiis 14 angulatis, fornicis longitudinaliter
striatis.

The cited drawing of Gualtieri was not mentioned.

O. ZICZAC. _Pec._ radiis 18 explanatis.

No specific name was attached to this, the preceding, and the next two
species.

O. STRIATULA. _Pec._ radiis 16 obliteratis, transverse
membranaceostriatis, margine integerrimo.

O. MINUTA. _Pec._ radiis 20 convexis.

O. PLEURONECTES. _Pec._ radiis 12 duplicatis, extus laevis.

O. OBLITERATA. _Pec._ radiis 24 duplicatis, extus laevis.

O. RADULA. _Pec._ radiis 6 convexis decussate striatis, margine crenato,
auriculis aequalibus.

O. PLICA. _Pec._ radiis 16 convexis laeviusculis, decussato-striatus.

No specific name was appended to either this, the next, or the two
preceding species.

O. PALLIUM. _Pec._ radiis 12 convexis, striatus, scaber, squamis
imbricatus.

This with the remainder of the _Pectens_ (as far as _flavicans_) formed
a group characterized by "Auricula altera intus ciliato-spinosa."

O. NODOSA. _Pec._ radiis 9 nodoso-vesicularibus.

O. PES-FELIS. _Pec._ radiis 9, laevis, fornice squamis fornicatis.

The printed diagnosis, or heading, was evidently drawn up from a
different shell.

O. PELLUCENS. _Pec._ radiis 9, laevis, fornice squamis
cochleari-hemisphaericis.

No name was attached to this or the next shell.

O. SANGUINEA. _Pec._ radiis 22 scabris, semiauritus.

The reference was not to plate 74 (as printed) of Gualtieri, but to
plate 73. "Purpureus nigro undatus" was written after the indicated
colouring.

O. VARIA. _Pec._ radiis 30 scabris explanatis.

"Et omnia cadem" followed "sanguineae"; "striis compressis echinatis" was
not present; "color pallidior" was in the place of "concolor."

O. PUSIO. _Pec._ radiis 40 filiformibus.

O. GLABRA. _Pec._ radiis 10 laevibus planiusculis, internis striis
elevatis duplicatis.

Gualtieri's rude drawing was not quoted.

O. OPERCULARIS. _Pec._ radiis 20 subrotundis, decussate striato-scaber,
operculo convexiore.

O. GIBBA. _Pec._ radiis 20 glabris, gibbus.

Brown's drawing was not quoted.

O. FLAVICANS. _Pec._ radiis 8 striatis, margine altero rotundato.

As in the 'Systema,' the next two shells, along with this, formed a
group distinguished as having the "Valvulis altero latere magis gibbis."
No names had been appended to this, the three preceding, and the two
following species.

O. FASCIATA. _Pec._ radiis 20, auriculis aequalibus exoletis.

The "gibba" of the borrowed diagnosis was not, it may be observed, in
the original.

O. LIMA. _Pec._ radiis 22, imbricatis squamis, altero margine rotundato,
auriculis obliteratis.

The "gibba" of the borrowed heading was not in the original diagnosis.
The final remark was likewise absent.

O. ISOGNOMON. The entire account of this species was added to the copy
in the Linnean handwriting. "Klein, 128. t. 8. f. 15. Isognomon" and
"Cardo ut ephippo" had been omitted in printing.

O. MALLEUS. _O._ trilobum.

"Transverso ad marginem" was a subsequent addition.

O. FOLIUM. _O._ ovatum, lateribus obtuse plicatum.

Klein's copy (t. 8. f. 22.) of the indicated figure in Rumphius was
cited, in the handwriting of Linnaeus: the "cavitate conica" was an
emendation.

O. EDULE. _O._ subrotundum semiorbiculatum, valvula altera plana
integerrima.

There was no semicolon after "opaca," but a comma after "latiore." The
original sole synonym was the omitted one of "Gualt t. 102. f. B."

O. SEMIAURITUM. _O._ semiauritum ovatum laeve, basi obliqua.

Linnaeus himself had added this species to the earlier catalogue.

O. EPHIPPIUM. _O._ submembranaceum curvum, cardine octosulcato.

In addition to the published _Ostreae_, the following description of the
shell subsequently termed _O. perna_ (Syst. ed. 12.) was found in the
manuscript:--

_O._ rugosum, inaequale, tumidiusculum, cardine octocrenato.

Testa perniformis, obovata, substantia ligni antiqui, tumidiuscula,
superficie obsolete rugosa, inaequali interne livida. Cardo transversus,
margine inflexo, notatus crenis obtusis circiter 8.


ANOMIA.

The single species here mentioned was comprehended in _Ostreum_.

A. PLACENTA. _O._ orbiculatum planum pellucidum.

Reference was made, by a long periphrasis, to plates 225, 226 of
Lister's 'Historiae'; Seba was not quoted: "intra discum testae adnatis"
was absent.


MYTILUS.

Testa opaca, laeviuscula. Cardo nullis dentibus instructus, sed fossula
obliqua intra marginem.

This definition very properly excluded the oysters which had been
erroneously inserted in this genus. Only the _Mytili_ and _Modiolae_ of
Lamarck were left as members; for _margaritiferus_ and _hirundo_ were
transferred to _Ostreum_!!

M. FRONS. _Ost._ acutum plicatum, labio altero scabro.

M. CRISTA-GALLI. _Ost._ acutum, plicatum, labio utroque scabro.

The reading of the MS. was not "secundum marginem insculptus," but
"secundum marginem Mytilus."

M. HYOTIS. _Ost._ subacuto-plicatum imbricatum squamis compressis, labio
utrinque glabro.

M. MARGARITIFERUS. _Ost._ semiauritum, imbricatum tunicis, basi
transversum.

"Bonan. 2. f. 1." was the omitted synonym. The description of the hinge
was not at first inserted.

M. UNGUIS. _M._ subrotundus, longitudinaliter striatus, pellucidus.

This ambiguous species was not named, but placed next to _Ostrea
edulis_. I entertain but little doubt of its being a young _Perna_.

M. LITHOPHAGUS. _M._ cylindricus.

Neither Gualtieri nor d'Argenville was referred to, which confirms
my idea that the species of the 'Museum' (termed _coriaceus_ in the
manuscript) was not the Mediterranean _Lithodomus_.

M. BILOCULARIS. _M._ striatus, cardine fornicato.

M. EXUSTUS. _M._ striatus, dorso angulato.

M. EDULIS. _M._ laevis, subcurvatus, cardine terminali mutico.

The printed synonyms are additions. From the "crassa," and the "absque
denticulo," it is by no means improbable that some large exotic species
was intended. The proposed name was _niger_; and that word originally
formed part of the heading, but had been erased by Linnaeus.

M. UNGULATUS. _M._ laeviusculus, valvis obliquis postice dilatatis,
antice apice.

"Lineis" was "tunicis" in the original. I do not consider that the
details of this species (the _M. rusticus_ of the MS.) pertain, even
generically, to the _ungulatus_ of the 'Systema.'

The large _Mytilus_ represented by Gualtieri was not quoted: the
reference, on the contrary, was to the two _Modiolae_ depicted by
Rumphius ("Rump. 151. t. 46. f. B. C.") and to their Kleinian names
("Klein, 127. Musculus acutus vulgaris, a. b."); and to that genus,
rather than to _Mytilus_, does the account of the suture, and the final
remark, apply.

M. MODIOLUS. _M._ laevis, cardine sublaterali, margine dorsali dilatato.

The erroneous, yet approximate, synonyms of Rumphius and Gualtieri (the
4 H's of whose engraving represent 4 different shells) were not quoted
in the original. The species (for want of a good figure) was not clearly
defined until the twelfth edition of the 'Systema.'

M. VIRIDIS. _M._ laevis membranaceus, cardine terminali.

M. RUBER. _M._ rugosus, valvulis obliquis, postice dilatatis, margine
antico apicem aequante.

The preceding mussel spoken of was not _viridis_, but _ungulatus_. The
reading was not "brevissimo, compresso," but "brevissime compresso."

M. HIRUNDO. _Ost._ valvis bilobis, lobo anteriore angustiore longiore.

"Bonan. 2. f. 57" (error for 58) and "List. 220. f. 55" were quoted.


PINNA.

The definition was not precisely similar in words to that of the
'Systema,' but the sense varied but little. It ran as follows:--

Testa oblonga, membranaceo-fragilis, basi angustata. Cardo nullus, sed
valvis altero latere coadunatis ut una appareat.

P. RUDIS. _P._ rugosa squamis fornicatis per seriem digestis.

The name of this shell, identified (I think wrongly) by our author
with the one he had termed _rudis_ in the 'Systema,' was originally
_fornicata_.

P. NOBILIS. _P._ squamis canaliculato-tubulosis subimbricatis.

P. MURICATA. _P._ striata, squamis concavis ovatis acutis.

"List. Hist. t. 370. no. 215," and "Sloan. Hist. i. p. 254," were
present among the original synonyms.

P. ROTUNDATA. _P._ squamis obsoletis, testae margine rotundato.

P. SACCATA. _P._ nuda saccata erectiuscula.

P. DIGITIFORMIS. _P._ nuda digitiformis incurva.

P. LOBATA. _P._ nuda lobata.

       *       *       *       *       *

In addition to the printed species, an anomalous _Pinna_, which I doubt
not was the _Lingula anatina_, is here described.

P. VIRIDIS. _P._ ovalis, basi compressa.

Generis dubii huc relata, donec certiora determinentur.

Testa utraque ovali-oblonga, viridis, intus magis pallida; quasi
compressa, et fere naviculata, acutior.


ARGONAUTA.

The intended name of this genus was _Cymbium_, the one applied to it by
Gualtieri.

A. ARGO. _Cym._ carina dentata.

"Bonan. 1. f. 13," and "Klein, 3. t. 1. f. 3," were the unprinted
synonyms. The intended specific epithet was _C. papyraceum_.


NAUTILUS.

There was no definition of either this, or of the preceding genus, in
the written catalogue.

N. POMPILIUS. _N._ apertura cordata, anfractibus contiguis.

The unprinted synonyms were "Bonan. 1, f. 1, 2," "Breyn. Polyth. 14,"
"Pet. Amb. t. 3. f. 7," "Pet. Gaz. t. 99. f. D," "Klein, 2. t. 1. f. 1,
2," and "Bellon. Aquat. 318. t. 382." Seba was not quoted.

N. SPIRULA. _N._ apertura orbiculari, anfractibus distantibus.

The I in the reference to Rumphius was a misprint for the written 1;
"Bon. 1. f. 39," "Breyn. Polyth. 21. f. 2," "Klein, 5. t. 1. f. 6," and
"Petropol. Mus. 532. n. 6," were the unprinted synonyms: "tubo" was an
emendation.


CONUS.

Testa oblonga, cylindrica, deorsum attenuata. Apertura longitudinalis.
Labium edentulum. Os non reflexum. Columella integra.

This most natural genus had the precise limits ordinarily assigned to
it.

C. MARMOREUS. _C._ conicus fuscus, maculis ovatis albis.

"Bonan. 3. f. 123" was an additional synonym; the "versus basin
transverse striata," and "subtruncata, apice prominulo," with the
account of the variety, were not found in the MS.

C. IMPERIALIS. _C._ pictus fasciis flavis cingulisque linearibus albo
fuscoque articulatis.

The "obconica" was simply "conica"; there was no description of the
spire.

C. LITERATUS. _C._ conicus albus punctis fuscis.

The spire was not described: the reference to d'Argenville was I, not
_Q_.

C. VIRGO. _C._ striis convexis laevibus, basi caerulescente.

"Longa" was originally "magna": the erroneous reference to Gualtieri was
not inserted.

C. CAPITANEUS. _C._ conicus, basi fusca, spirae anfractibus
adscendentibus.

At least two species were confused; but, from the heading, it is clear
that _C. generalis_, rather than _C. capitaneus_, was the typical form:
the latter was the variety _g._

The V in the reference to Rumphius was a misprint for the written Y:
"Gualt. t. 20. f. G." and "Pet. Gaz. t. 27. f. O." were additional
synonyms. "Notata lituris undatis fuscis" was not in the manuscript.

C. PRINCEPS. _C._ flavus, lineis fusco-purpureis longitudinalibus
ramosis.

"Sub" preceded "convexa."

C. AMMIRALIS. _C._ basi punctato-scaber.

After "summus" was written "cingulo albo"; after "ordinarius," "cingulo
nullo"; Seba was not quoted; "pruniformis" was the earlier reading
for "conico-convexa, pyriformis." The variety _a._ was described as
"circumdata lineis numerosis albis nigro articulatis, quarum quae
cylindrum distinguit a spira latior maculis albis nigrisque majoribus
alternantibus." The variety _g._ was not originally present in the
catalogue, but was interpolated by Linnaeus. "Haec pretiosissima ut
vendita fuerit 500 florenis" was the final remark.

C. NOBILIS. _C._ subcylindricus laevis glaber, spira acuta argute
canaliculata.

"Cacumen" was a misprint for the written "acumen."

C. GENUANUS. _C._ pictus cingulis linearibus albo fuscoque articulatis.

A strange confusion took place between the details of _C. senator_
and _C. Genuanus_. The published description belonged to the former,
the synonym the latter, and should have preceded the following brief
description:

"Testa conica, pallida, glauca, oblongiuscula. Lineae 19 transversae
fusco-nigrae s. purpurascentes albo interruptae, alternae saepe
angustiores. Spira subconica, obtusa."

C. GLAUCUS. _C._ emarginatus, basi striatus, spirae inermis anfractibus
convexis.

C. MONACHUS. _C._ gibbus acutus, fusco-caerulescente nebulosus, basi
striatus.

Bonanni was not quoted in the written copy.

C. MINIMUS. _C._ cinerascens, punctis oblongis cinctus.

The original description has been much altered by Linnaeus. It ran as
follows: "Testa ovata, glauco-cinerea, gibba, striae transversales
plus 30 punctis fuscis oblongis. Spira convexa, alba, maculis fuscis
magnis transversis." The cited figure does not even suit these meagre
characteristics, which might have been equally applied to _C. glaucus_.

C. RUSTICUS. _C._ ovatus, basi rugoso-scaber, spira conica convexa.

The variety was not noticed, and d'Argenville was not quoted in the
original catalogue. "Flavo et glauco" should have been "flavo aut
glauco," as written.

C. MERCATOR. _C._ ovatus, albus fasciis reticulatis flavis.

C. BETULINUS. _C._ subemarginatus, basi rugosus, spira planiuscula
mucronata.

Seba was not cited.

C. FIGULINUS. _C._ emarginatus, basi rugosa, spira convexa acuta.

An additional synonym, "Rump. t. 31 (error for 33, there being no number
1 in that plate) f. 1," was indicated.

C. EBRAEUS. _C._ ovatus albus fasciis nigris ex maculis transversis.

"Pet. Gaz. t. 99. f. 12." was quoted.

C. STERCUS-MUSCARUM. _C._ emarginatus, basi striatus, spirae anfractibus
canaliculatis.

Of the two species confounded under this designation the _C. arenarius_
appeared as a variety in the manuscript. Of the typical form "Spira
laevi," "Pet. Gaz. t. 75. f. 1," and "Rumph. Mus. t. 33. f. Z," were
cited as illustrations; the other synonyms were ascribed to "Var.
{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}. coronatus spinis obtusis." The colouring was not mentioned.

C. VARIUS. _C._ scabro-coronatus, elongatus, spira coronata acuta.

C. GRANULATUS. _C._ scaber inermis, striis laevibus.

The original size indicated was "magnitudine coryli."

C. MAGUS. _C._ subcylindricus, fasciis longitudinalibus albo punctatis.

The erroneous figure of d'Argenville was not referred to; and the
32, Q (as in the 'Systema'), not 34, A, of Rumphius was quoted as
illustrative. The final remark had been interpolated by Linnaeus.

C. STRIATUS. _C._ ovato-oblongus gibbus nebulosus, striis tenuissimis
parallelis fuscis.

The "Caeterum testa minus ante convoluta est," is a press addition. "Pet.
Gaz. t. 98. f. 9." was correctly cited.

C. TEXTILE. _C._ pictus venis reticulatis luteis, maculis luteis
fuscisque.

The intended name (_C. drador_) was an amusing specimen of conchological
Latin: it was of course borrowed from d'Argenville's appellation of
"_Drap d'or_." "Columella ad postica quasi replicata est" was added in
the printing; the "luteo" was originally "albo"; the "subconica" was
"anfractibus subconicis"; and there was no mention of a variety.

C. AULICUS. _C._ pictus venis reticulatis fasciisque longitudinalibus
interruptis fuscis.

"Columella postice replicata est," and the objectionable "obovato-sub,"
were not in the copy. No figures were cited in the original catalogue.

C. SPECTRUM. _C._ caerulescens, flavo-nebulosus, punctis striisque
alboluteis.

The original description did not comprise those characteristics which
are so much at variance with the essentials of the _C. spectrum_ of
authors. The following passages were omitted: "gibba, minus arcte
convoluta" (this replaced "conica"), "Columella postice striata et
replicata. Intus testa sub-caerulescens," "mucrone cingulis granulato."

C. BULLATUS. _C._ flavus, albo nebulosus.

The account of the variety, and the "vix tuberculata," were absent from
the manuscript.

C. GEOGRAPHUS. _C._ oblongus gibbus coronatus.

The Rumphian name was the one attached to this species in the written
copy.

C. TEREBELLUM. _C._ scaber inermis, striis tuberculatis.

The synonyms attached to the published details were "Gualt. Test. t.
25. f. L.--Arg. Conch. t. 16. f. P.--Rumph. t. 33. f. EE." Now these
harmonize with both the heading and the description, and clearly
indicate the _C. Nussatella_ of the 'Systema'!

The details attached to the published synonyms (which latter belonged to
the _C. terebellum_ of the 'Systema,' and to which were joined "Gualt.
t. 23. f. O.--"Bonan. 3. f. 57.--Pet. Amb. t. 13. f. 24,") ran as
follows:

"Testa cylindracea, glabra, antice angustior, desinens in spiram
attenuatam, anfractibus 3. Basis truncata, tennis. Columella non torta,
sed involuta. Color pallidus."


CYPREA.

Testa ovata laevis involuta. Apertura linearis, utrinque dentata. Spira
occultata intra testam.

C. MAPPA. _C._ subturbinata characterisata, macula longitudinali
dentata.

"Pet. Amb. t. 16. f. 2." was an omitted synonym. The terminal remark
is an improvement upon the earlier "Noscitur linea utrinque dentata in
superficie scripta."

C. ARABICA. _C._ subturbinata characterisata, macula longitudinali
simplici.

"Denticulis testaceis" and the description of the variety were
additions by the hand of Linnaeus.

C. ARGUS. _C._ subturbinata subcylindrica, maculis annularibus.

The synonyms of Petiver (t. 97. f. 6) and Bonanni (f. 263), quoted in
the 'Systema,' were also present in the MS., where "2. s. 1" was in
the place of "duabus." The "pallidis" was a misprint for the written
"pallidae." The account of the variety was subsequent to the copy.

C. TESTUDINARIA. _C._ obtusa cylindrica, extremitatibus depressis.

"Pet. Amb. t. 8. f. 7." was an unprinted synonym.

C. CARNEOLA. _C._ subturbinata pallida, fasciis incarnatis.

C. TALPA. _C._ subturbinata violacea, fasciis pallidis.

"Pet. Amb. t. 16. f. 1." was an unprinted synonym: "pallide
flavescens" was the earlier reading for "testacea." The final remark
was not in the copy.

C. AMETHYSTEA. _C._ subturbinata, dorso violaceo.

Rumphius was not originally cited as illustrative.

C. VANELLI. _C._ subturbinata, maculata punctis lutescentibus.

"Obsoletis" was originally in the place of "acutis": the "saepe
lutescentibus" was an addition of the press. _C. Ovum Vanelli_ was the
intended designation.

C. LOTA. _C._ subturbinata alba, denticulis subulatis.

C. FRAGILIS. _C._ subturbinata gibba fragilis, obsolete fasciata.

Linnaeus himself inserted this heading, with the first three lines of the
printed details, in the manuscript copy. Neither the reference, nor the
longer account of the variety (evidently a different species) appeared
there.

C. CAPUT-SERPENTIS. _C._ obtusa triquetro-gibba, postice obtusiuscula.

"Fusis" was the earlier reading for "confertis."

C. MAURITIANA. _C._ obtusa triquetro-gibba, postice depresso-acuta.

"Pet. Gaz. t. 96. f. 8. ex Insula Mauritii" was added in the manuscript:
"fuscus" was the earlier version of "fusco-testaceus."

C. VITELLUS. _C._ subturbinata livida, maculis albis.

The published reference was substituted for "Bonan. 3. f. 254," a
more characteristic figure: "maxima ex parte distincta, sed" followed
"Spira." "Albida," not "alba," was the tint at first ascribed to the
base.

C. MUS. _C._ obtusa subovalis gibba cinerea, fascia longitudinali fusca.

Our author himself inserted the account of this species in the
manuscript. Seba was not quoted. "Habitat in Carthagena" was appended to
the description.

C. TIGRIS. _C._ obtusa ovata, postice obtusa.

In the synonym of Rumphius, 36 is a misprint for 38: the erroneous
reference to the H of Gualtieri was not in the copy, where "Pet. Gaz.
t. 96. f. _7_" was indicated as illustrative. The printed additions
were "aut alba," "fusco-ferrugineis" (in lieu of "fuscis"), and "s.
alba, quasi exarata; postice subcylindrica, truncata"; the previous
words "Linea, &c." of that sentence were also absent from the original
description, but had been inserted by the hand of Linnaeus. "Postice"
preceded "planiusculo," and "subviolaceo" followed "nitore."

C. LYNX. _C._ oblongo-ovata, linea flavescente, postice acutiuscula.

No variety was mentioned in the written copy.

C. ISABELLA. _C._ obtusa cylindrica, extremitatibus luteis.

"Pet. Amb. t. 16. f. 16." was cited in the manuscript, where the final
remark was wanting.

C. ONYX. _C._ umbilicata, subtus fusca.

Neither of the synonyms was quoted in the copy.

C. SUCCINCTA. _C._ umbilicata, labio interiore utraque extremitate
rotundato.

The entire account of this shell (the _C. bicincta_ of the MS.) was
added to the copy by our author.

C. ZICZAC. _C._ umbilicata, subtus lutea punctis fuscis.

None of the cited figures were referred to in the original, where
"interiore" stood in the place of the printed "utroque fusco."

C. HIRUNDO. _C._ umbilicata, supra caerulescente.

"Sparsis", "s. fusca", "necnon macula, &c." were emendations of the
press: "postice" preceded "fere marginato" in the original.

C. ASELLUS. _C._ umbilicata alba, fasciis tribus fuscis.

"Pet. Amb. t. 16. f. 18." and "Pet. Gaz. t. 97. f. 11." were cited in
the copy as illustrative.

C. CRIBRARIA. _C._ umbilicata, maculis albis.

"Margo" preceded "adscendens" in the copy, in which "livide flavo" was
found in place of "luteo": "flavicantibus" was omitted. The intended
name was _C. Argiolus_.

C. ERRONES. _C._ umbilicata, macula testacea aequali.

_Erratica_ was the original specific appellation.

C. MONETA. _C._ marginate-nodosa.

"Pet. Gaz. t. 97. f. 8." and "Pet. Amb. t. 16. f. 8." were omitted in
printing; "subflavescente" followed "convexo"; "subtus planiuscula" and
"incisis" were absent. In place of the final remark (added, however,
by the hand of our author), there originally stood "Noscitur tuberibus
quinque elevatis."

C. ANNULUS. _C._ marginata annulo flavo.

The "s. rotundata" was added in printing.

C. EROSA. _C._ marginata flava albo-punctata.

"Undique aspersa" and "Macula fusca notat medium utriusque lateris" are
the printed emendations.

C. HELVOLA. C. marginata, postice crenata, subtus flava immaculata,
supra albo punctulata.

The final remark was unwritten, and the size not mentioned: "marginis
gibbi" was "margine exteriore gibbo", and "subcrenati" was "latere
subcrenato."

C. STOLIDA. _C._ marginata variegata cinereo testaceoque.

"Quinque" and "adspersis" were not in the original.

C. OCELLATA. _C._ marginata lutea, ocellis nigris.

C. FLAVEOLA. _C._ marginata fulva, albo punctata.

C. PORARIA. _C._ marginata subviolacea, albo punctata.

C. PEDICULUS. _C._ transversim sulcata.

"List. 168. t. 3. f. 17." and "Barr. t. 1326. f. 28." were cited in
addition to the printed synonyms. The last four words of the description
were not in the copy.

C. NUCLEUS. _C._ sulcata punctata tuberculis, rostrata.

"Pet. Amb. t. 16 f. 11." was cited as illustrative.

C. STAPHYLAEA. _C._ punctis elevatis sine striis, subrostrata.

The printed "minus" has been substituted for the earlier "vix"; "lutea"
for "flava"; and "totam basin" for "maximum partem baseos."

C. GLOBULUS. _C._ rostrata laevis.

The printed additions were "alba s.", "extremitate utraque" (in place
of "postice"), "Superficies punctis vix manifestis notata", and
"excurrentes in strias".


BULLA.

Testa subrotunda, inflata, laevis. Apertura oblonga, non utrinque
dentata. Spira obsoleta. Columella obliqua.

The _Murex ficus_ and _rapa_ of the printed edition were originally
located in this genus, from which _Auris Midae_, _Auris Judae_, and
_achatina_ were excluded: the two former were placed in _Morion_, the
last in _Buccinum_.

B. OVUM. _B._ birostris, labio dentato.

"Arg. t. 21. f. A." "Pet. Gaz. t. 94. f. 7." "Pet. Amb. t. 8. f. 6."
were additional references in the written copy: "magnitudine ovi
gallinacei", "apice et basi producta", were emendations during the
printing. The "dilatata" was originally modified by a "parum."

B. VOLVA. _B._ birostris, rostris elongatis striatis.

"List. t. 711. f. 63" had been added to the copy by the hand of Linnaeus.
The mode of reference (not, as in the earlier writings, by sections and
chapters) evinces that this addition was, in all probability, subsequent
to the publication of the work.

B. VERRUCOSA. _B._ angulata, aucta utrinque puncto osseo.

The correct synonyms of "Arg. t. 21. f. M." and "Pet. Gaz. t. 97. f.22."
were found in the manuscript: the printed emendations were, "magnitudine
ovi passerini", "uti anterius", and "granis duobus" for the earlier
"punctis."

B. GIBBOSA. _B._ angulata, cingulo elevato.

"Bonan. 249", "List. t. 711. f. 64", "Pet. Gaz. t. 15. f. 5", were
cited in the copy: "praecedentis magnitudine", "solidiorque", with
the modification of "cylindrica" by a preceding "sub", were press
emendations.

B. NAUCUM. _B._ rotundata pellucida.

The size was not at first mentioned.

B. AMPULLA. _B._ rotundata opaca.

The printed "nulla" replaced the earlier "descendens, nuda", and
"pallido-testacea" the written "albida." The "antice, nullus vero
postice" was an emendation of the press.

B. PHYSIS. _B._ spira obtusa, lineis crispata.

"Saepe", "hiansque", "tenue", and the name, are not to be found in
the written copy: "apicem" was the reading for the printed "ventrem,
aduatum."

B. AMPLUSTRE. _B._ spira elevata, fasciis incarnatis.

B. PALLIDA. _B._ spira elevata acuta, corpore cylindrico.

So very many changes has this puzzling species experienced in the
works of our author, that it has been thought advisable to transcribe
the written description from the manuscript copy:--

Testa ovato-cylindrica, glabra. Spira convexo-conica, mucronata.
Columella multum torta. Color lividus, longitudinaliter grisco
undulatus.

This evidently was a very different shell from the four-plaited, pale
pink, and often variegated specimen described in the printed copy.
The description of the outer lip, the name, and the terms "solida",
"laevigata, obsoletior" were, likewise, additions of the press.

B. CANALICULATA. _B._ cylindrica laevis, spirae anfractibus
canaliculatis.

The entire account of this species was added to the manuscript in the
Linnean handwriting.

B. ACHATINA. _Buc._ glabrum, apertura integra.

"Colum. Aphr. 18. t. 16" was the omitted synonym: "vel inaequaliter
ovata" and the entire account of the base (merely described as "vix
manifeste emarginata") were the printed additions.

B. AURIS-MIDAE. _Morion_ ovali-oblongum, spira rugosa, labio interiore
bidentato.

Figure 122 of Klein's seventh plate was correctly quoted as
illustrative: "crudae" preceded "niger."

B. AURIS-JUDAE. _Morion_ oblongus, spira laevi, labio interiore
tridentato.

B. SOLIDULA. _B._ ovata opaca striata, spira elevata.

I do not doubt, from the "ovata", that _Tornatella flammea_ was the
shell originally here intended; for the inharmonious account of
the inner lip (as well as of the outer one) was not found in the
manuscript,--from which, too, the erroneous reference to Bonanni was
at first absent. The "acutiuscula" was "obtusiuscula": the "postice
rotundata, antice acuta" was an improvement upon the earlier "pone
gibba."

B. LIVIDA. _B._ spira elevata obtusa, corpore cylindrico.

This heading makes no mention of the columellar plication of the
shell so named in the 'Systema,' and confirms my surmise of their
distinctiveness. The name _livida_ was not originally attached to the
description, but had been added (together with "obsoletis") by Linnaeus,
from a mistaken identification.

There has evidently been some error in the comparison with _Voluta
Caffra_. I suspect that _Conus bullatus_ was meant, as the contrasting
characters answer admirably. "Differt a _B. pallida_ et _livida_, quod
testa solida--anfractus spirae canaliculati". This passage shows that
"fragilis et spirae anfractus obtusae" referred to _livida_, not to
_Caffra_.


VOLUTA.

Testa oblonga, subconvexa, basi emarginata, replicata in canalem rectum.
Columella plicata oblique. Labio integro.

The genus appears to comprehend precisely the same members as in the
published edition. They were arranged in sections exactly corresponding
with the Lamarckian genera of _Oliva_, _Voluta_, _Mitra_, and
_Marginella_.

V. PORPHYRIA. _V._ spira basi obliterata, labio medio retuso.

Linnaeus spoilt his excellent earlier description by his attempted
emendations. The interpolated "Faux saepius rufescens" (misprinted
virescens), and the reference to Gualtieri's figure O. (_O.
erythrostoma_), formed no part of the original version.

The "Varictas fere sola est _V. Olivae_" was an afterthought.

V. OLIVA. _V._ spirae basi reflexa.

The synonyms were thus distributed. To var _a_, Rumph. t. 39. f. 2, and
Gualt. t. 23. f. B; to var. _g_, Rumph. t. 39. f. 3; to var. _e_, Arg.
t. 16. f. R; to var. _d_ ("Caesius atro-undatus," not "Fusco undulatus"
as printed), Rumph. t. 39. f. 4. The expressions "ponderosa" and "magis
sulcatum" were not in the original.

V. ISPIDULA. _V._ spira adscendente, margine unico.

"Pet. Gaz. t. 59. f. 8," cited in the 'Systema,' was also written in the
manuscript: not so the "Varietas forte praecedentis _V. Olivae_." None of
the drawings exhibit the produced spire, which must have resembled that
of _O. jaspidea_. The earlier name was _ispida_.

V. GLABELLA. _V._ ovata laevis, labii margine reflexo, basi rotundata.

The reference to Gualtieri (a doubtful figure) was not originally
inserted. The intended name was _V. polita_.

V. CAFFRA. _V._ fusiformis laevis.

The absurdity of asserting, in relation to this and the next species,
that each resembled the other, but was larger, arose from the
circumstance that when our author, in revising the labours of his
amanuensis, added "sed major," he omitted to erase it from the following
species.

V. VULPECULA. _V._ fusiformis angulata inermis, transversim striata.

Of the ample details the first two paragraphs only were found in the
manuscript. The proposed name was _V. picta_.

V. PLICARIA. _V._ fusiformis, angulis antice subspinosis.

The intended appellation _angulata_ was changed from an erroneous
impression of the identity of the species with the _Turricula plicata_
of Rumphius. "Mucronatis" and "albidus" were emendations. "Bonan. 8.
f. 65" was referred to, as in the 'Systema'.

V. PERTUSA. _V._ fusiformis, labro denticulato, striata punctis
pertusis.

_V. denticulata_ was the name originally proposed for this _Mitre_.

V. MITRA. _V._ fusiformis laevis, labro denticulato.

The final paragraph was not in the manuscript, where "Bonan. 3. t.
119, 120", and "Klein, 36. Mitra episcopi", the former cited in the
'Systema', the latter a mere name, were quoted as illustrative.

V. MUSICA. _V._ spinis obtusiusculis, columella plicis 8.

The reference to the letters X. and Y. of Gualtieri (neither of which
are illustrative) stood not thus in the original: the characteristic Z.
of that work was the figure really cited. The printed edition has been
enlarged by an "ob" before "ovato" the addition of "solida", and the
description of the lips.

V. VESPERTILIO. _V._ spinis acutis, columella plicis 4.

The only printed additions are "ob" before "ovato", "s. glauca", and
"fuscis lineis" in place of the "saturatius."

V. AETHIOPICA. _V._ spinis fornicatis cingentibus apicem papillarem.

"Habitat in mari Pacifico", "Pet. Amb. t. 7. f. 5" (copied from
Rumphius, t. 31. f. B.), and "Bonan. t. 3 f. 1" (cited in the 'Systema')
were the unprinted additions.

V. CYMBIUM. The entire account of this shell was in the handwriting of
Linnaeus, and inserted at a later period than the mass of species. The
decided reference to Gualtieri _was not in the manuscript_.

V. OLLA was not mentioned in the written catalogue.

       *       *       *       *       *

In addition to the species published in the 'Museum,' the following were
also characterized in the manuscript:--

V. FABA. _V._ ovata, antice subplicata, labii exterioris margine
reflexo, basi rotundata.

Bonan. 3. f. 49.

Testa magnitudine vix fabae, ovalis, laevis, antice subplicata, livida,
punctis fuscis aspersa. Spira testae 1/2 brevior, subplicata. Labium
exterius reflexum, basi rotundatum integrum.

This was evidently the shell so designated in the 'Systema.'

V. GRANULATA. _V._ fusiformis, sulcis longitudinalibus, striisque
transversalibus.

Rumph. Mus. t. 29. f. V.

Arg. Conch. t. 12. f. V.

Testa facie antecedentis, sed sulci et striae contrariae, fusiformis,
sulcis longitudinalibus elevatis obtusis, striis transversalibus
exaratis. Color cinereus, fasciis linearibus 2 rubris ex punctis. Spira
longitudine ventris. Apertura praecedentis.

This was the _V. sanguisuga_ of the 'Systema.'

The preceding species referred to was

V. LIMA. _V._ fusiformis, sulcis transversis, striisque
longitudinalibus.

Rumph. Mus. t. 28. f. T.

Testa fusiformis, scabriuscula, striis longitudinalibus secundum testam,
et sulcis secundum anfractus adscendentibus margine acutiusculis. Color
albidus sulcis elevatis rubris--albidus sulcis elevatis flavis albo
interruptis. Spira longitudine ventris. Apertura oblonga, intus alba.
Basis acuta, emarginata. Labium exterius integrum; interius nullum.
Columella dentibus 4 obliqius.

These features fairly enough suit the _Mitra filosa_, generally, and
with reason, supposed to be the _V. filaris_ of the 'Mantissa.' The
cited figure however, seems _M. gracilis_ of Reeve.


BUCCINUM.

The species which compose this group in the 'Museum' were originally
separated under many generic designations.

1. BUCCINUM. Testa ovata, ventricosa. Apertura integra, semilunaris,
superne extrorsum, postice introrsum.

2. CASSIDA. Testa ovata, gibba. Cauda reflexa oblique. Apertura
longitudinalis, obliqua.

3. LYRA. Testa ovata, ventricosa. Apertura ovata, patens, pone
submarginata. Labium interius nullum. Columella compressa, nitida.

4. TURRICULA. (No definition: evidently intended for all the turreted
shells.)

5. MORION. Testa oblonga, inermis. Apertura oblonga, labio interiore
reflexo unidentato.

In the first were located the _Dolia_, and _B. echinophorum_; in the
second the _Cassides_, with _B. papillosum_ and _arcularia_; in the
third the _Harpae_ and _Purpurae_; in the fourth the _Terebrae_; in the
fifth _B. glans_, _spiratum_, _glabratum_.

_B. undosum_ was located in _Murex_.

B. PERDIX. _B._ umbilicatum subsulcatum, basi recta.

The proposed name was _B. pennatum_, adopted from Rumphius:
"lunari-patula" was not in the manuscript.

B. POMUM. _B._ exumbilicatum, labio utroque dentato.

"Barr. Ic. t. 1325. f. 12" (cited in the 'Systema'), and "Klein, 95.
Semicassis, striata, costosa", were the additional synonyms of the
manuscript: "s. sulcata", "nullum, interne", "at vero in adultioribus
accrescit planum album", were subsequent emendations.

B. DOLIUM. _B._ emarginatum subsulcatum rugosum, labio exteriore reflexo
dentato.

The _Dolium fimbriatum_, or, as Deshayes prefers it, _D. Minjac_ (the
Malay name was Bia Minjac in Rumphius, who preceded Adanson), was
assuredly the shell described in the 'Museum', as the recorded dentation
of the outer lip clearly manifests. An excellent figure of it in Petiver
("Gaz. t. 99. f. 11") was cited in the original copy, where the drawing
of Gualtieri was not referred to.

B. ECHINOPHORUM. _B._ (changed to _Cassida_) tuberibus ("quaterna serie"
interpolated) nodosum.

The reference to Rumphius was correctly written 1, not I, in the
original, where "albido-flavescens" was the indicated colouring. The
printed emendations were "quadruplici s. quintuplici", instead of
"triplici", and the entire account of the aperture, which at first ran
simply as follows, "Labium exterius crassius, margine tenuiore, interne
subrugosum, obsolete dentatum."

B. TUBEROSUM. _B._ tuberibus gemina serie nodosum.

The entire published account of this species had been interpolated
by Linnaeus in the written copy, with the exception of the "color
pallidus." The "nodis anterioribus" was a misprint for "nodis
acutioribus."

Gualtieri's admirable figure of the _Cassis tuberosa_ of authors was
not, however, cited, which confirms my statement that the species of
the 'Museum' was not the _Cassis_ usually so designated.

B. CORNUTUM. _Cas._ acuminibus antice cingentibus, superficic
reticulata.

The I in the reference to Rumphius was a misprint for the written 1:
"maculata" was originally "maculis griseis."

B. RUFUM. _Cas._ nodis sparsis.

"Pyri" was a misprint for the written "pugni". Neither the "maculis
fuscis" nor the "Variat tota albo colore" were originally present. The
Rumphian name _rubra_ was the one written.

B. FLAMMEUM. _Cas._ longitudinaliter striata, antice subnodosa.

To the solitary synonym our author had added "List. t. 1004. f. 69" and
"Sloan. Hist. 2. p. 242. n. 2". The final remark was not in the copy.

B. TESTICULUS. _Cas._ laevis, striis longitudinalibus, sulcis
transversalibus.

"Vix ullus" was at first "nullus": "laeve" was not present.

B. DECUSSATUM. _Cas._ laevis, striis decussatis, labio exteriore
dentato.

"Bonan. Clas. 3. t. 157" was an additional synonym.

B. AREOLA. _Cas._ glabra, spira papillosa.

The erroneous references to Gualtieri, and to the figure 2 of
Rumphius, were not present in the original, nor was there any allusion
made to the sculpture of the inner lip.

B. ERINACEUS. _Cas._ subsulcata, antice nodosa, labio edentulo,
postice extrorsum denticulato.

The entire account of this _Cassis_ was interpolated by Linnaeus in the
pages of his amanuensis.

B. GLAUCUM. _Cas._ glabra, antice muricata, labio dentato, postice
extrorsum denticulato.

The superfluous A in the reference to Gualtieri was a misprint:
"inferne" was "interne": the "acuminata" and "marginatum" were
emendations.

B. VIBEX. _Cas._ glabra, labio edentulo, postice extrorsum denticulato.

The figures 8 and 9 of Rumphius were not cited.

B. PAPILLOSUM. _Cas._ papillis decussatis, labio tenui, extus
denticulato, fauce glabra.

"Rectum" followed "exterius" in the written copy, wherein "s. albidus"
and "antice sinu excavata" were not to be found.

B. GLANS. _Morion_ labio exteriore denticulato, interiore bidentato.

"Labium exterius margine postico denticulato" was omitted in printing.

B. ARCULARIA. _Cas._ longitudinaliter sulcata, labio exteriore tenui,
interiore maximo.

B. COSTATUM. _Lyra_ costis longitudinalibus, antice prominulis,
alternis obsoletis.

This diagnosis but ill suits the _Many-ridged Harp_, which, of late,
has been considered identical.

B. HARPA. _Lyra_ costis longitudinalibus antice mucronatis.

The shell is described in the MS. as "striata subtilissime
longitudinaliter", and "Pet. Amb. t. 2. f. 2", "Pet. Gaz. t. 48. f. 13"
(the latter quoted also in the 'Systema') are there substituted for the
reference to Gualtieri. The printed additions are considerable; to
wit, "costae vero striis transversis", "anfractibus costis mucronatis",
"denticulatum."

B. PERSICUM. _Lyra_ laeviuscula, labii margine crenulato.

The erroneous citation of Grew (t. 9. f. 5, 6) in the 'Systema' had
been adopted in the manuscript.

B. PATULUM. _Lyra_ muricata spinis obtusis.

Neither the erroneous reference to Gualtieri, plate 51. f. A (which
was designed for _Purpura haemastoma_), nor the "color interne
rufescens", is to be found in the manuscript.

B. SMARAGDULUS. _Lyra_ glaberrima, columella denticulata.

Neither the erroneous reference to d'Argenville, nor the specific
name derived from his figure, is to be found in the MS. The proposed
appellation was _L. vitrea_. "Simillima Cassid, lapillo, sed glabra,
et columella crenata" is the unprinted remark.

B. SPIRATUM. _Morion_ umbilicatus, anfractibus distinctis canaliculo.

The specified colouring was "alba, maculis longitudinalibus fuscis";
"pone bifidum" followed "integrum." The intended name was _M.
canaliculatus_.

B. GLABRATUM. _Morion_ umbilico descendente flexuoso.

d'Arg. Conch t. 12. f. G.

"Testa oblonga, acuminata, obtusiuscula, glaberrima, anfractibus
confluentibus, Neritarum maximarum pondere. Color albo-flavescens,
nitidus. Apertura obliqua, profunde emarginata. Labium exterius
integerrimum. Labium interius antice reflexum adnatum, dein solutum
brevius flexuosum, descendens ad basin. Sulcus profundus distinguit
basin testae. Umbilicus pone labium interius descendens ad basin sulco".

B. VIRGINEUM. I can find no account of this shell in the written copy.

B. UNDOSUM. The nearest approach to this species seems the variety B.
of the _Murex succinctus_ (the shell so named in the 'Mantissa').

_M._ laevis, sulcis transversis laevibus, angulo marginali.

d'Arg. Conch. t. 12. f. N. Bon. 3. f. 47.

Testa ovata, absque tuberculis magnitudine nucis, exarata sulcis
transversis pallidis, eminentibus vero lineis luteis. Spira obtusa,
anfractibus rotundatis. Cauda teretiuscula. Apertura ovata, margine
crasso, nec alia costa laterali crassa.

Var. B. Rugis s. angulis obliteratis 5 longitudinalibus.

B. MACULATUM. _Turricula_ elongata, anfractibus laevibus integerrimis.

The l. of Gualtieri, and the reference to d'Argenville, were printed
emendations.

B. CRENULATUM. _Turric._ elongata, anfractibus margine crenatis.

The reference to Gualtieri was an emendation.

B. STRIGILATUM. _Turric._ elongata, oblique striata.

B. DUPLICATUM. _Turric._ elongata emarginata, anfractibus bipartitis
striatis.


STROMBUS.

This genus, rendered more natural by the omission of _S. lividus_ and
_ater_ (assigned to _Turricula_), appeared under the designation of
HARPAGO with the following definition:--

Testa depressa, nodosa. Apertura longitudinalis. Labium antice
dilatatum ultra basin.

The _Strombi_ of the manuscript were the young of this genus (erased by
Linnaeus) and certain Lamarckian _Fusi_, _Pyrulae_, and _Fasciolariae_.

S. CHIRAGRA. _Har._ labii spinis laevibus 6, extimis recurvis, fauce
striata.

"Bar. Icon. 327. f. 1." was an additional synonym.

S. SCORPIUS. _Har._ labii spinis nodosis _7_, fauce striata.

The published account was enlarged by the following passages, which are
not to be found in the written copy: "crenulato cincta", "lato, brevi",
"s. incarnata", "s. testaceo-nebulosus". "Distinctum" was originally
"obscuro", and "repandus, inflexus" was "denticulatus."

S. LAMBIS. _Har._ labii spinis laevibus _7_, fauce laevi.

"Bar. Icon. t. 1326. f. _7_" was the synonym omitted in printing. The
name was borrowed from d'Argenville.

S. MILLEPEDA. _Har._ labii spinis laevibus 10.

"Anteriora" was "posteriora" in the manuscript.

S. LENTIGINOSUS. _Har._ labio inermi integro rotundato, angulis
pluribus nodosis.

The "aut marginatum" was "fragile, diaphanum", so that a young shell
appears to have furnished the materials for description.

S. GALLUS. _Har._ labio inermi mucronato, cingulo dorsali spinoso.

S. AURIS-DIANAE. _Har._ labio inermi muricato, cauda recurva, lobo
incurvato.

The "32. f. II." was a misprint for the written "17. f. O." The
printed additions are "usque" and "Color testaceo et albido nebulosus."

S. PUGILIS. _Har._ labio inermi obtuso, spira spinosa distincta, basi
emarginata.

"Nitida", and "sed spira albida", were not found in the original.

S. LUHUANUS. _Har._ labio obtuso, antice posticeque emarginata.

Few of the details were present in the original copy, but appear
to have been added, to discriminate the species from the allied
_gibberulus_. "Spira obtusa brevis" was added by the hand of Linnaeus;
"saepe subplicati", "postice lobo obsoleto instructum", "intus",
"Columella nigricans", "Cauda nulla, sed postice emarginata", were all
absent from the MS.

S. GIBBERULUS. _Har._ labio inermi dorso laevi, spira repanda.

The printed additions are "subtus planiuscula", "laeves", "fuscum", and
the final remark.

S. LATISSIMUS. _Har._ labio inermi rotundato, spira subnodosa
breviore, dorso laevi.

S. EPIDROMIS. _Har._ labio inermi dilatato, dorso laevi, spira
subnodosa.

The _S. epidromis_, as it originally stood in the manuscript, was a
recognizable species, and precisely identical with the shell so named
in the 'Systema'; for the erroneous reference to Gualtieri was not
present, neither was "carinato," nor any of the discordant details
from "interius" to the termination. As the printed description now
stands, it would suit _S. emarginatus_ or _succinctus_, at the least,
equally well. I doubt not our author, when correcting the press,
forgot his own species, and added the partial essentials of one
species to those of another.

S. CANARIUM. _Har._ labio inermi dilatato, dorso spiraque laevibus.

The erroneous reference to plate 37 of Rumphius was not present in the
written copy, which contains the additional synonyms of "Pet. Gaz.
t. 98. f. 11", and "Klein, t. 4. f. 73": the latter was not there
originally. The early description has been improved, in the press, by
the addition of "obovata", "Faux laevis, alba", and "longitudinaliter
subundulatus."

S. VITTATUS. _Har._ labiis inermibus, spirae anfractibus vitta
interstinctis.

S. URCEUS. _Har._ labiis inermibus striatis, dorso nodoso.

The erroneous reference to Gualtieri was not present in the original,
but in place of it the 37. W. of Rumphius (_S. mutabilis_): "Spira
testa brevior, plicato-subnodosa" was, likewise, absent. "Klein,
49, urceus fimbriatus" (a name for Rumph. t. 37. f. F & W) was
interpolated by our author.

S. ATER. _Turricula_ labiata.

Neither the reference to Rumphius, nor the "et postice emarginatum"
were found in the original. This confirms my expressed belief that the
Museum species (to which no name was at first attached) was distinct
from that of the 'Systema.'

S. LIVIDUS. _Turric._ labiata, anfractibus serie subspinosa.

This was located in a section of _Turricula_ distinguished as having
the outer lip dilated and rounded.

       *       *       *       *       *

Besides the above, the following unprinted details were found in the
manuscript:--

The _Strombus gigas_ was described at length under the appellation of
_Harpago gigas_.

_Har._ labio inermi rotundato, dorso spiraque subulato-spinosis.

Gualt. t. 34. f. A. Bar. Icon. 1727. f. 7.

Testa gibba, maxima, magnitudine capitis. Cauda obtusa. Spira spinis
patentibus, subulatis, validis. Anfractus desinens in dorso spina.
Series in dorso spinarum maximarum ferme conicarum. Labium dilatatum,
rotundatum, spira longius, vix adnatum spirae. Faux glabra, nitida,
incarnata. Color pallidus.

The _Strombus dentatus?_ was also defined (without a specific
appellation) by the following characters:--

_Har._ labio dentato, testa laevis, plicato-nodosa.

Testa simillima reliquis, longitudine articuli digiti, laevis,
flavescens, subplicata, plicis antice acuminatis nodis. Spira
acutiuscula, similiter plicata, nodosa. Labium exterius minus
dilatatum, postice margine dentatum et interne fuscum, striatum.
Labium internum crassum, integrum, laeve.

The _Strombus palustris_, although not published until the twelfth
edition of the 'Systema,' had been already defined in the 'Museum' as
_Turricula cornea_.

_Tur._ decussatim rugosa, labio dilatato.

Rumph. 101. t. 30. f. Q. Strombus palustris.

Testa crassa, rudis, pyramidalis, cornea aut plumbea, anfractibus
12 et ultra, secundum spiras transversim aliquot striis exarata,
longitudinaliter subplicata, adcoque sine spinis rugosissima. Labium
dilatatum, rotundatum, concavum, edentulum.


MUREX.

The definition of this genus ran as follows:--

Testa subovata, spinosa. Apertura coarctata, ovata, desinens in
canalem tubuloso-conniventem.

This was evidently designed for the _Murices_ proper. The other
species of the 'Museum' were distributed in the groups of _Cassis_,
_Turricula_, _Bulla_, and _Strombus_. The last was defined as follows;
"Testa obverse conica, nodosa, labium exterius angulum transversalem
superne formans; interius nullum. Columella incurva. Cauda integra."

M. HAUSTELLUM. _M._ caudatus, subinermis, nodosus.

"Suturis" was originally "costis". The printed emendations
are "gibbis, adglutinatis", "costati et nodosi", "subtus rima
longitudinali clausa", "margine", and the final remark.

M. TRIBULUS. _M._ caudatus spinis subulatis trifariis.

"Olear. Mus. t. 39. f. 1" was cited in the transcript, to which
Linnaeus had added "Bonan. 269" and "List. t. 902. f. 22", all which
synonyms are present in the 'Systema.' The printed additions are
"suturis 3 longitudinalibus, adglutinatis, incrassatis", "secundum
suturas: superficies transversim striis elevatis distinctis", "recta".

M. CORNUTUS. _M._ caudatus, spinis subulatis serie gemina.

The s. in the reference to Rumphius was a misprint for the written
5: "Pet. Gaz. t. 68. f. 12" (as in the 'Systema') was present in the
copy. The expressions "striata", "conicae", "obliquo situ", and the
final remark, are the printed additions.

M. TRUNCULUS. _M._ subcaudatus, spinis simplici serie.

The description of the tail and account of the variety were
not originally present: "suturis" was, at first, "plicis", and
"adglutinatis" was "antrorsum adnatis".

M. RAMOSUS. _M._ daedaleus triangularis, spira longitudine ventris.

Had the original manuscript been printed, the multitude of species
confused under this appellation would have been somewhat lessened. For
the cited figures of _M. inflatus_ (Rumph. t. 26. f. A. and Gault. t.
38. f. A), with that of another short-spired _Murex_ (Arg. t. 19. f.
C), were separated from the rest, and quoted for a _M. unguis-odor_,
the brief definition of which was "_M._ daedalens triangularis, spira
ventre breviore."

The published details, and the drawings of the longer-spired and more
slender-bodied _Murices_ (Rumph. t. 26. f. l; d'Arg. t. 19. f. E, H.),
appeared as _M. lichenoides_.

I consider, then, that in that event the _M. adustus_ (Arg. t. 19.
f. H.), which would tolerably suit the definition, would have been
considered the typical form, and _M. axicornis_ (Rumph. t. 26. f. l,
and d'Arg. t. 19. f. E.), the variety {~GREEK SMALL LETTER GAMMA~}.

M. SCORPIO. _M._ daedaleus quadrangularis, spira subcapitata.

The ill-judged final remark was not in the copy.

M. SAXATILIS. _M._ daedaleus quinquangularis, spira contigua.

The idea of this being a mere variety was not expressed in the
original.

M. RANA. M. angulatus subdepressus, costis lateralibus.

The R. of d'Argenville was properly referred to the variety B. The
"alba", "sulcis transversis", and "Dorsum anfractum simplici cingulo
aculeato" were not in the copy.

M. LAMPAS. _M._ angulatus tuberculis nodosis, cauda flexuosa, labio
interiore laevi.

The earlier reading of "una alterave ruga" was "uno alterove
denticulo."

M. FEMORALE. _M._ angulato-triqueter: angulis antrorsum acuminatis.

The intended name was _M. triqueter_. Grew's engravings (f.
7, 8) of the species were correctly cited, and the erroneous
reference to Rumphius was not inserted. The printed additions were
unimportant--"exarata", "repando", "sub" before "edentula", and
"levissime".

M. LOTORIUM. _M._ angulatus, tuberculis conicis, cauda flexuosa, labio
interno rugoso.

"Subter" was a misprint for the written "inter": the "ut in proximis"
was a printed addition.

M. RUBECULA. _M._ angulatus, sulcis moniliformibus, costis lateralibus,
dorsalique.

"Gualt. t. 49. f. I" was rightly cited as illustrative: "ex" preceded
"lineis".

M. RETICULARIS. _Cas._ inaequalis gibba reticulata, cauda elongata.

The erroneous reference to Rumphius was not present in the manuscript.
As corroborative of my expressed belief in the identity of the
species described in the 'Museum' with the _Triton ! mulus_, it may
be observed, that our author has wholly separated this and the allied
_anus_ from the true _Tritons_ and _Ranellae_, and that the original
heading corresponds accurately with the peculiar characteristics.

M. ANUS. _Cas._ inaequalis, gibba nodosa, labris rugosis.

"Pet. Gaz. t. 74. f. 9" and "Pet. Amb. t. 6. f. 4" were the unprinted
synonyms. The "rugis reticulato-intertextis", "irregularis", and
"patens" were emendations.

M. RICINUS. _M._ ecaudatus, ore utrinque dentato.

"AEqualibus, ad labium majoribus" was not in the copy.

M. CAPITELLUM. _M._ ecaudatus ovatus, columella rugosa, labio edentulo,
superficie inermi rugosa.

"Alba" followed "edentula", and "Umbilicus ad basin" terminated the
description in the original: the word "striis" was a subsequent
introduction.

M. TURBINELLUS. _M._ ecaudatus, turbinatus, columella dentata, spinis
explicatis.

The printed additions are "anteriores", "nodulosa", "alba", "Cauda vix
ulla", and "Variat colore albo spira longiore".

M. CERAMICUS. _M._ ecaudatus, utrinque acuminatus, columella dentata,
spinis conicis.

"Rumph. t. 49. f. L." was an unpublished synonym.

M. NODUS. _M._ ecaudatus ovatus, labio denticulato.

As "Gualt. t. 28. f. R." was quoted, and "aut nigris, conicis,
obtusiusculis" (a character which probably belonged to some distinct
species erroneously supposed to be a variety) was not inserted in the
manuscript, I feel convinced that the _Purpura hystrix_ of authors was
the species designed in the 'Museum Ulricae.'

M. HYSTRIX. _M._ ecaudatus edentulus, fauce laevi.

M. MANCINELLA. _M._ ecaudatus, edentulus fauce striata.

This original heading, and the absence of the erroneous synonym from
the MS., confirm the received opinion of the identity of the Museum
species (not that of the 'Systema') with _Purpura mancinella_.

M. HIPPOCASTANUM. _M._ ecaudatus edentulus, fauce edentula integra,
spinis serie triplici.

Gualtieri's erroneously cited figure was not indicated in the
manuscript. No specific name had been originally attached to the
description.

M. MELONGENA. _M._ ecaudatus edentulus fauce patula laevi, spinis serie
duplici.

"Bonan. 3. f. 186" had been added to the synonymy by our author. The
details were less copious than in the published edition, "apice solo
acuminatus" being the meagre substitute for the entire description
from "Spira" to the end.

M. FICUS. _Bul._ caudata, striis reticulatis, spira obtusa.

"Pet. Amb. t. 6. f. 9" was an omitted synonym. The shell described in
the 'Museum' was assuredly not the _ficus_ of most writers.

M. RAPA. _Bul._ caudata, striis longitudinalibus, spira acuta.

M. FUSUS. _Turric._ caudata laevis, labio dentato.

"Bonan. f. 121" and the name had been added to the MS. by Linnaeus.

M. BABYLONIUS. _Turric._ caudata, transversim angulo sulcata, labio
marginali versus basim sinu exciso.

M. COLUS. _Turric._ caudata striata, labio exteriore crenato.

The printed emendations were "longa" and "s. angulati." The name was
added by Linnaeus. The following unnamed _Turricula_ succeeded the
species in the manuscript copy:--

_T._ caudata striata, longitudinaliter sulcata.

Testa parva, striis plurimis secundum anfractus. Anfractus scabri,
sulcis longitudinalibus 15. Color anfractuum superne griseus inferne
pallidus. Apertura ovata. Rostrum baseos rectum, testae dimidio brevius.
Labium tantum exterius integrum. An filia praecedentis?

M. MORIO. _Strom._ spira subnodosa, labio exteriore intus rugoso.

The synonymy, as might be expected (for Seba was unknown to Linnaeus
when the descriptions were written), was not in the original.

M. COCHLIDIUM. _Strom._ spira pyramidata, anfractibus planis.

The reference to Seba, the name, and the "Cauda subulata, longitudine
testae" were not present.

M. CANALICULATUS. _Strom._ spira subconvexa, anfractibus distantibus.

The "Anfractus distincti canaliculo per omnes spiras," the name, and
the reference to Seba, were the printed additions. "Habitat in Canada.
Kalm." was appended.

M. ARUANUS. _Strom._ incurvus spinosus ventricosus, angulo obsoleto.

The objectionable name (for assuredly the _Buccinum Aruanum_ of
Rumphius suits not "spinosus") was not present in the original, but
had subsequently been added by our author, who seems to have erased
the original "Habitat in Canada. Kalm." I doubt not that _Pyrula
carica_ was intended.

M. PERVERSUS. _Strom._ inversus.

The wretched engraving of Gualtieri was not cited.

M. TRITONIS. _Cas._ pyramidalis laevis, columella dentata.

"Bonan. 3. f. 188" stood in the place of Seba. The printed additions
were "plerisque", "et suturis variis alternis crassis", and the
specific epithet. "Genus difficile eruitur" was written after the
description, and the following note erased:--"Ad genus retuli ob labium
interius adnatum in quibusdam latius, ob suturas verrucosas, ob caudam
canaliculatam parum elevatam, ob labium postice dentatum, quae omnia
affinitatem arguunt."

The _Triton nodiferus_ was probably designed by the following
description, which succeeded that of _M. Tritonis_:--

_Cas._ (corrected by Linnaeus to _Murex_) _Neptuni_. _C._ pyramidalis
nodosa, columella dentata.

Testa maxime facie statura et colore praecedentis. Anfractuum angulus
summus nodis prominentibus, unde et spira nodosa evadit, quod non in
praecedente. Apertura praecedentis. Labium interius magis dilatatum,
maximeque planum. Columella non dentata. Habitat Constantinopoli. Edw.
Carleson.

M. TRAPEZIUM. _Strom._ spira nodosa, labio denticulato, columella
rugosa.

M. ALUCO. _Turric._ recurvirostra, spinosa, serie simplici.

Gualtieri was not cited, and the reference was to "N. Strombus
tuberosus" (_Cerithium aluco_), not O. (_C. nodulosum_) of Rumphius.
The inner lip was described as "non adnatum, sed prominens": "s.
fuscis", and "Variat cauda recta, &c.", were not in the original.

Besides the published species, the following had been written, but
omitted in printing:--

TURRICULA ALBA. _T._ alba recurvirostra, anfractibus margine crenulatis.

Bon. 3. t. 84. Rumph. t. 30. f. K. Pet. Gaz. t. 56. f. 4. d'Arg. Conch.
t. 14. f. P. Gualt. Test. t. 57. f. D.

Testa laevis. Anfractus circiter 15, margine subcrenati. Color albus,
saepius saturatior ad marginem anfractuum. Apertura ovata, rostro
canaliculato, recurvo. Labium interius adnatum, dente unico obsoleto.

This was evidently identical, from its synonymy, with the _M. vertagus_
of the 'Systema.'

TURRICULA SENTICOSA. _T._ reflexo-emarginata, costis reticulatis.

d'Arg. Conch. t. 12. f. O.

Testa gibba, costis saepius 12 perpendiculari-obliquis, intertextis
striis lamellosis transversis ad anastomosases muricatis, unde admodum
scabra evadit. Anfractus ventricosi, saepius x. Color griseus. Apertura
ovata, interne striata, emarginata, parum reflexa.

Evidently this was identical with the _M. senticosus_ of the 'Systema.'

M. OLEAGINEUS. _M._ angulis sulcis inaequalibus, labio interiore
rugoso, costis alternis.

Gualt. Test. t. 49. f. G. d'Arg. Conch. t. 13. f. M.

Habitus et structura _rubeculae_, at octies major, nec vivide pictus,
sed colore testaceo fasciis fuscis longitudinalibus. Apertura intus
saturate crocea, rugis albis.

Apparently this was the _Triton pileare_ of authors,--not the
Mediterranean shell (_T. corrugatus_) termed _M. pileare_ in the
'Systema.'

M. PILEUS HELVETICUS. _M._ angulis rotundatis, tuberculis conicis,
apertura utrinque canaliculata.

d'Arg. Conch, t. 12. f. D. Rumph. t. 28. f. D.

Testa ovata, admodum inaequalis, adspersa nodis conicis tuberculatis
inaequalibus. Costae latere antico membranaceae, primae 2 oppositae,
reliquae alternae. Color flavus. Apertura hians, antice et postice
canaliculatae, faux intus striata. Labium exterius dentatum, intus
dilatato-membranaceum.

This suits very fairly the _Triton lampas_ of authors; far better,
indeed, than does the _M. Lampas_ of the 'Museum Ulricae.'

M. SUBULATUS. _M._ ecaudatus, pyramidalis.

Testa subulata instar turris, anfractuum undecim, reticulata
striis elevatis decussantibus punctis contiguationem eminentibus.
Costae oppositae et alternae. Color albus, maculis flavescentibus.
Apertura ovata, Labium exterius crassum, intus dentatum. Interius
dentato-glabrum.

Both _Triton! maculosus_ and _Ranella candisata_ approach the ideal
portrait, yet neither of them precisely agrees.

Under the name of _Trochus turritus_ our author appears to have first
described his _Murex radula_.

_Trochus_ exumbilicatus, pyramidatus, anfractibus duplici serie
muricatis.

Gualt, t. 58. f. F.

Testa elongata, flavescens s. testacea. Anfractus 16, connexi sutura
crenulata, dorso duplici serie instructi punctis eminentibus pallidis.
Apertura subtetragona, subtus in canalis rudimentum desineus.

The _Murex Neritoideus_ of the 'Systema' was thus described.

LYRA NERITOIDES. _L._ testa nodosa subrotunda.

Gualt.

Testa crassa, ponderosa, alba cum rubedine tincta, figura Neritae,
magnitudine juglandis, cincta anfractibus 5 e nodis obtusis
crassiusculis. Labium interius depressum, longitudine pictum macula
ferruginea.


TROCHUS.

Testa conica. Apertura quadrangularis, basi columella contorta, sinu
descendens.

The last five words had been substituted for "absque sinu evidente."

T. MACULATUS. _T._ contorto-umbilicatus conicus, vertice subnodoso.

The printed description and the synonymy are so very dissimilar to the
written one, that I entertain no doubt that an early definition of _T.
Niloticus_ (with references to "Olear. Mus. t. 9. f. 5" and "Bonan.
3. f. 102") was transmuted into that of a granular species, by the
addition of "quasi granis exasperata," &c.

T. SOLARIS was not mentioned in the manuscript.

T. PERSPECTIVUS. _T._ crenato-umbilicatus convexus obtusus: margine
acuto.

"Bonan. 3. f. 27, 28" was quoted, as illustrative: "costa crenata" not
"costa concava", was the earlier reading.

T. HYBRIDUS. _T._ crenato-umbilicatus, convexus, undique obtusus.

The proposed name was _T. spurius_. The "absque carina, rotundata" was
"absque angulis, glabra": "albo, flavoque" preceded "variegata".

T. PHARAONIUS. _T._ umbilicatus subovatus striatus, punctis globulosis,
labio dentato.

"Habitat in mari rubro, frequens. D. Hasselquist." was written: the
final remark was absent.

T. MAGUS. _T._ umbilicatus convexo-conicus nodosus.

The "cinereo nebulosa" was a manuscript emendation by Linnaeus.

T. MURICATUS. Except that "obverse" precedes "ovata", both the
diagnosis and the details are precisely similar to the printed account.

T. SCABER. _T._ umbilicatus subovatus, sulcis alternis majoribus
moniliformibus.

The erroneous figure of d'Argenville was not cited in the original,
nor, indeed, was any name attached to the description. The whorls were
said to number from 6 to 8 (not 4 or 5); and the aperture was termed
"ovata," not "subrotunda." "Pallida", the final remark, and the present
construction and enlargement of the passage relative to the inner lip
(which at first ran thus, "Labium posticum coadunatum, sinu postico
excisum"), had been added by Linnaeus himself.

T. LABIO. _T._ exumbilicatus ovatus striato-tuberculatus, labio
dentato.

The erroneous figure of d'Argenville was not cited; "variegata"
was the earlier reading of "marmorata"; "aliquot" of "et punctis";
"externo" of "margine". Linnaeus himself had enlarged the account of
the inner lip from the earlier "postice sinu excisum" to its present
length.

T. ZIZYPHINUS. _T._ umbilicatus conicus, striis papillosis.

This is clearly not the imperforated _zizyphinus_ of the 'Systema.'
Gualtieri was not referred to; "ambitu marginati", and "in aliis
clausus", were not in the copy: "columella parum obliqua" was an
addition in the Linnean handwriting.

T. TELESCOPIUM. _T._ exumbilicatus pyramidatus, striis exaratus; labio
postice recurvato, spirali, integro.

"Bon. 92", and "Klein 26. Pseudotrochus striatus", were the additional
synonyms of the MS.

T. DOLABRATUS. _T._ umbilicatus, labio postico recurvato sulcato,
ovato-pyramidalis, glaber.

The whorls were at first called imbricated. The "basis rotundata", and
"in superioribus vero unica", had been added by Linnaeus.


TURBO.

Testa conica. Apertura orbicularis, integra.

T. PERSONATUS. _T._ exumbilicatus inermis convexus, labio postice
diducto.

The I of the reference to Rumphius was a misprint for the written
1. A drawing of Gualtieri (t. 64. f. O), which accords not with the
description of this species, was an additional synonym. The name had
been added subsequently. _Turbo cidaris_ agrees in most respects.

T. PETHOLATUS. _T._ exumbilicatus ovatus laevis, anfractibus sursum
obsolete angulatis.

The written version furnishes us with the additional synonyms of "Gualt.
t. 64. f. F.", and "Klein 40. t. 2. f. 51."; the latter (also cited
in the 'Systema') was added by our author when he admitted the at
first excluded 5. 6 of the synonym of Rumphius. The admission of the
rounded-whorled variety? was evidently an afterthought.

T. CHRYSOSTOMUS. _T._ exumbilicatus subovatus rugosus striatus, spinis
fornicatis.

"Klein 41. t. 7. f. 126" (cited in the 'Systema'), and the printed "in
superiore serie majoribus", had been added by Linnaeus in the original
account.

T. TECTUM-PERSICUM. _T._ exumbilicatus subovatus, spinis obtusis
reflexis, subtus papillosus.

"Forte sola varietas sequentis a loco" has been remarked by our author,
who did not admit in his MS. the deceptive figure of d'Argenville.

T. PAGODUS. _T._ exumbilicatus conicus spinis obtusis concatenatis,
subtus papillose striatus.

Neither "acuminata", nor the inappropriate "rotundata", were in the
original account of this well-known species.

T. CALCAR. _T._ exumbilicatus depressus, anfractibus supra spinis
fornicato-compressis scabris.

To his printed synonyms Linnaeus has added "Gualt. t. 65. f. N. P.",
"List. Hist. t. 608. f. 46", and "Klein t. 1. f. 27". The "fornicatis"
was an emendation.

T. MARMORATUS. _T._ exumbilicatus subovatus nodosus laevis.

T. PICA. _T._ umbilicatus laevis conicus denticulo umbilicali.

"Habitat in Barbados, Jamaica", which corrects the stated locality of
the 'Systema,' and "Bonan. 29, 30", "Pet. Gaz. t. 70 f. 9", were the
additional particulars of the manuscript copy.

T. ARGYROSTOMUS. _T._ umbilicatus subovatus, striatus lineis dorsalibus.

The erroneous references to Gualtieri and d'Argenville, were not
present: "os argenteum variegatum" was written after the reference to
Rumphius, which name belongs to figure 3, not to 4, whose colouring,
moreover, excludes it from being illustrative. The intended specific
name was "os variegatum."

T. MARGARITACEUS. _T._ exumbilicatus subovatus, (? angulo) dorsali
elevato, ore postice diducto.

Rumphius was not referred to in the original, where "subtilissimis" was
in the place of "variis": the printed "margine albo" was a subsequent
emendation.

T. DELPHINUS. _T._ umbilicatus depressus hispidus, spinis ramosis.

"Pet. Amb. t. 3. f. 1", and "Grew Mus. t. 11. f. 5, 6", were also cited.

T. DISTORTUS. _T._ umbilicatus muricatus undique spinulis brevibus.

The final remark was not in the original.

T. SCALARIS. _T._ cancellatus conicus, anfractibus distantibus.

"Pretium immensum, saepe 100 ducatorum", was the final remark instead
of the printed one. "Pet. Amb. t. 2. f. 9", was an additional synonym
in the written version.

T. CLATHRUS. _T._ cancellatus pyramidatus, anfractibus contiguis
laevibus.

All the synonyms of the tenth edition of the 'Systema,' together with
"Johnst. t. 11. f. 9", were present in the MS., but most of them,
together with the final remark, had been subsequently added to the
copy by our author.

T. CRENATUS. _T._ cancellatus pyramidatus, anfractibus contiguis supra
crenatis.

The details of the 'Museum' were referred to before their publication.
"Pyramidalis" was the earlier reading for "turrita"; "saepe" was
absent: "transversim" preceded "crenati."

T. UVA. _T._ cancellatus ovatus, anfractibus contiguis imbricatis.

"Pet. Gaz. t. 27. f. 2. Olivaris" was the unpublished additional
synonym, and the intended name was borrowed from that work.
"Longitudinalibus" was "transversis" in the copy, where "ut latus
planum non conspiciatur exterius distincta linea" terminated the
account of the volutions: the colouring ("alba") was not indicated.

T. CORNEUS. _T._ umbilicatus, anfractibus teretibus decussatim
striatis, oris margine reflexo.

The "s. cornea", the name, and the "vix manifeste" had been added to
the original account, which latter was referred to previous to its
publication.

T. IMBRICATUS. _T._ pyramidalis, anfractibus deorsum subimbricatis.

The "praecedentibus tribus", here mentioned, were not those which the
species now follows, but nos. 358, 359, 360, after which it was placed
in the MS. "Grisea" had been added by Linnaeus.

T. REPLICATUS. The entire account of this shell was interpolated in
the MS. by Linnaeus.

T. ACUTANGULUS. _T._ pyramidalis, sulco unico acuto majore.

The last four words of the details were written subsequently to the
earlier description, to which no name was then appended.

T. DUPLICATUS. _T._ pyramidalis, sulcis 2 acutis.

"Bonan. 3. f. 114", and "List. 160. t. 3. f. 7", were additional
synonyms; both, however, were quoted in the 'Systema.' The "color
albus", and the term "obtusiores", were in the Linnean handwriting.

T. TEREBRA. _T._ pyramidatus, sulcis 6 acutis.

"Bonan. 3. f. 115" was in the place of the doubtful figure of
Rumphius; the indicated colouring was simply "pallida": the
"obsoletum" was an afterthought.


HELIX.

Testa cochleata, laevis. Apertura subrotunda segmento circuli exempto.

Except _scarabaeus_ and _amarula_, the members of this genus were
located in the same group as in the published edition.

H. SCARABAEUS. _Morion_ ovatus subanceps, labio utroque tridentato.

The "ovata, adeo" has replaced the earlier "ita", and "angulata" the
original "articulata". The account of the aperture was not inserted in
the manuscript, wherein "List. Hist. 577. f. 31" and "Klein 11. t. 1.
f. 23", had been inserted in the Linnean handwriting.

H. LAPICIDA. _H._ marginata perforata convexa carinata.

"Cincta" was a press emendation. The only written synonym was "Faun.
Suec. 1298".

H. OCULUS-CAPRI. _H._ marginata perforata subcarinata.

"Pet Gaz. t. 76. f. 6." was indicated as a synonym. The name was
Latinized from the "_l'oeil de bouc_" of d'Argenville who has,
however, represented an utterly different shell.

H. CAROCOLLA. _H._ submarginata imperforata carinata, labio interiore
recto.

D'Argenville's figure was, evidently, not at first considered
sufficiently illustrative to be referred to: it was not cited in the
written copy. "Conicoplaniuscula" was the reading for "convexa",
"segmento circuli" (the 1/4 without any sequence was absurd) for
"semiovata": the size, as usual, was not given.

H. CORNU-MILITARE. _H._ marginata imperforata subcarinata, labio
interiore explanato.

The deceptive figure of Gualtieri was not at first cited.

H. CORNEA. _H._ marginata convexa umbilicata, spira plana.

"Faun. Suec. 1304" was in place of the reference to 'Lister's English
Conchology,' a work apparently unknown to our author when he first
drew up the Museum Catalogue. I doubt the identity of this shell (the
intended name for which was _tabellaris_) with the cornea of the
'Systema.'

H. CORNU-ARIETIS. _H._ utrinque depressa.

"List. Hist. t. 136. f. 40" was written by our author in the
manuscript copy.

H. AMPULLACEA. _H._ subrotunda, sursum ventricosior glabra.

The original reading of "anfractus superne ventricosi" was "abdomen
superne ventricosius". The erroneous reference to Gaultieri was not
at first attached to the description. The species of the Museum was
evidently distinct from that of the 'Systema.'

H. GLAUCA. _H._ subrotunda acuminata, labro postice marginato.

H. CITRINA. _H._ umbilicata convexa obtusa.

The final remark was an afterthought.

H. ARBUSTORUM. _H._ marginata perforata convexo-acuminata, ore
suborbiculari, margine duplici, antice elongato.

"Faun. Suec. 1295" was the only synonym; the work of Lister on English
Conchology not having been at first known to Linnaeus.

H. UNGULINA. _H._ marginata perforata spiralis convexa, ore
suborbiculato.

The "Gualt." was a misprint for the written "Rumph."

H. LUTARIA. _H._ ovata-oblonga umbilicata, interne coloratiore.

"Habitat frequens in lutosis fluviis, lacubus." May not the _Valvata
piscinalis_ be the shell intended?

H. PERVERSA. _H._ ovato-oblonga subperforata glabra.

"Pet. Gaz. t. 44. f. 7", and "Grew. Mus. t. 10. f. 9" cited in
the 'Systema', were also referred to in the MS. "Alba", and "in
quibusdam", were interpolations in the Linnean handwriting: _H.
sulphurata_ was the intended designation.

H. IANTHINA. _H._ subrotunda obtusa patula diaphana.

The entire account of this beautiful shell was written by Linnaeus
subsequently to the labours of his amanuensis: the twelve last
printed words were not present. The cited figure of Gualtieri was not
admitted, as a representation, but only alluded to in the final remark
of "Confer Gualt. t. 64. f. O." "List. Hist. t. 572. f. 23", and
"Sloan. Jam. 2. p. 239. t. 1. f. 4" were indicated as delineations.

H. NEMORALIS. _H._

"Habitat ubique in Europae nemoribus", and "Argen. t. 32. f. 8", were
the unprinted additions. Lister's English Conchology was not, of
course, mentioned. "Flavescens" and "nigro-purpurascens", were not in
the original.

H. HAEMASTOMA. _H._ imperforata subrotunda fusca fascia longitudinali
subrecta alba, ore purpureo.

H. DECOLLATA. _H._ elongata laevis truncato-mutilata.

"Pet. Gaz. t. 66. f. 1", and "Habitat in Arabia. Hasselquist. Santa
Cruz. Petiv." were the unprinted additions. The entire account was in
the handwriting of our author.

H. AMARULA. _Nerita_ edentula oblonga, anfractibus multifariam
denticulatis.

Our author was evidently puzzled as to the generic position of
this peculiar-looking shell, for he has written "Habitu accedit ad
Volutas vespertiliones, ore Helicibus, sed labium interius planum, et
affinitas cum antecedenti fiat, ut hic relinquatur." The preceding
shell alluded to was _N. corona_.

H. NERITOIDEA. _H._ convexa longitudinaliter striata.

The erroneous reference to Gualtieri was not present in the written
copy.

H. PERSPICUA. _H._ convexo-ovata, labio interiore nullo, apertura ad
apicem usque pervia.

The then unpublished details of both this and the preceding were
referred to in the tenth edition of the 'Systema.' Patens was the
proposed specific appellation.

H. HALIOTOIDEA. _H._ depresso-planiuscula obtusissima, ore ovali
dilatato.

None of the cited figures were at first accepted by our author, who
only added that of Rumphius to the earlier description, and wholly
omitted the rest. "Transverse" preceded "striata".


NERITA.

Testa subrotunda, obtusa. Labium interius planum, transversim
truncatum, depressum.

The generic arrangement was similar to that of the printed version.

N. CANRENA. _N._ edentula umbilicata, spira mucronata, labio reflexo
bifido.

When Linnaeus first described this shell, under the appellation of
_N. musica_, he did not admit a single one of the cited figures as
illustrative.

N. GLAUCINA. _N._ edentula convexa, umbilico simplici semiclauso
gibboso dicolore.

None of the deceptive figures were at first referred to, but had been
added at subsequent period; and that of Rumphius again erased. _N.
luteola_ was the intended name.

N. ALBUMEN. _N._ edentula subrotunda, umbilico teretinsculo.

The present heading agrees with the subsequent details, which could
not be affirmed of the printed one borrowed from the 'Systema.' The
MS., in some degree, clears up the extraordinary confusion in which
the Linnean species was enveloped. There were two _N. albumens_ in
the written copy. The shell here described (assuredly not the lobed
_albumen_ of the 'Systema') was originally termed _hepatica_ or
_luteola_ (for both had been erased). The true _albumen_ was described
as "edentula subrotunda, umbilico subcordato labri interioris lobo
explanato" and the only figure referred to was "Rumph. t. 22. f. B."
"Klein 13. Platystoma vitellum compressum" was also mentioned. This
description was suppressed, and the other species retained, with the
erroneous designation, and the faulty synonymy, attached. Nor was this
the only change. In order to include the _Natica vitellus_ of authors
("Rumph. t. 22. f. A. Valvata laevis prima s. vitellus" had been quoted
by our author) the "aut lutea", "aut maculis albis", had been added to
the earlier description: so, likewise, had been "Apertura rotundata,
semicordata", and "glabrum, planiusculum, nitidum." I suspect, then,
that whilst the ideal of the _albumen_ of the 'Systema' was any
hemispherical or flattened _Natica_ with a labial lobe (such as _Nat.
albumen_, _didyma_, _olla_, _&c._), the _albumen_ of the 'Museum', as
printed, was composed of _Natica rufa_ ("Rumph. 22. f. D." was quoted
in the MS.) and _vitellus_ (for A, not B, of Rumphius was the letter
indicated in the MS.).

N. MAMMILLA. The entire account of this common shell was added in the
Linnean handwriting. The inappropriate "aut lutea" was not at first
present.

N. CORONA. _N._ edentula, simplici spira spinosa.

"Pet. Amb. t. 3. f. 4.", a mere copy of the Rumphian figure, was also
quoted. The 19 in the reference to d'Argenville was a misprint for the
written 10. _N. spinosa_ was the intended designation.

N. RADULA. _N._ edentula sulcata, tuberculis aequalibus.

The valvata granulata of Rumphius (t. 22. f. M.) was referred to at
illustrative.

N. CORNEA. _N._ edentula, obsolete striata.

N. BIDENS. _N._

"Obsoletis" followed "duobus": the name had been written subsequent to
the description.

N. VIRGINEA. _N._ subedentula ovata laevis.

"Dentibus pluribus minutissimis" preceded "oris"; "Pet. Gaz. t. 11.
f. 3" was in the place of the delusive figure of d'Argenville: the
variety d was a subsequent addition.

N. POLITA. _N._ laevis, labiis dentatis.

The 1 in the synonym of Rumphius was a misprint for the written I.

N. PELERONTA. _N._ striata, labiis dentatis, interiore planiusculo
rugoso.

The erroneous synonym was added, along with the name peleronta, to the
written details: _N. rufa_ was the original appellation.

N. ALBICILLA. _N._ striata, labiis subdentatis, interiore tuberculato.

N. HISTRIO. _N._ sulcata, transversim striata, labio interiore dentato.

The name, and the synonym, were added by Linnaeus to the written
details.

N. PLICATA. _N._ sulcata, labiis profunde dentatis, interiore
rotundato, exteriore utrinque dentibus acutis conicis.

The variety alluded to was a subsequent addition. The details of the
'Museum' had been quoted, in anticipation, for this species.

N. GROSSA. _N._ sulcata labiis dentatis, interiore convexo rugoso.

N. CHAMAELEON. _N._ sulcata, labiis dentatis, interiore rugoso
tuberculato.

"Habitat in Banda", and "compositis" after "subtilissimis", are the
unprinted additions.

N. UNDATA. _N._ sulcata, labiis dentatis, interiore rugoso,
tuberculato.

The erroneous figure of Gualtieri was not cited when the description
was drawn up, but added to the details, along with "confluentibus.
Spira acuta prominens", when the present name was substituted for the
earlier _nebulata_.

N. EXUVIA. _N._ sulcata, labiis dentatis, interiore denticulato.


HALIOTIS.

Testa univalvis, patens, convexa. Spira obsoleta, lateralis. Foramina
lateralia pervia.

H. MIDAE. _H._ subrotunda, utrinque nitida.

_Humana_ was the intended specific appellation.

H. TUBERCULATA. _H._ subovata, rugis transversis tuberculatis.

The reference to Lister was an emendation.

H. STRIATA. _H._ ovata, transversim rugosa, longitudinaliter striata.

No name was attached to either this or any member of the genus, except
the first.

H. VARIA. _H._ ovata, striis longitudinalibus, majoribus tuberculatis.

H. MARMORATA. _H._ ovata, striis longitudinalibus, transversis
obsoletis.

H. ASININA. _H._ oblonga, extra foramina angulata, striis elevatis.

H. PARVA. _H._ ovata, angulo inter foramina et spiram.

All the headings in this genus are similar to those in the 'Systema'.


PATELLA.

Testa conica, convexa. Spira regularis nulla vera.

The limits of this genus were precisely those of the printed edition.

P. EQUESTRIS. _P._ ungue fornicali nutante.

P. NERITOIDEA. _P._ integra ovata, apice subspirali, labio laterali.

"Supra" preceded "convexa", and the "fere" was before "apice".

P. CHINENSIS. _P._ conica latior laevis, labio interno laterali.

This was an addition to the original catalogue.

P. PORCELLANA. _P._ basi interne labiata, pone mucronato-subspiralis.

P. CREPIDULA was not mentioned in the manuscript.

P. SACCHARINA. _P._ margine sinuato, carinata, costis 7.

"Pet, Amb. t. 3. f. 3", and "Klein 117. t. 8. f. 4", were additional
synonyms: both are in the 'Systema.'

P. BARBARA. _P._ dentata, costis 19 elevatis.

P. GRANULARIS. _P._ margine dentato, striis elevatis mucronibus
imbricatis.

The erroneous reference to Gualtieri was not in the original.

P. GRANATINA. _P._ margine angulato, striis 11 laevibus.

"Interius" was the earlier reading of "subtus".

P. TUBERCULATA. _P._ dentata conica tuberculata, postice sima.

_Sima_ was the earlier name in the MS., but was erased by Linnaeus.

P. LUTEA. _P._ integerrima striata, vertice mucronato inflexo.

P. UNGUIS. _P._ ovali-oblonga, apice emarginata, mucrone dorsali
carinato.

_Unguiformis_ was the intended appellation.

P. TESTUDINARIA. _P._ ovata glaberrima integerrima.

P. RUSTICA. _P._ integra, striis 50 obtusiusculis.

P. FUSCA. _P._ ovata integerrima, striis elevatis, vertice obtuso.

The intended name was _cinereo-nigricans_.

P. CRUCIATA. _P._ ovalis convexa integerrima, cruce picta.

P. RETICULATA. _P._ conica compressa, superficie reticulata.

The suggestion I have elsewhere made that this uncertain shell might
prove the European _Pedicularia_, induces me to remark that, although
_P. Sicula_ has been supposed to be a comparatively modern discovery,
Favanne had long ago delineated it in the fourth plate (f. H. 1.) of
his enlarged edition of d'Argenville.

P. NIMBOSA. _P._ conica ovalis, costis confertis, vertice perforato.

The discrepancy between the heading borrowed from the 'Systema', and
the after details, is removed by the substitution of the original one.
The shell was termed _perforata_ (not _nimbosa_), and was wrongly
identified by Linnaeus with the striated brown _Fissurella_ of the
'Systema'.

       *       *       *       *       *

In addition to the printed species, the two following were present in
the manuscript copy.

P. SOLARIS. _P._ ovata integerrima, striis subnodosis, vertice
acutiusculo.

Testa ovata, diaphana, magnitudine extimi articuli digiti, margine
integerrimo, laevis, striis subtilissimis inaequalibus numerosissimis,
fasciis longitudinalibus rubris albo passim maculatis. Mucro
acutiusculus obliquus albidus.

This was placed in the section having a simple margin.

P. PERFOLIATA. _P._ conica, reclinata, perfoliata.

Testa magnitudine coryli nucis, conica, sed cono retro inclinato,
acutissima, alba, imbricata lamellis horizontaliter testam
cingentibus. Margo integer, ovalis, antrorsum gibbus s. dilatatus.
Cavitas profunde glabra.

This description very fairly suits the _Patella antiquata_ of the
twelfth edition of the 'Systema'.


DENTALIUM.

Testa univalvis, subcylindrica, utrinque aperta. Spira regularis nulla.

Although the _Serpulae_ were intermingled, it is clear that they did
not accord with the above definition.

D. ELEPHANTINUM. _D._ subulatum subarcuatum, angulatum.

The synonymy of the tenth edition was appended, Lister excepted; the
erroneous 13 of the reference to the Gazophylaceum was erased. _Dens
elephantis_ was the proposed trivial name.

D. ENTALIS. _D._ subulato-cylindricum, subarcuatum.

The terminal details were not furnished.

_D. dentalium_ was the intended appellation.


SERPULA.

In the original version of the 'Museum Ulricae,' the members of this
genus are not separated from the _Dentalia_ (a proof, among many
others, of the early date of this catalogue). Linnaeus, however,
when revising the transcript, had meditated the withdrawing of _S.
arenaria_ and _lumbricalis_, and constituted for them a nameless genus
with the following definition:--

Testa tubulosa, isthmis concamerata, dissepimentis integris, nec
perforatis, s. communicantibus.

This genus would have been the equivalent of the modern _Vermetus_.

S. TRIQUETRA. _D._ triquetrum, adhaerens.

The reference to Gualtieri (whose figure was somewhat uncertain, yet
probably designed for _Vermilia triquetra_) was queried. The proposed
name was _D. parasiticum_.

S. CONTORTUPLICATA. _D._ teretiusculum, depressum, rugosum.

There was at first no name to the description of this shell; but it
was added in the handwriting of Linnaeus.

S. GLOMERATA. _D._ teres glomeratum.

The 'decussato-rugosa' of the 'Systema', applicable to the _'Vermetus
subcancellatus_', the shell designed in that work, was not inserted.
Gualtieri's figure is that of _Vermetus glomeratus_, for the colouring
of which 'alba' would be a most inappropriate term.

S. LUMBRICALIS. _D._ spira divaricata teretiusculum, integrum.

D'Arg. t. 29. f. 1. was an additional synonym.

S. ARENARIA. _D._ teres rectiusculum intestiniforme.

Despite the name borrowed from Rumphius, the _Vermetus gigas_ was the
object defined in the tenth edition of the 'Systema'. The absence from
the manuscript of the reference to Gualtieri's drawing of that shell,
and "rectiusculum" in the written diagnosis, confirms the conclusion
previously arrived at, that the _Septaria arenaria_ of authors was
the species intended in the 'Museum Ulricae': it was subsequently
termed _S. polythalamia_ by Linnaeus. The delusive "subangulata" of the
supposititious diagnosis was of course absent.

The _V. gigas_ was probably intended by the following unpublished
description.

D. INTESTINIFORME. _D._ teres flexuosum intestiniforme.

Testa rudis crassitie digiti et ultro, flexuosa vario modo in diversis,
integra, intus laevis.

S. ANGUINA.

The two very dissimilar _Siliquariae_ united under this appellation
in the 'Museum Ulricae,' were originally held distinct. The prickly
variety was the unpublished type, and was thus defined:--

D. ANGUINUM. _D._ spira inaequali angulata aculeata, sulco
longitudinali perforata.

Rumph. 125. t. 41. f. H. Solen anguinus.

Lang. Test. 6. Tubulus vermicularis crista dentata.

Testa albida, teretiuscula, angulis 9 obsoletis. Anfractus inaequales,
nunc confertiores, nunc remotiores. Sulcus longitudinalis in superiore
latere perforatus serie punctorum. Spinae breves, fornicatae ad angulos
in latere inferiore.

Condensation, that peculiar faculty of the mental organization of
Linnaeus, induced him to suppress this description, and attach the
species, as a variety, to the form he had simultaneously characterized
as _D._ spira elongata, teretiusculum, inerme, fissura longitudinali.
Gualt. test. 10. f. z.

To this latter the published details belong, except the expression
"passim concatenata et quasi poris pertusa" (which was a subsequent
and fallacious addition), and the account of the variety.

S. PENIS. _D._ teres, extremitate radiata disco cylindris poroso.

"Bonan. i. f. 38.", indicated in the tenth edition of the 'Systema',
was among the synonyms. The "Stigma, &c." was an addition; so too were
"laevis," "tubulosis", and "aequalibus". The term "hemisphaerico" has
replaced the earlier "convexo."

In addition to the published species, the _S. Spirorbis_ of the
'Systema' appears to have been indicated as

D. PLANORBE. _D._ spira plana, adhaerens.

It. W. Goth. 170. Dentalium testa spirali plana adhaerente.

Planc. Conch. 13. n. 3. Vermiculus in littore Veneto foliis algae
adhaerens.

Testa minima, magnitudine nuper ab ovo exclusae cochleae, cujus formam
omnino gerit, at plana omnino est, et altero latere omnino fuci foliis
adhaeret.

This was evidently different from the _Serpula planorbis_ of the
'Systema.'

       *       *       *       *       *




Catalogue of the Dipterous Insects collected at Makessar in Celebes,
by Mr. A. R. WALLACE, with Descriptions of New Species. By FRANCIS
WALKER, Esq., F.L.S.

(Read June 2nd. 1859.)


Fam. CULICIDAE, _Haliday_.

Gen. MEGARHINA, _Desvoidy_.

1. MEGARHINA IMMISERICORS, n. s. _Mas._ Nigra, squamosa, capite
thoraceque viridibus, hujus disco cupreo, proboscide palpis pedibusque
purpureis, femoribus subtus fulvis, tarsis intermediis albo
bifasciatis, tarsis posticis albo unifasciatis, pectore argenteo,
abdomine cyaneo fasciculis lateralibus albis subapicalibus nigris
apicalibus auratis, alis subcinereis apud costam nigricantibus.

_Male._ Black. Head and thorax with green metallic scales; disc of
the latter with cupreous scales. Proboscis, palpi, and legs purple;
femora tawny beneath; middle tarsi with two white bands; hind tarsi
with one white band. Pectus silvery. Abdomen blue, widening from the
base to the tip, with small white tufts of hairs along each side; four
larger black subapical tufts, two gilded apical tufts. Wings slightly
greyish, blackish along the costa; veins black. Length of the body 5
lines; of the wings 8 lines.


Gen. CULEX, _Linn._

2. CULEX OBTURBANS, n. s. _Foem._ Nigricans, thoracis disco fusco,
abdomine cupreo apice viridescente, gutta subapicali alba, fasciis
ventralibus latis albis, pedibus subcupreo squamosis, femoribus subtus
albis, alis cinereis.

_Female._ Blackish. Proboscis pale; its sheaths dark, longer than the
thorax. Disk of the thorax with brown tomentum. Abdomen with cupreous
tomentum, and with a slight greenish tinge towards the tip; a white
subapical dot; underside with broad white bands. Legs with a cupreous
tinge; femora whitish beneath. Wings grey; veins black, fringed.
Length of the body 2-3/4 lines; of the wings 4-1/2 lines.

3. CULEX IMPATIBILIS, n. s. _Mas._ Subcupreo-niger, capite albo
punctato, pectore albo guttato, abdomine fasciis interruptis albis,
genubus albis, femoribus posticis albis apice nigris, tarsis
intermediis basi albis, tarsis posticis albo bifasciatis, alis
cinereis.

_Male._ Black, with a very slight cupreous tinge. Head with shining
white points. Sheaths of the proboscis dark tawny, longer than the
thorax. Pectus with shining white dots. Abdomen with interrupted
shining white bands, which are most complete beneath. Knees white;
hind femora white, with black tips; middle tarsi white at the base;
hind tarsi with two white bands. Wings cinereous; veins black,
fringed. Length of the body 2 lines; of the wings 3 lines.

4. CULEX IMPELLENS, n. s. _Foem._ Fuscus, subtus testaceus, proboscide
nigricante albo-fasciato, pedibus pallidis, femoribus albidis apice
obscurioribus, tarsorum articulis basi albis, alis cinereis.

_Female._ Brown, testaceous beneath. Proboscis blackish, with a white
band, a little longer than the thorax. Legs with pale reflections;
femora whitish, with darker tips; joints of the tarsi white at the
base. Wings grey; veins black, fringed. Length of the body 2-1/2
lines; of the wings 4 lines.


Gen. ANOPHELES, _Meigen_.

5. ANOPHELES VANUS, n. s. _Mas._ Cinereo-fuscus, gracilis, antennis
late plumosis, pedibus testaceis longis gracillimis, tarsorum
articulis basi albis, alis subcinereis antice nigro punctatis.

_Male._ Cinereous brown, slender. Proboscis full half the length of
the body. Palpi nearly half the length of the body. Antennae broadly
plumose. Legs testaceous, long, very slender; joints of the tarsi
white at the base. Wings slightly cinereous, with black points on the
fore part; veins black, fringed. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of
the wings 4 lines.


Fam. TIPULIDAE, _Haliday_.

Gen. LIMNOBIA, _Meigen_.

The following species, in the structure of the wing-veins, does not
accord with any of Meigen's divisions of the genus. The mediastinal
vein ends at about three-fourths of the length of the wing; the
subcostal ends at seven-eighths of the length, and is connected
with the radial by a transverse veinlet at its tip; the radial, the
cubital, and the 1st and the 3rd externo-medial are long and of equal
length; the 2nd externo-medial springs from the 1st, at one-fourth
of its length; the 3rd externo-medial is connected by a transverse
veinlet near its base with the subanal.

6. LIMNOBIA IMPONENS, n. s. Ochracea, palpis antennisque
nigricantibus, his thoracis dimidio brevioribus, thorace antico
valde elongato et attenuato, abdomine piceo, alis subcinereis longis
angustis, stigmate nigricante longissimo, halteribus piceis basi
testaceis.

Ochraceous. Proboscis, palpi, and antennae blackish, the latter
moniliform setaceous, not half the length of the thorax. Thorax much
elongated and attenuated in front. Abdomen piceous. Wings greyish,
long narrow; veins black, testaceous at the base and along the costa
from the base to the stigma, which is blackish and very long; halteres
piceous, testaceous at the base. Length of the body 7 (?) lines; of
the wings 16 lines.


Gen. TIPULA, _Linn._

7. TIPULA INFINDENS, n. s. _Foem._ Fusca, capite apud oculos subtusque
cinereo, antennis basi testaceis thorace brevioribus, thorace
vittis quatuor ochraceis, abdominis apice ochraceo, pedibus fulvis
longissimis, femoribus apice fuscis, alis cinereis apud costam luridis.

_Female._ Brown. Head cinereous about the eyes and beneath. Antennae
setaceous, submoniliform, testaceous at the base, shorter than the
thorax. Thorax with a slight cinereous tinge, and with four dull
ochraceous stripes. Abdomen ochraceous at the tip. Legs tawny,
slender, very long; tips of the femora brown. Wings cinereous, lurid
along the costa to the stigma, which is brown; veins black, tawny at
the base. Length of the body 10 lines; of the wings 24 lines.

8. TIPULA INORDINANS, n.s. _Mas._ Fusca, capite pallide cinereo vitta
fusca, antennis testaceis thorace valde longioribus, articulis basi
nigris nodosis setigeris thorace vittis quatuor pallide cinereis,
abdominis lateribus ventreque testaceis, segmentis basi nigro postice
albomarginatis, pedibus nigris longissimis, femoribus dimidio basali
testaceis apices versus albo fasciatis, tibiis albo fasciatis,
tarsis albo _bifasciatis,_ alis hyalinis striga costali subapicali
nigricante, venis transversis nigro nebulosis.

_Male._ Brown. Head pale cinereous, with a brown stripe. Antennae
testaceous, slightly setaceous, much longer than the thorax; joints at
the base black, nodose, setigerous. Thorax with four pale cinereous
stripes; pectus pale cinereous. Abdomen testaceous beneath _and_
along each side, thickened towards the tip; segments whitish _at_ the
_base,_ black along the hind borders. Legs black, slender, very long;
femora testaceous for half the length from the base, with a white
subapical band; tibiae with a white band beyond the middle; tarsi with
two broad white bands. Wings hyaline, with a blackish costal subapical
streak; veins and stigma black, the latter small; transverse veins and
forked subapical vein clouded with black; veins testaceous. Length of
the body 9 lines; of the wings 16 lines.


Gen. CTENOPHORA, _Fabr._

9. CTENOPHORA INCUNCTANS, n.s. _Mas._ Atra, capite thoraceque laete
ochraceis, antennarum ramis longis aequalibus subpilosis, abdomine basi
ochraceo. _Foem._ Thoracis disco saturate ochraceo. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}._ Capite
thoraceque saturate ochraceis, alis albido strigatis et guttatis.

Deep black. _Male._ Head and thorax bright ochraceous. Antennae with
long equal slightly pilose branches. Abdomen ochraceous at the base.
_Female._ Disc of the thorax deep ochraceous. _Var._ Head and thorax
deep ochraceous. Wings with five whitish streaks and two exterior
elongated whitish dots. Length of the body 8-10 lines; of the wings
18-22 lines.

10. CTENOPHORA GAUDENS, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Laete ochracea, abdomine
apicem versus nigro, pedibus nigris, femoribus ochraceis apice nigris,
tibiis fascia basali candida, alis nigricantibus _basi_ ochraceis,
fascia exteriore albida.

_Male and Female._ Bright ochraceous. Abdomen black towards _the_ tip.
Legs black; femora ochraceous, black towards the tips; tibiae with a
snow white basal band. Wings blackish, ochraceous _at_ the base, with
a whitish exterior band which is attenuated hindward. _Male._ Antennae
with long, equal, slightly pilose branches. Length of the body 7-10
lines; of the wings 14-16 lines.


Fam. STRATIOMIDAE, _Haliday_.

Gen. PTILOCERA, _Wied._

11. Ptilocera smaragdina. _Walk. Dipt._ pt. 3. 525.

Inhabits also the Philippine Islands.

12. PTILOCERA SMARAGDIFERA, n. s. _Mas._ Nigra, thorace pubescente
vittis duabus smaragdinis, lateribus purpurascentibus, abdomine
nigricanti-cyaneo squamis lateralibus viridibus, tarsis basi obscure
rufescentibus, alis subhyalinis, dimidio basali antice nigricante
postice cinereo.

_Male._ Black. Thorax thickly pubescent, purplish along each side,
with two emerald green dorsal stripes. Abdomen blackish blue, with
green scales along each side. Tarsi dark reddish towards the base.
Wings nearly hyaline; basal half blackish in front, cinereous
hindward; veins black, yellow along the costa exteriorly. Length of
the body 5 lines; of the wings 8 lines.


Gen. HERMETIA, _Latr._

13. HERMETIA REMITTENS, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Nigra, capite antico
livido, antennis basi subtus lividis apice albis, thorace vittis
tribus cinereis, abdomine aeneo-nigro, tibiis basi tarsisque albidis,
alis nigricantibus basi subhyalinis. _Mas._ Abdominis dimidio basali
livido.

_Male and Female._ Black. Head livid in front; a whitish line along
the eye on each side of the front. Antennae livid beneath towards the
base; apical joint elongate-fusiform, white at the tip, as long as all
the other joints together. Thorax with 3 indistinct cinereous stripes.
Abdomen slightly bronzed, livid for half the length from the base in
the male. Tibiae at the base and tarsi whitish. Wings blackish, nearly
hyaline at the base; halteres livid. Length of the body 78 lines; of
the wings 12-14 lines.


Gen. STRATIOMYS, _Geoffr._

14. STRATIOMYS IMMISCENS, n. s. _Mas._ Nigra, antennis fulvis parvis,
scutelli margine postico spinisque pallide flavis, abdomine pallide
flavo fasciis tribus dorsalibus latis nigris postice excavatis,
pedibus flavescentibus, femoribus tibiisque nigro fasciatis, tarsis
nigris, alis limpidis.

_Male._ Black. Head beneath and thorax with whitish down. Antennae
tawny, short. Scutellum along the hind border and spines pale yellow.
Abdomen pale yellow, with three broad black dorsal bands, whose hind
borders are much indented. Legs yellowish; femora and tibiae with black
bands; tarsi black. Wings limpid; veins brown; halteres pale. Length
of the body 6 lines; of the wings 10 lines.

15. STRATIOMYS PINALIS, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, aureo-tomentosa, capite
subtus fulvo, antennis fulvis parvis, thorace vittis tribus nigris,
thoracis margine postico spinisque pallide flavis, abdomine fulvo,
pedibus pallide fulvis, alis limpidis.

_Female._ Black with gilded tomentum. Head tawny beneath, with two
more or less tawny calli above the antennae, which are tawny and short.
Thorax with three black stripes; scutellum with the hind border and
the spines pale yellow. Abdomen tawny, paler beneath. Legs pale tawny.
Wings limpid; veins tawny; stigma testaceous. Length of the body 4
lines; of the wings 8 lines.


Gen. CLITELLARIA, _Meigen_.

16. CLITELLARIA FESTINANS, n. s. _Mas._ Nigra, aureo-tomentosa,
antennis rufescenti-fulvis apices versus nigris, thorace fascia
vittisque duabus aureis, scutelli spinis apice rufescenti-fulvis,
abdomine vittis tribus macularibus aureis, pedibus luteis, alis luteis
postice cinereis apice nigricantibus.

_Male._ Black, thick, with gilded down. Antennae nearly as long as the
breadth of the head; scape reddish tawny, fusiform, longer than the
flagellum, which is black and lanceolate. Thorax and pectus with an
interrupted downy band; thorax with two downy stripes, and with two
lateral black spines; scutellum with a downy border, and with two
stout spines, whose tips are reddish tawny. Abdomen with three rows of
downy spots; the middle spots triangular; the lateral spots oblique.
Legs and halteres luteous. Wings luteous along the costa, cinereous
hindward, where the veins are bordered with black; tips broadly
blackish; a black dot adjoining the luteous stigma. Length of the body
6 lines; of the wings 12 lines.

_Foem.?_ Nigra, cinereo-tomentosa, antennis scapo intus fulvo,
thoracis vittis duabus abdominisque maculis cinercis, femoribus
tibiisque albidis apices versus nigris, tarsis basi albidis, alis
obscure cinereis fascia lata subapicali nigricante.

_Female?_ Black. Head shining, with white tomentum about the eyes.
Antennae shorter than the breadth of the head; scape linear, tawny on
the inner side, much shorter than the flagellum, which is lanceolate.
Thorax with two stripes of cinereous tomentum and with two lateral
spines; scutellum with two stout spines; pectus with silvery cinereous
tomentum. Abdomen with cinereous tomotose spots, which are disposed
in three rows, Femora and tibiae whitish black towards the tips; tarsi
whitish at the base. Wings dark grey, with a broad blackish subapical
band; veins and stigma black; halteres whitish. Length of the body 5
lines; of the wings 10 lines.

17. CLITELLARIA GAVISA, n. s. _Mas._ Nigra, albido-tomentosa, antennis
testaceis apices versus nigris, thorace vittis duabus aureis, scutelli
spinis apice flavis, abdomine vittis tribus macularibus aureis,
pedibus flavis apices versus nigricantibus.

_Male._ Black, with whitish down. Antennae shorter than the breadth
of the head; scape testaceous, longer than the flagellum, which is
pilose. Thorax with two stripes of gilded tomentum, and with two
lateral spines; spines of the scutellum yellow towards their tips.
Abdomen with three rows of gilded tomentose spots, the dorsal spots
triangular; the lateral spots oblique. Legs yellow; tarsi black
towards the tips. Wings cinereous, blackish towards the tips and about
the transverse veins; veins black, yellow towards the base; halteres
yellow. Length of the body 3-1/2 lines; of the wings 7 lines.

_Foem.?_ Cinereo-tomentosa, thoracis vittis abdominisque maculis
cinereis, pedibus albidis, femoribus tibiis tarsisque apice nigris
alis cinereis, fascia subapicali nigricante.

_Female?_ With cinereous tomentum. Head white and shining about the
eyes. Stripes of the thorax and spots of the abdomen cinereous.
Legs whitish; femora, tibiae and tarsi black towards the tips. Wings
cinereous with a blackish subapical band.


Gen. OXYCERA, _Meig._

18. OXYCERA MANENS, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Nigra, cinereo-subtomentosa,
antennis fulvis, pedibus pallide fulvescentibus aut lividis, alis vix
cinereis. _Mas._ Thorace aureo-subtomentoso.

_Male and Female._ Black, slightly covered with cinereous tomentum.
Head white and shining about the eyes. Antennae tawny. Thorax of the
male slightly covered with gilded tomentum. Legs dull pale tawny or
livid; hind tibiae black. Wings hardly cinereous; veins and stigma pale
in the male, black in the female. Length of the body 3 lines; of the
wings 7 lines.


Gen. SARGUS, _Fabr._

19. SARGUS REPENSANS, n. s. _Mas._ Testaceus, pubescens, vertice
nigro, palpis lanceolatis, arista nigra, tibiis tarsisque posticis
nigris, his albo cinctis, tarsis anterioribus apice nigris, alis
cinereis apices versus nigricantibus.

Allied to S. AURIFER.

_Male._ Testaceous, pubescent. Vertex black. Palpi lanceolate,
extending along two-thirds of the space between the mouth and the
antennae; arista black. Hind tibiae and hind tarsi black, the latter
white towards the tips, which are black; anterior tarsi with black
tips. Wings cinereous, blackish towards the tips; veins black,
testaceous at the base. Length of the body 9 lines; of the wings 20
lines.

20. SARGUS REMEANS, n. s. _Foem._ Niger, pubescens, thorace
purpurascente-nigro, vittis duabus lateralibus pectoris disco
tibiisque anterioribus supra sordide albidis, alis nigricantibus.
_Mas.?_ Antennis piceis, thorace purpurascente-cupreo, pectore livido,
abdominis segmentis albido-marginatis, alis fuscescente, cinereis
extus albido-strigatis.

Allied to S. TENEBRIFER.

_Female._ Black, pubescent. Head wanting. Thorax purplish black, with
a dingy whitish stripe along each side; disk of the pectus dingy
whitish. Anterior tibiae dingy whitish above. Wings blackish; veins
black; halteres dingy whitish, with blackish knobs. Length of the body
9 lines; of the wings 20 lines.

_Male?_ Black. Head whitish about the mouth. Antennae piceous. Thorax
purplish cupreous, with a dingy whitish stripe along each side; pectus
livid. Abdomen with two lanceolate apical appendages; hind borders of
the segments whitish. Wings brownish cinereous, with slight whitish
streaks on the exterior areolets. Length of the body 7 lines; of the
wings 16 lines.

21. SARGUS REDHIBENS, n. s. _Foem._ Cyaneus, antennis fulvis, thoracis
lateribus anticis purpurascentibus, abdomine purpureo, pedibus
albidis, tibiis posticis femoribusque nigricante strigatis, alis
cinereis, _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}._ Vertice purpureo, thorace viridi.

_Female._ Blue. Antennae tawny. Thorax purplish on each side in front.
Abdomen purple, much broader than the thorax. Legs whitish; femora
with a blackish streak above towards the tips; hind tibiae with a
blackish apical streak. Wings cinereous; veins black; stigma blackish.
Halteres tawny. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}._ Vertex purple. Thorax green. Length
of the body 3-1/2-4 lines; of the wings 7-9 lines.

This may be a local variety of _S. metallinus_, but differs from that
species by the dark marks on its hind legs, and by the wing-veins
being black at the base.

22. SARGUS MACTANS, n. s. _Foem._ Cupreo-viridis, abdomine cupreo,
pedibus testaceis, tibiis posticis basi nigris alis cinereis apices
versus obscurioribus.

_Female._ Cupreous green, with cinereous down. Head wanting. Abdomen
cupreous. Legs testaceous; hind tibiae black for half the length from
the base. Wings cinereous, darker from the discal areolet to the tips;
veins black; stigma brown; halteres testaceous. Length of the body
4-1/2 lines; of the wings 10 lines.

23. SARGUS INACTUS, n. s. _Mas._ Albido-testaceus, vertice nigro,
thoracis disco scutellique apice purpureis, pectore maculis duabus
cupreis, alis cinereis.

_Male._ Whitish testaceous. Vertex black. Disk of the thorax and
scutellum towards the tip purple; pectus with a cupreous spot on each
side. Wings cinereous; veins black; stigma dark brown; discal areolet
shorter than that of the two preceding species. Length of the body 5?
lines; of the wings 10 lines.


Gen. NERNA, _Walk._

24. NERNA IMPENDENS, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Nigra, cinereo-subtomentosa,
antennis tarsis posterioribus halteribusque testaceis, tarsi anticis
tibiisque piceis, alis cinereis apud costam exteriorem nigricantibus.

_Male and Female._ Black, with very slight cinereous pubescence.
Antennae, posterior tarsi, and halteres testaceous; tibiae and fore
tarsi piceous. Wings cinereous, blackish along the exterior part of
the costa; veins and stigma black. Length of the body 3-1/2 lines; of
the wings 6 lines.


Gen. SOLVA, n. g.

_Corpus_ lineare. _Proboscis_ lanceolata. _Palpi_ porrecti, lineares,
caput non superantes, _Antennae_ lanceolatae. _Scutellum_ inerme,
_Abdomen_ thorace longius. _Pedes_ breviusculi, femoribus posticis
incrassatis subserratis. _Alae_ sat angustae.

Body linear. Head not broader than the thorax. Proboscis lanceolate.
Palpi porrect, linear, rounded at the tips, not extending beyond the
head. Antennae lanceolate, shorter than the breadth of the head; joints
indistinct. Thorax with a humeral callus and a linear callus on each
side. Scutellum unarmed. Abdomen rather longer than the thorax. Legs
rather short; hind femora incrassated, minutely serrated beneath;
hind tibiae very slightly curved, applied to the femora. Wings rather
narrow; 1st and 2nd cubital veins rather long; length of the discal
areolet more than thrice its breadth; 3rd and 4th externo-medial veins
connected towards the border; anal and subanal veins connected at some
distance from the border.

25. SOLVA INAMOENA, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereo-nigra, palpis, thoracis
callis, scutello, abdominis lateribus, ventre pedibusque testaceis,
antennis testaceis apice nigris, abdominis segmentis testaceo
marginatis, alis subcinereis.

_Female._ Cinereous black. Mouth, palpi, calli of the thorax,
scutellum, abdomen beneath and along each side except at the base,
legs, and halteres testaceous. Antennae testaceous except towards
the tips. Hind borders of the abdominal segments testaceous. Wings
greyish; veins black, testaceous towards the base. Length of the body
2-1/2-3 lines; of the wings 5-6 lines.


Gen. AMPSALIS, n. g.

_Foem. Corpus_ elongatum, sublineare. _Antennae_ filiformes;
flagellum lineare. _Thorax_ longi-ellipticus; scutellum bispinosum.
_Abdomen_ ellipticum, thorace paullo latius non longius. _Pedes_
longiusculi. _Alae_ angustae.

_Female._ Body elongate, nearly linear. Head a little broader than
the thorax. Eyes prominent. Palpi very short. Antennae filiform, much
longer than the breadth of the head; flagellum linear, about twice the
length of the scape; joints indistinct. Thorax elongate-elliptical;
scutellum armed with two obliquely ascending spines. Abdomen
elliptical, a little broader but not longer than the thorax. Legs
rather long. Wings narrow; 1st cubital vein about one-fourth the
length of the 2nd; four externo-medial veins complete; subanal vein
curved, joining the anal vein at some distance from the border; discal
areolet elongated and attenuated exteriorly; exterior side very short.

26. AMPSALIS GENIATA, n. s. _Foem._ Ferrugineo-fusca, antennis nigris
basi fulvis, thorace vittis duabus testaceis, scutello testaceo, apice
spinisque et pectoris disco nigris, abdomine nigro, basi vittis duabus
interruptis lateralibus pedibusque testaceis, alis cinereis apices
versus fuscescentibus.

_Female._ Ferruginous brown. Antennae black, tawny towards the base.
Thorax with two testaceous stripes; scutellum testaceous; tip and
spines black. Disk of the pectus black. Abdomen black; base and an
interrupted stripe along each side testaceous. Legs and halteres
testaceous. Wings grey, brownish in front towards the tips; veins
black, testaceous at the base; stigma testaceous. Length of the body 6
lines; of the wings 11 lines.


Gen. TRACANA, n. g.

_Mas et Foem. Corpus_ elongatum. Proboscis lanceolata. _Antennae_
graciles, filiformes, capite transverso vix breviores. _Thorax_
longi-ellipticus; scutellum bispinosum. _Abdomen_ thorace paullo
longius et latius. _Pedes_ longiusculi. _Alae_ non latae.

_Male and Female._ Body elongate. Head rather broader than the fore
part of the thorax. Mouth lanceolate; palpi very short. Antennae
slender, filiform, about as long as the breadth of the head; 3rd joint
long; 4th and following joints shorter. Thorax elongate-elliptical,
with a distinct linear callus along each side; scutellum armed with
two obliquely ascending spines. Abdomen elongate-elliptical, most
attenuated towards the base, a little broader and longer than the
thorax. Legs rather long. Wings long, not broad; 1st subcubital vein
hardly one-third the length of the 2nd; four externo-medial veins
complete; subanal vein curved, joining the anal vein near the border;
discal areolet oblong, narrower exteriorly; exterior side very short.

27. TRACANA ITERABILIS, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Cinereo-nigra, capite
antico fulvo, antennis albido-flavis basi nigricantibus, pedibus
fulvis, tibiis posticis femoribusque nigro-fuscatis, alis cinereis
apices versus nigricantibus. _Mas._ Abdomine fulvo maculis lateralibus
nigris. Foem. Abdominis basi lateribusque fulvis.

_Male and Female._ Cinereous black. Head in front and calli of the
thorax tawny. Antennae whitish yellow, blackish at the base. Legs
tawny; femora and hind tibiae banded with black. Wings grey, blackish
towards the tips; vein black; halteres tawny. _Male._ Abdomen tawny,
with some black spots on each side. _Female._ Abdomen tawny at the
base and along each side. Length of the body 5 lines; of the wings 10
lines.


Gen. ROSAPHA, n. g.

_Mas et Foem. Corpus_ angustum, elongatum, lineare. _Antennae_
graciles, filiformes, capite transverso longiores; articulus 3^{us}
fusiformis. _Scutellum_ spinis duabus longis acutis armatum. _Abdomen_
thorace vix longius aut latius. _Pedes_ breves. _Alae_ angustae.

_Male and Female._ Body narrow, elongated, linear. Mouth and palpi
extremely short. Antennae slender, filiform, longer than the breadth
of the head; 3rd joint long, fusiform; joints of the flagellum
indistinct. Thorax nearly linear, a little narrower in front;
scutellum armed with two long, acute, hardly ascending spines. Abdomen
subfusiform, narrowest towards the base, very little broader and
longer than the thorax. Legs short. Wings narrow; 1st cubital vein
nearly half the length of the 2nd; three complete externo-medial
veins; subanal vein curved, joining the anal vein at some little
distance from the border; discal areolet oblong; exterior side short.

28. ROSAPHA HABILIS, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Fulva, capite antennisque
nigris, his basi fulvis, thoracis macula antica elongata, spinis
apice, tibiis posticis apices versus tarsisque anterioribus nigris,
tarsis posticis albis apice nigris, alis cinerascentibus apices versus
nigris. _Foem._ Abdomine supra nigro, basi lateribusque fulvis.

_Male and Female._ Tawny. Head black, white beneath along the eyes.
Antennae black; 1st, 2nd, and 3rd joints tawny. Thorax with an
elongated black spot in front; spines of the scutellum black towards
the tips. Hind tibiae towards the tips and anterior tarsi black; hind
tarsi white with black tips. Wings greyish, blackish in front towards
the tips; veins black, tawny at the base; stigma ferruginous brown.
_Female._ Abdomen black above, except at the base and along each side.
Length of the body 3-1/2 lines; of the wings 7 lines.


Gen RUBA, n. g.

_Foem. Corpus_ breve, crassum, latum. _Caput_ parvum. _Antennae_
capite transverso vix breviores. _Scutellum_ inerme. _Abdomen_
globosum, thorace valde latius. _Pedes_ breves. _Alae_ mediocres.

_Female._ Body thick, short, broad. Head much narrower than the
thorax. Proboscis and palpi very short. Antennae nearly as long as the
breadth of the head; 3rd joint broader and longer than the flagellum,
of which the joints are short, compact, and minutely setulose. Thorax
a little longer than broad; scutellum unarmed. Abdomen globose, very
much broader and a little longer than the thorax. Legs short. Wings
moderately broad; 1st cubital vein not one-third of the length of
the 2nd; four complete externo-medial veins; subanal vein curved,
joining the anal vein at some distance from the border; discal areolet
elongated exteriorly, irregularly triangular; exterior side very short.

29. RUBA INFLATA, n. s. _Mas._ Testacea, valde pubescens, capite
subtus guttis duabus nigris, alis subcinereis apices versus
fuscescentibus, stigmate flavescente.

_Male._ Testaceous. Head with a black dot on each side of the mouth.
Flagellum of the antennae black. Thorax and abdomen very pubescent.
Wings slightly greyish, brownish towards the tips, and especially
so in front; veins black, testaceous at the base; stigma yellowish.
Length of the body 4 lines; of the wings 7 lines.


Gen. TINDA, n. g.

_Foem. Corpus_ longiusculum, depressum. _Caput_ oblongum, margine
postico elevato. _Antennae_ capite transverso vix breviores; articulus
3^{us} fusiformis; flagellum compressum, lanceolatum. _Scutellum_
spinosum. _Abdomen_ ellipticum, thorace latius non longius. _Pedes_
breves, graciles. _Alae_ angustae.

_Female._ Body somewhat elongated and depressed. Head somewhat oblong;
eyes nearly contiguous in front, diverging hindward, where there is an
elevated margin. Mouth and palpi very short. Antennae nearly as long as
the breadth of the head; 3rd joint fusiform, fully half the length of
the flagellum, which is compressed and lanceolate, and with indistinct
joints. Thorax slightly widening hindward; scutellum with six ? very
minute spines. Abdomen elliptical, broader but not longer than the
thorax. Legs short, slender. Wings narrow; 1st cubital vein less than
one-third the length of the 2nd; three complete externo-medial veins;
subanal vein joining the anal vein at some distance from the border;
discal areolet elongated, its exterior side very short.

30. TINDA MODIFERA, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, antennis basi testaceis,
pedibus testaceis, femoribus posterioribus supra obscurioribus, alis
cinereis costam versus subnigricantibus.

_Female._ Black, hardly shining. Antennae testaceous towards the base.
Legs testaceous; posterior femora somewhat darker above, except
towards the base. Wings grey, slightly blackish along most of the
costa; veins black; halteres testaceous. Length of the body 3 lines;
of the wings 5 lines.


Gen. SARUGA, n. g.

_Mas. Corpus_ contractum, breve, latum, crassum. _Vertex_ gibbosus.
_Oculi_ magni. _Antennae_ brevissimae; articulus 3^{us} rotundus; arista
apicalis, gracillima. _Thorax_ gibbosus; scutellum elevatum, conicum,
postice productum. _Abdomen_ transversum, thorace brevius. _Pedes_
breves, graciles, simplices. _Alae_ breviusculae.

_Male._ Body contracted, short, broad, thick. Head almost as broad as
the thorax; vertex gibbous; eyes large, bare; mouth extremely short
and small; antennae very short, 3rd joint round; arista apical, very
slender, a little longer than the antennae; thorax gibbous; scutellum
very gibbous, forming an upright cone, somewhat gibbous and conical
hindward, where it is horizontal; abdomen a little broader than long,
much shorter than the thorax; legs short, slender, simple; wings
rather short; veins in structure like those of _Oxycera_.

31. SARUGA CONIFERA, n. s. _Mas._ Anthracina, antennis pedibusque
albido-testaceis, thorace maculis duabus magnis flavo-tomentosis,
femoribus nigris, genibus fulvis, alis albidis.

_Male._ Coal-black; antennae and legs whitish testaceous; thorax with
a large yellow tomentose spot on each side in front of the scutellum;
femora black; knees tawny; wings whitish vitreous; veins and stigma
whitish testaceous, the former black towards the base. Length of the
body 2-1/2 lines; of the wings 5 lines.


Fam. TABANIDAE, _Leach_.

Gen. TABANUS, _Linn._

32. TABANUS SUCCURVUS, n. s. _Foem._ Nigricanti-fuscus, capite
ferrugineo, callo longo lanceolato gracillimo, palpis piceis, antennis
nigris, segmentorum abdominalium marginibus posticis subpallidioribus,
tibiis subtus rufescenti-piceis, alis obscure cinereis apud venas
fuscescentibus.

_Female._ Blackish brown. Head ferruginous, with a long lanceolate and
very slender callus between the nearly contiguous eyes; under side
clothed with black hairs. Proboscis black. Palpi piceous. Antennae
black; 3rd joint with a small horn. Hind borders of the abdominal
segments slightly paler in the middle. Tibiae reddish piceous beneath.
Wings dark grey, brownish about the veins towards the base; veins
black, piceous towards the base; fore branch of the cubital vein
simple, nearly straight; halteres ferruginous, with luteous knobs.
Length of the body 11 lines; of the wings 22 lines.

33. TABANUS FACTIOSUS, n. s. _Foem._ Nigricanti-fuscus, capite
testaceo, callo nigro gracili lanceolato, palpis piceis, thorace
cinereo, abdomine rufescenti-piceo, maculis dorsalibus trigonis
albidis, segmentorum ventralium marginibus posticis testaceis.

_Female._ Blackish brown. Head with testaceous tomentum and with a
slender lanceolate black callus between the eyes. Proboscis black;
palpi piceous. Antennae with a very small horn. Thorax with cinereous
down; pectus paler and more thickly clothed with paler down. Abdomen
reddish piceous, with a whitish triangular spot on the hind border
of each segment; hind borders of the ventral segments testaceous.
Legs piceous; femora black; tibiae tawny beneath. Wings grey, with a
brownish tint in front; veins black, ferruginous towards the base;
fore branch of the cubital vein simple, nearly straight; halteres
ferruginous, with whitish-yellow knobs. Length of the body 10 lines;
of the wings 22 lines.

34. TABANUS REDUCENS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereo-niger, capite albido,
callo nigro longo clavato, palpis albidis, antennis nigris vix
dentatis, thorace vittis quatuor cinereis, abdomine vittis tribus
albidis, segmentis ventralibus albido marginatis, tibiis fulvis apice
nigris, alis cinereis striga subcostali nigricante, halteribus piceis
apice testaceis.

_Female._ Cinereous black. Head whitish, clothed with white hairs
beneath; callus black, long, clavate; palpi whitish; antennae black,
with an extremely small tooth; thorax with four cinereous stripes;
pectus cinereous; abdomen with three whitish stripes, the dorsal
one much more conspicuous than the lateral pair; hind borders of
the ventral segments whitish; tibiae tawny with black tips. Wings
cinereous, with a blackish subcostal streak; veins black; fore branch
of the cubital vein simple, nearly straight; halteres piceous, with
luteous knobs. Length of the body 10 lines; of the wings 20 lines.

35. TABANUS SPOLIATUS, n. s. _Mas._ Cinereo-niger, albido tomentosus,
capite cinereo, palpis testaceis, antennis nigris basi rafescentibus
vix dentatis, thoracis lateribus fulvescentibus, abdomine rufescente
maculis dorsalibus trigonis albidis, segmentis ventralibus albido
marginatis, tibiis rufescentibus nigro lineatis, alis cinereis apud
costam fuscescentibus, halteribus albidis.

Allied to T. UNIVENTRIS and to T. INTERNUS, but distinct.

This may prove to be the male of _T. reducens_, though it is very
different in appearance. _Male._ Cinereous black, with whitish
tomentum, which is visible when viewed horizontally; head cinereous;
palpi testaceous, very short; antennae black, reddish at the base, with
an extremely small tooth; thorax dull-tawny along each side; abdomen
reddish, with a small triangular whitish spot on the hind border of
each segment; hind borders of the ventral segments whitish; tibiae
reddish with a black line; wings cinereous, brownish along the costa;
veins black, ferruginous at the base; fore branch of the cubital vein
simple, nearly straight; halteres whitish. Length of the body 9 lines;
of the wings 16 lines.

36. TABANUS IMMIXTUS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereo-niger, capite albido,
callo nigro longo angusto sublineari, palpis albidis, antennis nigris
basi rufis vix dentatis, abdomine ferrugineo apice nigro maculis
trigonis marginibusque posticis testaceis, tibiis fulvis, alis
cinereis apud costam subluridis, halteribus testaceis.

_Female._ Cinereous black; head whitish; callus long, black, slender,
nearly linear; palpi whitish; antennae black, red at the base; tooth
extremely small and obtuse; abdomen ferruginous, black towards
the tip; each segment with a triangular spot and the hind border
testaceous; tibiae tawny; wings cinereous, slightly lurid along the
costa; veins black, ferruginous at the base; halteres testaceous.
Length of the body 6 lines; of the wings 12 lines.

37. TABANUS FLEXILIS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereus, testaceo tomentosus,
callo nigro longo gracillimo, palpis testaceis, antennis ochraceis
subdentatis apice nigris, abdomine ferrugineo fusco maculis dorsalibus
trigonis marginibusque posticis testaceis, tibiis basi fulvis,
alis cinereis apud costam subluridis fusco bifasciatis, halteribus
testaceis apice albis.

_Female._ Cinereous, with testaceous tomentum; head with a black,
long, extremely slender callus; palpi testaceous; antennae ochraceous,
with black tips and with a very small black tooth; pectus whitish;
abdomen ferruginous brown; each segment with a large triangular spot
and with the hind border testaceous; tibiae tawny towards the base;
wings cinereous, somewhat lurid along the costa, with two irregular
brown bands; 1st band short, discal, 2nd abbreviated hindward; veins
black, ferruginous at the base; fore branch of the cubital vein
simple, nearly straight; halteres testaceous with white tips. Length
of the body 8 lines; of the wings 16 lines.


Gen. CHRYSOPS, _Meigen_.

38. CHRYSOPS FASCIATUS, _Wied_. See Vol. I p. 112.


Fam. ASILIDAE, _Leach_.

Subfam. MYDASITES, _Walk._

Gen. MYDAS, _Fabr._

39. MYDAS BASIFASCIA, n. s. _Foem._ Atra, antennis clavatis, abdomine
fascia basali flava apice nitente, femoribus tibiisque posticis
rufescentibus, alis cinereis apud venas ochraceis.

_Female._ Deep black; antennae clavate, a little longer than the
breadth of the head; abdomen with a slender yellow band very near the
base, shining at the tip; hind femora and hind tibiae reddish; wings
cinereous, ochraceous about the veins, which are also ochraceous.
Length of the body 12 lines; of the wings 22 lines.


Subfam. DASYPOGONITES, _Walk._

Gen. DISCOCEPHALA, _Macquart_.

40. DISCOCEPHALA PANDENS, n. s. _Mas._ Picea, proboscide palpisque
nigris, pectore thoracisque lateribus albidis, abdomine subtus pallide
cinereo maculis lateralibus nigris, pedibus fulvis, genibus nigris,
tarsis piceis, alis fuscescentibus cinereo strigatis et marginatis,
halteribus albidis. _Foem._ Abdomine fulvo, alis cinereis.

_Male._ Piceous; front facets of the eyes large; proboscis and palpi
black; mystax with four bristles; pectus and sides of the thorax
whitish; abdomen beneath pale-cinereous, with black shining spots
along each side; legs tawny; trochanters and knees black; tarsi
piceous; wings brownish, cinereous along the hind border, and with
cinereous streaks in the disks of the areolets; halteres whitish.
_Female._ Abdomen and halteres tawny; wings cinereous. Length of the
body 4-5 lines; of the wings 10-12 lines.


Subfam. LAPHRITES, _Walk._

Gen. LAPHRIA. _Fabr._

41. LAPHRIA CONCLUDENS, n. s. _Foem._ Aurata, capite pilis flavis,
antennis flavis articulo 3 deg. rufescente fusiformi, thorace vittis
tribus nigris, abdomine fulvo lituris duabus fasciaque interrupta
fasciisque duabus ventralibus nigris, pedibus fulvis, alis cinereis
apud apices nigricantibus, halteribus pallide flavis.

_Female._ Gilded; head clothed with pale-yellow hairs; mystax with
several bristles; proboscis linear, tawny; antennae yellow; 3rd joint
reddish, elongate fusiform; thorax with 3 black stripes, the lateral
pair abbreviated; abdomen tawny; 4th and 5th ventral segments with
black bands; 4th dorsal segment with a slight black mark on each side;
5th with a widely interrupted black band; legs tawny; wings cinereous,
blackish towards the tips; veins black, ferruginous towards the base;
halteres pale yellow. Length of the body 11 lines; of the wings 20
lines.

42. LAPHRIA VULCANUS, _Wied._ See Vol. I. p. 10.

43. LAPHRIA TAPHIUS, _Walk. Cat. Dipt._ pt. 2, 380.

Inhabits also the Philippine Islands.

44. LAPHRIA REQUISITA, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Viridis, capite
aurato, antennarum articulo 3 deg. longi-fusiformi, femoribus
posticis incrassatis, alis nigricantibus basi et apud costam
cinereis, halteribus testaceis. _Mas._ Femoribus anterioribus
incrassatis, halteribus ex parte nigricantibus. _Foem._ Abdomine
purpurascenti-cyaneo basi viridi.

_Male and Female._ Green; head gilded in frost, with whitish hairs
beneath; mystax with a few black bristles; third joint of the antennae
elongate-fusiform; hind femora incrassated. Wings blackish, cinereous
near the base and along nearly half the length of the costa; veins
black; halteres testaceous. _Male._ Anterior femora incrassated;
halteres partly blackish. _Female._ Abdomen purplish blue, green
towards the base. Length of the body 7-9 lines; of the wings 14-16
lines.

45. LAPHRIA PARTITA, n. s. _Mas._ Nigra, capite aurato, antennarum
articulo 3 deg. sublineari, thorace lineis tribus cinereis, lateribus
ochraceopilosis, maculis duabus humeralibus testaceis, abdomine
apice cyanescenti-nigro dimidio basali ochraceo-piloso, pedibus
aurato-pilosis, femoribus incrassatis, alis nigricantibus dimidio
basali fere sublimpido, halteribus testaceis. _Foem._ Antennarum
articulo 3 deg. longi-fusiformi, maculis duabus humeralibus albidis,
abdomine nigricanti-cupreo, dimidio basali cinereo piloso.

_Male._ Black; head brightly gilded above, clothed with luteous
hairs beneath; mystax with some black bristles; 3rd joint of the
antennae nearly linear, conical at the tip, a little longer than
the 1st and the 2nd together; thorax with three slender cinereous
lines; sides with ochraceous hairs; two humeral testaceous spots;
abdomen bluish-black towards the tip; 1st, 2nd, and 3rd segments with
ochraceous hairs; legs with gilded hairs and with black bristles;
femora incrassated, especially the hind pair; wings blackish, almost
limpid for nearly half the length from the base, which is partly
blackish; the blackish part emitting some streaks into the limpid
part; veins black; halteres testaceous. _Female._ Third joint of
the antennae elongate fusiform; two humeral whitish spots; 1st, 2nd,
and 3rd abdominal segments with cinereous hairs; following segments
blackish cupreous. Length of the body 7-9 lines; of the wings 14-16
lines.

46. LAPHRIA COMPLENS, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, capite argenteo, antennarum
articulo 3 deg. fusiformi, thorace strigis duabus anticis obliquis
maculisque duabus pectoralibus argenteis, abdomine purpureo maculis
duabus argenteis, pedibus purpurascenti-nigris, femoribus non
incrassatis, alis nigricantibus, halteribus apice testaceis.

_Female._ Black; head silvery, with black hairs beneath; mystax with
several black bristles; third joint of the antennae fusiform; thorax
with an oblique silvery streak on each side in front; pectus with a
silvery spot on each side; abdomen purple, with a silvery spot on each
side of the 4th segment; legs purplish-black; femora not incrassated;
wings blackish; veins black; discal veinlet and third externo-medial
vein nearly forming one straight line; halteres with testaceous knobs.
Length of the body 7 lines; of the wings 12 lines.

47. LAPHRIA DIOCTRIOIDES, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, tenuis, linearis,
facie pectoreque argenteis, antennis linearibus, abdomine maculis
lateralibus pedibusque fulvis, femoribus posticis nigro fasciatis,
tibiis tarsisque posticis nigris, alis cinereis, halteribus pallide
flavis.

_Female._ Black, slender, linear; face silvery; mystax with four black
bristles; antennae slender, linear, nearly as long as the breadth of
the head; pectus silvery; abdomen with tawny dots along each side;
legs tawny; a black ring on each hind trochanter; hind femora with a
black band; hind tibiae and hind tarsi black, the latter tawny beneath;
wings cinereous; veins black; halteres pale yellow. Length of the body
2-1/2 lines; of the wings 5 lines.


Subfam. ASILITES, _Walk._

Gen. TRUPANEA, _Macq._

48. TRUPANEA STRENUA, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, robusta, capite
fuscescenti-cinerco, pilis subtus flavescenti-cinercis, abdomine
fuscescentialis nigro fascia basali fasciculari alba apice nigro
nitente, pedibus crassis, fuscescentibus vitta sordide albida,
halteribus fulvis.

_Female._ Black, stout; head brownish cinereous, very thickly clothed
beneath with yellowish cinereous hairs; epistoma very prominent;
mystax with a few black bristles above and with many yellowish
cinereous bristles below; palpi with short black bristles; 3rd joint
of the antennae elongate conical; thorax with black bristles hindward
and along each side; pectus cinereous; abdomen brownish black, with
a basal band of white tufts; tip black, shining; legs very stout;
pulvilli reddish; wings brownish; radial areolet with a dingy whitish
stripe; veins black; halteres tawny. Length of the body 11 lines; of
the wings 22 lines.

49. TRUPANEA CALORIFICA, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Ochracea, capite aurato,
antennis nigris, thorace vittato, abdomine maculis magnis transversis
subquadratis nigris, pedibus rufis crassis, tarsis nigris, alis
cinereis vitta sordide albida, halteribus fulvis. _Mas._ Pectore
abdomineque cinereis, hujus fasciculo subapicali argenteo. _Foem._
Pectore testaceo, abdomine fulvo.

_Male and Female._ Ochraceous; head gilded in front, thickly clothed
beneath; epistoma prominent; mystax with numerous gilded bristles and
above with a few black bristles; palpi with short black bristles;
antennae black; third joint fusiform; thorax with slender indistinct
stripes; abdomen with a large black transverse subquadrate spot on
each segment; legs red, very stout; tarsi black; wings cinereous;
radial areolet with a dingy whitish stripe; veins black; halteres
tawny. _Male._ Head with whitish hairs beneath; pectus and abdomen
cinereous, the latter with a silvery-white subapical tuft. _Female._
Head with gilded hairs beneath; pectus testaceous; abdomen tawny.
Length of the body 9-11 lines; of the wings 18-20 lines.


Gen. ASILUS, _Linn._

50. ASILUS DETERMINATUS, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Cinereo-niger, capite
subaurato, antennis nigris, thorace vittis tribus cinereis, pedibus
fulvis robustis, femoribus nigro vittatis, tibiis apice tarsisque
nigris, alis fuscis, halteribus testaceis. _Mas._ Abdomine pilis
basalibus luteis. _Foem._ Abdomine pilis basalibus cinereis dimidio
apicali stylato.

_Male and Female._ Cinereous black; head slightly gilded in front,
with pale hairs beneath; epistoma not prominent; mystax with many
pale, and above with a few black bristles; antennae black; third joint
lanceolate; arista nearly as long as all the preceding joints; thorax
with three cinereous stripes, the lateral pair dilated towards the
humerus on each side; pectus cinereous; legs tawny, stout; femora
striped above with black; tarsi and tips of the tibiae black; wings
brown; veins black; halteres testaceous. _Male._ Abdomen with luteous
hairs towards the base. _Female._ Abdomen with cinereous hairs
towards the base; nearly half the apical part stylate. Length of the
body 10-12 lines; of the wings 18-20 lines.

51. ASILUS INTRODUCENS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereo-niger, capite aurato,
antennis nigris, thorace vittis duabus lateribusque cinereis, abdomine
fasciculis quatuor basalibus cinereis dimidio apicali stylato, pedibus
nigris robustis rufo variis, alis fuscescentibus, halteribus fulvis.
_Mas?_ Capite argenteo, abdomine fascia basali fasciculari fasciaque
subapicali albidis latis, alis obscure cinereis.

_Female._ Cinereous black; head gilded in front, with cinereous hairs
beneath; epistoma slightly prominent; mystax with several gilded
bristles, and above with a few black bristles; antennae black; 3rd
joint lanceolate, nearly as long as the arista; thorax with two
cinereous stripes, which are dilated on each humerus; sides and pectus
cinereous; abdomen with two cinereous tufts on each side at the base;
nearly half the apical part stylate; legs black, stout; femora red
beneath and partly above; tibiae with a broad red band; wings brownish,
somewhat paler towards the base and about the borders of the posterior
areolets; veins black; halteres tawny.

_Male?_ Head silvery in front; mystax with several white, and above
with a few black bristles; abdomen with a broad whitish tufted band
at the base, and with a broad whitish subapical band; wings dark
cinereous, partly paler, as in the female. Length of the body 8-12
lines; of the wings 12-16 lines.

52. ASILUS AREOLARIS, n. s. _Mas._ Cinereo-niger, capite aurato,
antennis nigris basi fulvis, thorace vittis tribus cinereis, abdomine
apice nigro nitente segmentis cinereo marginatis, pedibus fulvis,
tarsis posterioribus nigris, alis fuscescenti-cinereis pallido
lituratis triente basali albido, halteribus testaceis. _Foem?_
Antennarum articulo 3 deg. fusiformi, alis fuscescentibus hyalino
lituratis.

_Male._ Cinereous black; head gilded in front, clothed with black
hairs beneath; epistoma prominent; mystax with many gilded bristles,
and above with a few black bristles; antennae black, tawny towards the
base; thorax with three slender cinereous stripes, sides and pectus
cinereous; abdomen black and shining at the tip, hind borders of the
segments cinereous; legs tawny; posterior tarsi black; wings brownish
cinereous, with paler marks in most of the areolets, white on more
than one-third of the length from the base; veins black, tawny towards
base; halteres testaceous.

_Female?_ Epistoma less prominent; third joint of the antennae
fusiform, hardly half the length of the arista; wings brownish;
marginal areolets with a nearly colourless spot in each. Length of the
body 10 lines; of the wings 18 lines.

53. ASILUS TENUICORNIS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereus, capite argenteo,
antennis testaceis parvis, thorace vittis duabus fuscescentibus,
abdomine obscure cinereo segmentis testaceo marginatis, pedibus
fulvis, genubus tarsisque nigris, alis cinereis apice obscurioribus,
halteribus testaceis.

_Female._ Cinereous; head silvery white in front; epistoma very
slightly prominent; mystax with some white bristles, and above with
very few black bristles: antennae testaceous; 3rd joint conical, much
shorter than the 1st joint, and not more than one-fourth of the
length of the arista; thorax with two brownish stripes; abdomen dark
cinereous; hind borders of the segments testaceous; legs tawny; tarsi,
except at the base and knees, black: wings cinereous, dark cinereous
towards the tips; veins black, tawny towards the base; halteres
testaceous. Length of the body 8 lines; of the wings 14 lines.


Gen. OMMATIUS, _Illiger_.

54. OMMATIUS SCITULUS, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Fulvus, gracilis,
capite cinereo antice albo, antennis nigris basi fulvis, thoracis
disco cinereo-nigro, pectore testaceo, abdominis segmentis pallido
marginatis, alis cinereis, halteribus testaceis.

_Male and Female._ Tawny, slender; head cinereous above, white in
front; mystax with several white bristles; antennae black, tawny
towards the base. 3rd joint lanceolate, arista not longer than the
3rd joint; disk of the thorax cinereous black; pectus testaceous;
hind borders of the abdominal segments pale; tarsi black towards the
tips; wings cinereous; veins black, tawny towards the base; halteres
testaceous. Length of the body 6-7 lines; of the wings 11-12 lines.

55. OMMATIUS STRICTUS, n. s. _Mas._ Niger, angustus capite argenteo,
pectore albido-cinereo, abdomine fusco maculis trigonis nigris,
segmentis albido marginatis, pedibus fulvis, genibus tarsisque nigris,
alis subcinereis extus nigricantibus, halteribus testaceis.

_Male._ Black, narrow; head silvery white in front; mystax with very
few white bristles; third joint of the antennae elongate-conical;
arista a little longer than all the preceding joints together; pectus
whitish cinereous; abdomen brown, each segment with a black triangular
spot and with a whitish hind border; legs tawny; knees and tarsi
black, the latter tawny at the base; wings greyish, exterior half
blackish; veins black; halteres testaceous. Length of the body 4-4-1/2
lines; of the wings 7-8 lines.


Gen. LEPTOGASTER, _Meigen_.

56. LEPTOGASTER MUNDA, n. s. _Mas._ Cinerea, capite argenteo,
proboscide antennisque fulvis, thorace lineis duabus fuscis, abdomine
longo gracili apicem versus subdilatato, segmentorum marginibus
maculisque quatuor subapicalibus testaceis, pedibus fulvis, femoribus
tibiisque posticis nigro fasciatis, alis subcinereis, halteribus
testaceis.

_Male._ Cinereous; head silvery white; proboscis and antennae tawny;
thorax with two brown lines; abdomen long, slender, slightly dilated
towards the tip, hind borders of the segments testaceous, two
testaceous spots on each side towards the tip; legs tawny, hind femora
and hind tibiae with a black band on each; wings slightly greyish;
veins black, tawny at the base; halteres testaceous. Length of the
body 6 lines; of the wings 8 lines.


Fam. LEPTIDAE, _Westw._

Gen. LEPTIS, _Fabr._

57. LEPTIS FERRUGINOSA, _Wied._ See Vol. I. p. 118.

Heliomeia ferruginea, _Dolichall._

Dr. Dolichall has described this species and several other Diptera
in a Zoological Journal published in Java. I am unable to refer to
this work, but have adopted the names with which he has ticketed the
species in Mr. Wallace's collection.

_Heliomeia_ has the aspect of _Leptis_, but is distinguished by the
subanal and anal veins being united before they join the border of the
wing, thus agreeing with _Chrysopila_, from which it differs in the
shorter third joint of the antennae, and in the more slender arista.

Gen. SURAGINA, n. g.

_Foem. Corpus_ lineare. _Caput_ thorace vix angustius. _Proboscis_
porrecta, compressa, capitis latitudine paullo brevior. _Palpi_
lanceolati, porrecti. _Antennae_ brevissimae; articulus 3^{us} rotundus;
arista gracilis, nuda. _Abdomen_ subdepressum, thorace non duplo
longius, apice obtusum. _Pedes_ nudi, inermes, longiusculi, sat
graciles. _Alae_ mediocres, areola discali longissima.

_Female._ Body linear, moderately broad. Head almost as broad as
the thorax; vertex and front of equal breadth. Proboscis porrect,
compressed, a little shorter than the breadth of the head. Palpi
lanceolate, contiguous to the proboscis. Antennae very short; 3rd joint
round; arista slender, bare, longer than the antenna. Thorax a little
narrower in front. Abdomen somewhat flat, less than twice the length
of the thorax, obtuse at the tip. Legs bare, unarmed, rather long and
slender. Wings moderately long and broad; radial vein slightly curved;
forks of the cubital vein a little longer than the preceding part; 3rd
externo-medial vein inclined beyond the discal areolet towards the
4th, which is straight; subanal and anal veins united close to the
border; discal areolet nearly six times longer than broad, its fore
side hardly angular.

58. SURAGINA ILLUCENS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereo-nigra, capite
argenteo-cinereo supra atro, palpis antennisque nigris, thorace vittis
duabus cinereis, abdomine basi cinereo maculis duabus magnis basalibus
apiceque testaceis, pedibus nigris, femoribus testaceis nigro cinctis,
tibiis intermediis luridis, alis fuscis postice cinereis albo
bifasciatis et bistrigatis.

_Female._ Cinereous black; head silvery grey, deep black above;
proboscis, palpi, and antennae black; thorax with two cinereous
stripes; pectus cinereous; abdomen cinereous at the base; two large
basal and lateral spots and the tip testaceous; legs black, femora
testaceous, anterior femora black towards the base, hind femora with
a broad black band, middle tibiae lurid; wings brown, cinereous along
the basal part of the interior border; two white abbreviated bands and
two white intermediate streaks; veins black; halteres testaceous, with
black knobs. Length of the body 7 lines; of the wings 12 lines.


Fam. BOMBYLIDAE, _Leach._

Subfam. THEREVITES, _Walk._

Gen. THEREVA, _Latr._

59. Thereva congrua, _Walk._ See Vol. II. p. 90.


Subfam. BOMBYLITES, _Walk._

Gen. ANTHRAX, _Fabr._

60. Anthrax Tantalus, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ iv. 260. 15. Inhabits also
Hindostan, China, and Java.

61. Anthrax semiscita, _Walk._ See Vol. I. p. 118.

62. ANTHRAX PRETENDENS, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, fulvo tomentosa,
thorace strigis duabus albidis, abdomine fasciis albidis maculisque
duabus apicalibus albis, alis subcinereis basi nigris apud costam
nigricantibus, halteribus albidis.

_Female._ Black; head with tawny tomentum in front, cinereous behind
and beneath; thorax with tawny hairs in front and on each side, a
whitish streak on each side by the base of the wing; abdomen with
whitish bands, and with a white spot on each side at the tip, sides
with tawny hairs at the base; wings slightly cinereous, black at the
base, blackish along nearly half the length of the costa; veins black;
radial vein forming a right angle at its base, curved towards its
tip; fore branch of the cubital vein deeply curved; externo-medial
veins almost straight; subanal and anal veins approximate on the hind
border; halteres whitish. Length of the body 6 lines; of the wings 12
lines.

This and the two following species belong to the group of which _A.
hottentotta_ is the type.

63. ANTHRAX ANTECEDENS, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, flavescente pilosa,
capite cinereo, abdomine fasciis late interruptis guttisque duabus
apicalibus albis, lateribus anticis albo pilosis, alis hyalinis basi
nigricanti-fuscis.

_Female._ Black; head cinereous in front and beneath; thorax with
pale-yellowish hairs in front and on each side; abdomen with broadly
interrupted white bands, a white dot on each side at the tip, sides
with white hairs towards the base; wings hyaline, blackish brown at
the base; veins black; radial vein curved towards the tip; fore branch
of the cubital vein deeply curved; externo-medial veins straight;
subanal and anal veins somewhat approximate on the hind border. Length
of the body 4 lines; of the wings 8 lines.

64. ANTHRAX CONGRUA, n. s. _Mas._ Nigra, albo pilosa, capite
abdominisque lateribus nigro pilosis, abdomine fasciis duabus
pallidis, alis subcinereis basi et apud costam nigricantibus, litura
costali basali argentea.

_Male._ Black; head and sides of the abdomen clothed with short black
hairs; antennae very short, 3rd joint round; thorax clothed with white
hairs in front and along each side; abdomen with two slender pale
bands; wings slightly greyish, blackish at the base and along half
the length of the costa, which has a silvery mark at its base; veins
black; radial vein curved towards its tip; fore branch of the cubital
vein deeply curved; externo-medial veins straight; subanal and anal
veins somewhat approximate on the hind border. Length of the body 3
lines; of the wings 6 lines.

65. ANTHRAX DEMONSTRANS, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, flavescente pilosa,
capite cinereo, abdomine fascia subinterrupta guttisque duabus
apicalibus albis, lateribus nigro pilosis basi luteo pilosis, alis
nigricantibus basi et apud costam nigris.

_Female._ Black; head with cinereous tomentum behind and beneath;
thorax with yellowish hairs on each side; abdomen with a white middle
band, which is almost interrupted in the middle and slightly dilated
on each side, a white dot on each side at the tip; sides with black
hairs, and at the base with luteous hairs; wings blackish, black at
the base and along the costa; radial vein forming a rounded angle at
its base, as deeply curved towards its tip as is the fore branch of
the cubital vein, to which it is parallel; 1st and 2nd externo-medial
veins undulating, 3rd nearly straight; subanal and anal veins
approximate on the hind border. Length of the body 5 lines; of the
wings 10 lines.

66. ANTHRAX PRAEDICANS, n. s. _Foem._; Nigra, nigro pilosa, antennis
brevissimis articulo 3 deg. rotundo, pedibus piceis, alis nigricantibus,
albido strigatis, apice et apud marginem posticum cinereis.

_Female._ Black; head and sides of the thorax and of the abdomen
clothed with short black hairs; antennae very short, 3rd joint round;
legs piceous; wings blackish, dark grey at the tips and along the hind
border; discal, pobrachial, 3rd externo-medial, and anal areolets with
whitish streaks; radial vein undulating towards its tip; fore-branch of
the cubital vein slightly curved; externo-medial veins straight; subanal
and anal veins approximating closely on the hind border; hind side of
the discal areolet forming a right angle, and emitting thence the stump
of a vein. Length of the body 4-1/2 lines; of the wings 9 lines.

67. ANTHRAX DEGENERA, _Walk._ See Vol. I. p. 15. _var. Mas et Foem._
Nigra, angusta, fulvo-pilosa, capite cinereo, antennarum articulo 3^o
conico, pectore subargenteo, abdomine fasciis duabus ventre pedibus
halteribusque fulvis, tarsis nigris, alis fuscis, apice margineque
postico cinereis.

_Male and Female._ Black, narrow, head cinereous; 3rd joint of the
antennae conical; arista very short; thorax with tawny hairs; pectus
silvery cinereous; abdomen with two lateral tawny stripes, which are
broadest in the female; underside, legs and halteres tawny; tarsi black;
wings brown, long, narrow, cinereous towards the tips and along the hind
border; radial vein curved towards its tip; fore branch of the cubital
vein slightly curved, sharply angular at its base; externo-medial veins
straight; subanal and anal veins approximate on the hind border. _Male._
Hind femora with black tips; angle of the fore branch of the cubital
vein emitting the stump of a vein.

_Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}. Female_. Sides of the abdomen less tawny; wings dark
brown, cinereous at the tips; fore branch of the cubital vein deeply
curved, with its angle emitting the stump of a vein. Length of the body
3-1/2-5 lines; of the wings 8-12 lines.

This species is closely allied to _A. fervida_, and, like the two
preceding species, approaches the Australian group (subg. _Neuria_),
which is distinguished by the long wings with contorted veins.

68. ANTHRAX PROFERENS, n. s. _Mas._ Atra, angusta, abdominis lateribus
basalibus albo-pilosis, alis longis atris apud marginem posticum
exteriorem limpidis, puncto discali albo, litura exteriore transversa
albida.

_Male._ Deep black, slender; head clothed with short black hairs;
antennae and arista very short; 3rd joint round; abdomen with white hairs
on each side at the base; wings long, deep black, limpid along the
exterior part of the hind border; a white point in the discal areolet,
and a little transverse whitish mark at the base of the fore branch of
the cubital vein; the latter deeply curved. Length of the body 4 lines;
of the wings 12 lines.

Allied to the group of which _A. hyalacra_ is the type.


Gen. SYSTROPUS, _Wied._

69. SYSTROPUS SPHEGOIDES, n.s. _Mas._ Niger, capite albido-testaceo,
antennis apices versus lanceolatis, thorace strigis quatuor lateralibus
pallide flavis, abdomine lurido basi et apicem versus nigro,
petiolo longissimo, femoribus subtus tibiisque apice luridis, alis
nigricante-cinereis, halteribus albidis nigro fasciatis.

_Male._ Black; head white behind, whitish testaceous in front about
the eyes; proboscis longer than the breadth of the head, its sheaths
diverging and convoluted at the tips; antennae a little longer than the
proboscis, lanceolate towards the tips; thorax with two pale-yellow
streaks on each side, one in front, the other behind the wing; abdomen
lurid, black at the base, above, and towards the tip, where it is
fusiform; its petiole very long and slender; femora beneath and tibiae
towards the tips lurid; wings blackish grey; veins black; halteres
whitish, with a black subapical band. Length of the body 7 lines; of the
wings 8 lines.


Fam. DOLICHOPIDAE, _Leach_.

Gen. PSILOPUS, _Meigen_.

70. PSILOPUS SPECTABILIS, n. s. _Mas._ Aureo-viridis, capite
purpurascente-cyaneo, antice argenteo, antennis testaceis, thorace
vittis tribus cupreis, scutello cyaneo, abdominis lateribus cupreis,
pedibus flavis, alis albis, costa lituris duabus costalibus
lutescentibus, halteribus testaceis.

_Male._ Bright golden green; head purplish blue, with silvery tomentum
in front; antennae testaceous; arista black, shorter than the thorax;
thorax with three bright cupreous stripes; scutellum blue; pectus
silvery; abdomen bright cupreous along each side; legs yellow; tarsi
black towards the tips; wings white, brown along the costa and on more
than one-third of the length from the tips, with the exception of the
hind border; the costal brown part including two transverse lutescent
marks, beyond which there is a brown band; veins black; fore branch of
the praebrachial vein nearly straight; discal transverse vein straight;
halteres testaceous. Length of the body 4 lines; of the wings 8 lines.

71. PSILOPUS FILIFER, n. s. _Mas._ Viridescente-cyaneus, capite
pectoreque argenteis, antennis pedibusque nigris, arista longissima,
abdomine viridi fasciis nigris, tibiis anterioribus albidis, alis
subcinereis. _Foem.?_ Viridis, capite cyaneo, tibiis anterioribus
testaceis.

_Male._ Greenish blue; head and pectus with silvery white tomentum;
antennae black; arista much longer than the body; abdomen green, with
a black band on the base of each segment; legs black, long, slender;
anterior tibiae dingy whitish; wings slightly cinereous; veins black;
fore branch of the praebrachial vein much curved; discal transverse vein
very slightly undulating.

_Female?_ Bright green; head blue, its fore part and the pectus with
silvery white tomentum; abdomen with black bands; anterior tibiae
testaceous; discal transverse vein straight. Length of the body 2-1/2
lines; of the wings 5 lines.

72. PSILOPUS AESTIMATUS, n. s. _Mas._ Viridis, capite pectoreque
argenteis, antennis nigris basi testaceis, abdomine fasciis latis
nigris, pedibus flavescentibus, femoribus posticis apice tarsisque
nigris; alis subcinereis, halteribus testaceis.

_Male._ Bright green; head in front and pectus silvery white; antennae
black, testaceous at the base; arista about as long as the thorax;
abdomen with a broad black band on the base of each segment; legs
yellowish, stout; tarsi black; femora paler than the tibiae; hind femora
with black tips; wings greyish; veins black; cubital vein slightly
curved; fore branch of the praebrachial vein much curved; discal
transverse vein straight; halteres testaceous. Length of the body
2-1/2 lines; of the wings 5 lines.

73. PSILOPUS ABRUPTUS, n. s. _Mas._ Viridis, capite cyaneo, facie
pectoreque subargenteis, antennis pedibus halteribusque nigris, abdomine
cyanescente-viridi, alis cinereis.

_Male._ Bright green; head blue; its fore part and the pectus somewhat
silvery; antennae black; arista hardly longer than the thorax; abdomen
bluish green; legs black; wings grey; veins black; fore branch of the
cubital vein forming a much rounded right angle, from whence it is
straight to its tip; discal transverse vein straight, parted by half its
length from the border, and by less than its length from the fork of
the cubital; halteres black. Length of the body 2 lines; of the wings 4
lines.


Gen. DOLICHOPUS, _Latr._

74. DOLICHOPUS CINEREUS, n. s. _Mas._ Cinereus, capite albo, antennis
fulvis, pectore albido, abdomine fasciis aeneo-nigris, pedibus testaceis,
tarsis anterioribus apice nigricantibus, tibiis posticis apice tarsisque
posticis nigris, alis cinereis, halteribus testaceis.

_Male._ Cinereous, not metallic; head white between the eyes; antennae
tawny; 3rd joint elliptical; arista black, much longer than the antennae;
pectus whitish; abdomen with an aeneous black band on each segment; legs
testaceous, stout; anterior tarsi blackish towards the tips; hind tarsi
and tips of hind tibiae black; wings grey; veins black; praebrachial
vein forming a right angle at its flexure, much curved from thence to
the border; discal transverse vein slightly bent outwards; halteres
testaceous. Length of the body 3 lines; of the wings 5 lines.

75. DOLICHOPUS PRAEDICANS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereus, capite pectoreque
albis, antennis fulvis, thorace vitta apiceque viridibus, abdomine
maculis lateralibus albis, pedibus testaceis, femoribus posticis nigro
lineatis, alis cinereis basi nigricantibus, halteribus fulvis.

_Female._ Cinereous; head and pectus white; antennae tawny: arista black,
longer than the antennae; thorax with a dorsal stripe and the hind part
green; abdomen with white spots along each side; legs testaceous, stout;
tibiae beset with black spines; tarsi black towards the tips; hind femora
with a black line; wings cinereous, blackish towards the base; veins
black; praebrachial vein gently curved outwards at its flexure, straight
from thence to the border; discal transverse vein straight; halteres
tawny. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the wings 4 lines.

76. DOLICHOPUS PROVECTUS, n. s. _Foem._ Viridis, capite pectoreque
argenteis, antennis nigris latiusculis basi testaceis, thorace vittis
duabus nigris, abdomine fasciis argenteis, pedibus nigris, robustis
spinosis, tibiis testaceis, alis obscure cinereis.

_Female._ Bright green; head in front and pectus silvery white; antennae
black, rather broad, testaceous towards the base; 3rd joint conical;
arista much longer than the antennae; thorax with a black stripe on each
side; abdomen with silvery white bands; legs black, stout, spinose;
tibiae; testaceous; wings dark grey; veins black; praebrachial vein
forming a very obtuse angle at its flexure, straight from thence to the
border; discal transverse vein straight. Length of the body 2-1/2
lines; of the wings 4 lines.

77. DOLICHOPUS PRAEMISSUS, n. s. _Mas._ Obscure viridis, capite
pectoreque cinereis, antennis nigris, abdomine viridescente-nigro,
pedibus nigris vix spinosis, tibiis ferrugineis, alis obscure cinereis,
halteribus fulvis.

_Male._ Approaches the _Psilopi_ in some of its characters. Dark green;
head in front and pectus cinereous; antennae black, very small and short;
3rd joint conical; arista as long as the breadth of the head; abdomen
greenish black; legs black, hardly spinose or setose; tibiae ferruginous;
wings dark grey; veins black; praebrachial vein hardly bent between the
straight discal transverse vein and the border; halteres tawny. Length
of the body 2 lines; of the wings 3-1/2 lines.

78. DOLICHOPUS PROVENIENS, n. s. _Foem._ Obscure viridis, capite
albo, antennis nigris thorace vittis duabus pectoreque cinereis,
abdomine cyanescente-viridi fasciis cupreis, pedibus nigris, femoribus
anterioribus apice tibiisque fulvis, alis nigricantibus, halteribus
fulvis.

_Female._ Dark green; head white in front and about the eyes; antennae
black; 3rd joint round; arista shorter than the breadth of the head;
thorax with two cinereous stripes; pectus cinereous; abdomen bluish
green, with cupreous bands; legs black; tibiae and tips of anterior
femora tawny; wings blackish; veins black; praebrachial vein quite
straight; discal transverse vein straight, parted by twice its length
from the end of the subanal vein; halteres tawny. Length of the body 2
lines; of the wings 4 lines.


Gen. CHRYSOTUS, _Meigen_.

79. CHRYSOTUS EXACTUS, n. s. _Mas._ Obscure viridis, cinereo-tomentosus,
antennis pedibusque nigris, abdomine obscure cupreo, tibiis anticis
fulvis, alis cinereis.

_Male._ Dark green, with cinereous tomentum; antennae black; 3rd joint
conical; arista much shorter than the breadth of the head; abdomen
dark-cupreous; legs black; fore tibiae tawny; wings grey; veins black;
praebrachial vein hardly bent exteriorly; discal transverse vein parted
by more than four times its length from the end of the subanal vein.
Length of the body 1-1/4 line; of the wings 2 lines.


Gen. DIAPHORUS, _Meigen_.

80. DIAPHORUS RESUMENS, _Wlk._ See Vol. 11. p. 93.


Fam. LONCHOPTERIDAE, _Curtis_.

Gen. CADREMA, n. g.

_Mas. Corpus_ breviusculum, sat gracile. _Caput_ thorace vix
angustius; facies subobliqua. _Antennae_ brevissimae; arista apicalis,
longa, subpubescens. _Abdomen_ ovatum, thorace vix longius. _Pedes_
posteriores robusti; tibiae posticae calcare apicali arcuata. _Alae_
angustae lanceolatae.

_Male._ Body rather short and slender; head nearly as broad as the
thorax; face slightly oblique. Antennae extremely short; arista long,
apical, minutely pubescent. Abdomen oval, hardly longer or broader than
the thorax. Posterior legs stout; hind tibiae with a curved apical spur.
Wings narrow, lanceolate; cubital vein and praebrachial vein parallel,
the latter ending at the tip of the wing; discal transverse vein
straight, ending at full thrice its length from the border and at nearly
thrice its length from the praebrachial transverse.

81. CADREMA LONCHOPTEROIDES, n. s. _Mas._ Testacea, antennis luteis,
thoracis disco et metathorace nigris, abdomine apicem versus nigricante,
alis vitreis macula apicali nigricante.

_Male._ Testaceous; antennae luteous; disk of the thorax and metathorax
black; abdomen blackish towards the tip; wings vitreous, with a blackish
apical spot; veins black, testaceous towards the base. Length of the
body 1-3/4 line; of the wings 4 lines.


Fam. PLATYPEZIDAE, _Haliday_.

Gen. PLATYPEZA, _Meigen_.

82. PLATYPEZA GLAUCESCENS, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Piceo-nigra, capite
gutta atra, thoracis disco cyanescente-cinereo, abdomine nigro, pedibus
halteribusque piceis, tarsis albidis, posticis dilatatis, alis vitreis.

_Male and Female._ Piceous black; head with a deep black dot in front;
disk of the thorax with a bluish-cinereous tinge; abdomen black; legs
piceous; tarsi whitish; hind tarsi dilated; wings quite vitreous; veins
black; discal transverse vein parted by nearly twice its length from
the border, and by more than twice its length from the fork of the
praebrachial vein; fore branch of the latter joining the termination of
the costal vein at the tip of the wing, close to the end of the cubital
vein; halteres piceous. Length of the body 1-1-1/2 line; of the wings
2-2-1/2 lines.


Fam. SIPPHIDAE, _Leach_.

Gen. CERIA, _Fabr._

83. CERIA LATERALIS, n. s. _Mas._ Nigra, capite vittis guttisque duabus,
thorace maculis octo, pectore fasciis duabus, abdomine maculis duabus
basalibus fasciisque duabus flavis, antennarum petiolo pedibusque rufis,
alis subcinereis, basi costa strigaque fuscis, halteribus flavis.

_Male._ Black; head with two yellow stripes in front, and with a yellow
dot on each side at the base of the antennae; petiole of the latter
reddish; 3rd joint elongate-fusiform: thorax with three yellow calli on
each side; scutellum with two oblique fusiform yellow spots which are
united hindward; pectus with a yellow band on each side; abdomen with a
slender petiole which is as long as the terminal fusiform part; a yellow
spot on each side of the base; hind borders of the 1st and 2nd segments
yellow; legs red; tarsi piceous; wings greyish, dark brown at the base,
whence a dark brown streak proceeds to the disk; costa dark brown,
blackish exteriorly; veins black; halteres yellow. Length of the body 12
lines; of the wings 16 lines.


Gen. MILESIA, _Latr._

84. MILESIA CONSPICIENDA, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Nigra, capite flavo
maculis duabus nigris, palpis antennisque rufescentibus, thorace vittis
fasciis maculisque duabus, scutelli margine abdomineque fasciis tribus
flavis, abdomine fasciis tribus chalybeis, pedibus luteis, femoribus
nigro vittatis, tarsis nigris apice luteis, alis cinereis apud costam
fuscis.

_Male and Female._ Black; head yellow, with an elongate black spot above
the antennae, and with another above the epistoma; mouth black; palpi and
antennae reddish; thorax with two yellow stripes; each of its sides in
front with a large yellow spot, the latter connected with a band across
the pectus; two yellow bands, the 1st interrupted; scutellum bordered
with yellow; pectus with two yellow bands on each side; abdomen with
three yellow bands and with three chalybeous bands; 3rd yellow band
slightly interrupted; legs luteous; femora striped beneath with black;
tarsi black, with luteous tips; wings grey, brown along the costa; veins
black; halteres yellow. _Male._ Abdomen with a subapical interrupted
band; 1st band notched on the hind side. _Female._ First abdominal band
slightly interrupted. Length of the body 8-9 lines; of the wings 14-16
lines.


Gen. GRAPTOMYZA, _Wied._

85. GRAPTOMYZA TIBIALIS, _Wlk._ See Vol. II. p. 95.

_Foem.?_ Lutea, crassa, lata, pubescens, vertice et epistomatis linea
nigris, thoracis maculis duabus, disco postico, scutelli pectorisque
discis cupreo-nigris, abdomine fasciis tribus nigris, femoribus
anterioribus tibiisque nigro fasciatis.

_Female?_ Luteous, pubescent, broad, thick; vertex black; epistoma
conical, forked at the tip, with a black line; proboscis longer than the
thorax, black towards the base; arista plumose; two large spots on the
thorax, its disk hindward, disk of the scutellum and disk of the pectus
cupreous black; abdomen highly arched, with three black bands which are
produced and slightly interrupted in the middle; apical band very broad;
tibiae and anterior femora with black bands; wings with a luteous stigma.
Length of the body 5 lines; of the wings 8 lines.


Gen. ERISTALIS, _Latr._

86. Eristalis crassus, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ IV. 281, 12. Inhabits
also Hindostan.

87. Eristalis AEsepus, _Wlk. Cat. Dipt._ pt. 3, 625. Inhabits
also China.

88. ERISTALIS BOMBOIDES, n. s. _Mas._ Ater, capite albo, arista nuda,
thorace pubescente fascia cinerea fasciaque chalybeo-nigra, pectore
cinereo, abdomine fasciis quatuor chalybeo-nigris, vittis duabus
ventralibus latis albidis; tibiis basi flavis, alis nigricante-fuscis
cinereo marginatis, halteribus flavis.

_Male._ Deep black; head with black hairs on the front and with white
tomentum in front and behind; arista simple; thorax thickly pubescent,
having in front a cinereous band which is tawny on each side, and
a chalybeous black hinder band; scutellum chalybeous-black; pectus
cinereous; abdomen with four chalybeous-black bands; the 1st widely
interrupted; under side with a broad short whitish stripe on each side;
hind (and anterior?) tibiae yellow at the base; wings blackish-brown,
cinereous towards the tips and along the hind border; veins black;
halteres yellow. Length of the body 5-1/2 lines; of the wings 11
lines.


Gen. HELOPHILUS, _Meigen_.

The two following _Helophili_ may be merely varieties of _H.
quadrivittatus_.

89. HELOPHILUS CONSORS, n. s. _Mas._ Niger, thorace vittis quatuor
flavis, scutello luteo, abdomine vittis tribus luteis tribusque
chalybeis, tibiis basi luteis, femoribus posticis incrassatis, alis
cinereis apud costam fuscescentibus, halteribus flavis.

_Male._ Black; thorax with four yellow stripes; scutellum luteous;
pectus cinereous; abdomen with three luteous bands and with four
chalybeous bands; 1st luteous band interrupted, very broad; 3rd and 4th
slightly excavated on the hind side; tibiae luteous towards the base;
hind femora incrassated; hind tibiae curved; wings cinereous, brownish
along the costa; veins black; halteres yellow. Length of the body 5
lines; of the wings 9 lines.

90. HELOPHILUS CONCLUSUS, n. s. _Mas._ Niger, capite albo, antennis
rufescentibus, arista nuda, thorace vittis quatuor flavis, scutello
fulvo, abdomine fasciis quatuor lineaque transversa flavis fasciaque
chalybea, pedibus nigro-luteis, tarsis nigris, alis cinereis apud costam
subfuscis, halteribus flavis.

_Male._ Black; head white, with a black callus above the antennae, which
are reddish; arista simple; proboscis black; thorax with 4 yellow
stripes; scutellum tawny; pectus with a broad oblique pale yellow band
on each side; abdomen with 4 yellow bands; 1st and 2nd bands very
broad; 1st interrupted; 2nd interrupted except in front, where there is
a yellow transverse line; 3rd and 4th narrow, with a chalybeous band
along the hind border of the 3rd; legs luteous, shaded with black; tarsi
wholly black; wings grey, slightly brown along the costa; veins black,
tawny towards the base; halteres yellow. Length of the body 5 lines; of
the wings 9 lines.


Gen. MERODON, _Fabr._

91. MERODON INTERVENIENS, n. s. _Mas._ Fuscus, flavescente-cinereo
tomentosus, capite testaceo, antennis nigris, arista nuda, scutello
fulvo, abdomine fasciis septem ventreque testaceis, pedibus fulvis,
femoribus nigro vittatis, femoribus posticis incrassatis, tibiis
posticis nigris, alis cinereis litura costali nigricante, halteribus
flavis.

_Male._ Brown; head with short black hairs on the vertex, white behind,
pale testaceous, and with a brown stripe in front; proboscis and antennae
black; arista simple; thorax thickly clothed with yellowish cinereous
down; scutellum tawny; pectus cinereous; abdomen cylindric-conical,
with seven testaceous bands; under side testaceous; legs tawny; femora
striped with black; hind femora incrassated; hind tibiae curved, black;
wings cinereous, with a blackish mark by the middle of the costa; veins
black, halteres yellow. Length of the body 6 lines; of the wings 10
lines.


Gen. VOLUCELLA, _Geoff._

92. VOLUCELLA DECORATA, n. s. _Mas._ Fulva, oculis thoraceque
pubescentibus, hujus disco cupreo-nigro, abdomine cupreo-nigro fasciis
tribus flavis, pedibus piceo-fulvis, tarsis piceis basi fulvis, alis
vitreis, costa lutea extus fuscescente, halteribus apice niveis.

_Male._ Tawny; epistoma very prominent; eyes pubescent; arista broadly
plumose; thorax pubescent; disk cupreous-black; abdomen cupreous-black,
with three yellow bands; 1st band basal; legs slightly shaded with
piceous; tarsi piceous, tawny at the base; wings vitreous, luteous and
exteriorly brownish along the costa; veins tawny, black towards the
tips; halteres with snow-white knobs. Length of the body 7 lines; of the
wings 14 lines.


Gen. BARYTEROCERA, _Walk._ See Vol. I. p. 123.

93. BARYTEROCERA GIBBULA, n. s. _Foem._ Cupreo-nigra, capite
flavescente vitta cupreo-nigra, antennis fulvis, thoracis lateribus
fasciaque flavis, abdominis lateribus fasciis tribus flavis strigisque
tribus flavis, pedibus flavis, tibiis posticis femoribusque nigris apice
flavis, alis cinereis, litura costali fasciisque duabus exterioribus
nigricantibus.

_Female._ Cupreous black; head in front yellowish with a cupreous-black
stripe; antennae tawny; 3rd joint long, linear, obtuse at the tip;
thorax yellow along each side and with a yellow band in front of the
scutellum; abdomen yellow along each side and with three yellow bands;
1st band entire; 2nd nearly interrupted; 3rd emitting a lanceolate
streak in front and two hindward streaks which extend to the tip; legs
yellow; femora and hind tibiae black with yellow tips; wings cinereous,
with a blackish mark by the middle of the costa, and with two exterior
slender blackish bands; veins black; halteres yellow. Length of the body
2-1/2 lines; of the wings 4 lines.


Gen. EUMERUS, _Meigen_.

94. EUMERUS FIGURANS, n. s. _Foem._ Niger, capite albo vitta cyanea,
scutelli margine postico fulvo, abdomine nigro-aeneo fasciis duabus
albis, 2^{a} interrupta, tarsis subtus genubusque testaceis, alis
subcinereis.

_Female._ Black, nearly cylindrical; head whitish, with a dark blue
stripe on the vertex; antennae with whitish tomentum; 3rd joint somewhat
dilated, rather broader than long; scutellum tawny along the hind
border; pectus cinereous; abdomen aeneous-black, minutely punctured, with
two white bands, placed oblique with regard _to the_ segments, the 2nd
interrupted; tarsi beneath and knees testaceous; wings greyish; veins
black; cubital vein much contorted; halteres testaceous. Length of the
body 5-1/2 lines; of the wings 6 lines.


Gen. SYRITTA, _St. Farg._

95. SYRITTA ILLUCIDA, n. s. _Foem._ AEnea, capite argenteo, vertice
nigro punctis duobus nigris, antennis pallide rufis, abdomine fasciis
duabus latis interruptis testaceis maculisque duabus subapicalibus
albis, pedibus testaceis, femoribus tibiisque posticis nigris, his rufo
fasciatis, alis subcinereis.

_Female._ AEneous; head silvery white; vertex black, with an elongated
white point on each side; antennae pale red; pectus and sides of the
thorax whitish; abdomen with two broad interrupted testaceous bands;
apical segment with a white spot on each side at the base; under side
testaceous except near the tip; legs testaceous; hind femora and hind
tibiae black, the latter with a red band; wings greyish-vitreous; veins
black. Length of the body 3-1/2 lines; of the wings 5 lines.


Gen. BACCHA, _Fabr._

96. BACCHA DISPAR, n. s. _Mas._ Cupreo-nigra, capite chalybeo-nigro
vittis duabus flavis, antennis rufis, thorace maculis quatuor luteis,
abdomine fasciis duabus arcuatis luteis, pedibus rufescentibus, alis
subcinereis, costa fasciaque nigricante fuscis, halteribus fulvis.
_Foem._ Scutello flavo apud discum nigricante, abdominis petiolo
fulvo, fascia 2^{a} non arcuata, apice chalybeo, pedibus testaceis,
posticis nigro fasciatis.

_Male._ Cupreous black; head chalybeous black, with a yellow stripe
on each side in front; antennae red, very short; 3rd joint conical;
arista black, short; thorax with two luteous _spots_ on each side; the
1st pair joining a luteous band on each side of the pectus; abdomen
petiolated, clavate, with two much-arched luteous bands; legs reddish;
wings slightly cinereous, blackish-brown along the costa, and with an
irregular blackish-brown band, which hardly extends to the hind border;
veins black; halteres tawny.

_Female._ Scutellum yellow, with a blackish disk; abdomen much
compressed, with a long slender linear tawny petiole; the 2nd yellow
band not arched; tip chalybeous; legs testaceous; hind femora slightly
banded with black; hind tibiae black towards the tips. Length of the body
4-1/2-5 lines; of the wings 8-9 lines.


Gen. SYRPHUS, _Fabr._

97. Syrphus consequens, _Wlk._ See Vol. I. p. 18.


Fam. MUSCIDAE, _Latr._

Subfam. TACHINIDES, _Walk._

Gen. NEMORAEA, _Macq._

98. NEMORAEA AMPLIFICANS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereo-nigra, capite testaceo,
frontalibus nigris, palpis fulvis, antennis piceis, thorace vittis
quinque nigris, scutello ferrugineo, abdomine piceo fasciis duabus latis
interruptis cinereis, alis cinereis basi et apud costam fuscis.

_Female._ Cinereous black, with black bristles; head testaceous, more
cinereous beneath; frontalia black, slightly widening to the face,
with a row of bristles along each side; facialia not bristly; epistoma
not prominent; palpi tawny; antennae piceous, not extending to the
epistoma; 3rd joint linear, rounded at the tip, full twice the length
of the 2nd; arista nearly twice the length of the 3rd, stout for full
half its length; thorax with five slender black stripes, thickly beset
with long stout bristles; scutellum ferruginous except towards its
base; abdomen piceous, setose towards its tip; 2nd and 3rd segments
with broad interrupted cinereous bands along their fore borders; legs
stout, bristly; wings grey, brown at the base and in front; veins black;
praebrachial vein forming a slightly obtuse angle at its flexure, from
whence it is very slightly curved inward to its tip; discal transverse
vein straight, excepting a very slight inward bend near its base, parted
by rather more than half its length from the border, and from the
flexure of the praebrachial; alulae cinereous-white. Length of the body 8
lines; of the wings 14 lines.

99. NEMORAEA TENEBROSA, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereo-nigra, capite albido,
frontalibus nigris, oculis pubescentibus, palpis et antennarum articulo
2 deg. rufescentibus, thorace lineis quinque nigris, scutello rufo, abdomine
obscure rufescente tessellis cinereis, femoribus posticis fimbriatis,
alis cinereis, basi costa et venarum marginibus obscure fuscis.

_Female._ Cinereous black, with black bristles; head whitish; frontalia
black, slightly widening to the face, with a row of bristles along
each side and beyond it; facialia bristly along most of the length;
epistoma not prominent; eyes pubescent; palpi reddish; antennae not
nearly reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear, slender, obtuse at the
tip, much less than twice the length of the 2nd, which is reddish;
arista stout for full half its length, much longer than the 3rd joint;
thorax with five black lines; scutellum red, black at the base; abdomen
dark reddish, slightly tessellated with cinereous; legs black, bristly;
hind femora fringed with short black hairs; wings grey, dark brown at
the base, along the costa and along the black veins; praebrachial vein
forming a right angle at its flexure, from whence it is slightly curved
inward to its tip; discal transverse vein much curved inward near
its base, parted by much less than its length from the border and by
rather less than its length from the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae
lurid-cinereous. Length of the body 6 lines; of the wings 12 lines.


Gen. MASICERA, _Maq._

100. MASICERA DOTATA, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, capite albo, frontalibus
atris, oculis nudis, proboscide palpisque fulvis, thorace vittis
quatuor nigris, abdomine longi-elliptico fasciis cinereis, alis luridis
angustis, dimidio apicali obscure fusco, margine postico cinereo,
halteribus testaceis.

_Female._ Cinereous, beset with numerous long stout black bristles;
head white, clothed behind and beneath with white hairs; frontalia deep
black, slightly widening towards the face, with stout bristles along
each side; facialia without bristles except by the epistoma, which is
not prominent; eyes bare; proboscis and palpi tawny; antennae nearly
reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint slightly broader towards the tip, which
is rounded, about four times the length of the 2nd; arista stout at
the base, very much longer than the 3rd joint; thorax with four black
stripes; abdomen elongate-elliptical, its bristles stouter than those of
the thorax; a cinereous band along the fore-border of each segment; lips
black, stout, bristly; wings lurid, narrow, dark brown on the exterior
half, cinereous along the hind border; veins tawny, black exteriorly;
praebrachial vein extending rather beyond the slightly acute angle
which it forms at its flexure, much curved inward from thence to its
tip; discal transverse vein undulating, parted by rather less than its
length from the border and from the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae
cinereous; halteres testaceous. Length of the body 6 lines; of the wings
12 lines.

101. MASICERA HORRENS, n. s. _Foem._ Albido-cinerea valde setosa,
capite albo, facie obliqua, oculis pubescentibus, thorace vittis
quatuor nigris, abdomine subfusiformi spinoso fasciis tribus latis
subinterruptis albidis, alis cinereis basi et apud costam subfuscis,
alulis albido-cinereis.

_Female._ Whitish cinereous, thickly beset with long stout black
bristles; head white, clothed behind and beneath with white hairs;
frontalia deep black, hardly widening towards the face, with bristles
along each side and beyond it; face oblique; facialia with bristles
along nearly two-thirds of the length; epistoma not prominent; eyes
pubescent; palpi black, rather long; antennae nearly reaching the
epistoma; 3rd joint linear, rounded at the tip, full four times the
length of the 2nd; arista very much longer than the 3rd joint, stout
for more than one-third of its length; thorax with four black stripes;
abdomen nearly fusiform, more spinose than bristly, with three broad
slightly interrupted whitish bands on the fore borders of the segments;
legs black, stout, bristly; wings grey, slightly brown at the base
and along the costa; veins black; praebrachial vein forming a somewhat
rounded right angle at its flexure, near which it is much curved inward
and is thence straight to its tip; discal transverse vein undulating,
parted by about its length from the border and by much less than its
length from the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae whitish cinereous.
Length of the body 7 lines; of the wings 12 lines.

102. MASICERA IMMERSA, n. s. _Foem._ Albido-cinerea, capite argenteo,
oculis nudis, palpis, antennis pedibusque nigris, thorace lineis quatuor
nigris, abdomine nigro fasciis tribus latis interruptis cinereis, alis
cinereis, alulis albido-cinereis albo marginatis.

_Female._ Whitish cinereous, with a few black bristles; head silvery
white, with white hairs behind and beneath; frontalia black, widening
towards the face, with a row of bristles along each side; facialia
without bristles; epistoma not prominent; eyes bare; palpi black;
antennae not reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear, rounded at the
tip, about four times the length of the 2nd; arista-slender, very much
longer than the 3rd joint; thorax with four slender black lines; abdomen
black, conical, not longer than the thorax, with three broad interrupted
cinereous bands along the fore borders of the segments; legs black,
stout; wings grey; veins black; praebrachial vein forming a slightly
rounded and obtuse angle at its flexure, from whence it is slightly
curved inward to its tip; discal transverse vein slightly undulating,
parted by much less than its length from the border and from the flexure
of the praebrachial; alulae whitish cinereous with white borders. Length
of the body 4 lines; of the wings 7 lines.

103. MASICERA PROGNOSTICANS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, gracilis, capite
albo, abdomine nigro cylindrico fasciis albis, alis cinereis, alulis
halteribusque albis.

_Female._ Cinereous, slender; head white; frontalia deep black, linear,
with stout bristles along each side; facialia without bristles; epistoma
not prominent; eyes bare; palpi short, slender; antennae reaching the
epistoma; 3rd joint linear, rounded at the tip, about six times the
length of the 2nd; arista rather slender, not much longer than the 3rd
joint; abdomen black, cylindrical, very much longer than the thorax,
with a white band on the fore border of each segment; wings cinereous;
veins black; praebrachial vein forming a slightly rounded and extremely
obtuse angle at the flexure, straight from thence to the tip; discal
transverse vein straight, parted by about its length from the border,
and by much less than its length from the flexure of the praebrachial;
alulae and halteres white. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the
wings 4-1/2 lines.


Gen. EURYGASTER, _Macq._

104. EURYGASTER RIDIBUNDA, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, capite argenteo,
oculis pubescentibus, palpis fulvis clavatis, antennis piceis,
thorace lineis quatuor nigris, abdomine nigro fasciis tribus latis
albido-cinereis, pedibus nigris, alis subcinereis basi et apud costam
subluridis, halteribus fulvis.

_Female._ Cinereous, with black bristles; head silvery white in front
and behind, clothed behind and beneath with white hairs; frontalia
deep black, hardly widening towards the epistoma, with a few black
bristles along each side and beyond; facialia without bristles;
epistoma not prominent; eyes pubescent; palpi tawny, clavate; antennae
piceous, almost reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear, slightly
rounded at the tip, nearly thrice the length of the 2nd; arista
slender, very much longer than the 3rd joint; thorax with four black
lines; abdomen black, conical, a little broader and longer than the
thorax, with three broad whitish-cinereous bands, somewhat spinose
towards the tip; legs black, hardly bristly; wings greyish, with a
lurid tinge at the base and along part of the costa; veins black,
tawny towards the base; praebrachial vein forming a rounded and obtuse
angle at its flexure, nearly straight from thence to its tip; discal
transverse vein hardly undulating, parted by little more than half
its length from the border, and by much less than its length from the
flexure of the praebrachial; alulae cinereous; halteres tawny. Length of
the body 4-1/2 lines; of the wings 8 lines.

105. EURYGASTER REMITTENS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, capite albo, oculis
pubescentibus, palpis, antennis pedibusque nigris, thorace lineis
quatuor nigris, scutello rufo, abdomine nigro fasciis cinereis fere
interruptis, segmenti 2^{i} lateribus rufescentibus, alis cinereis basi
fuscescentibus, alulis albidis.

_Female._ Cinereous, slightly bristly; head white, clothed behind and
beneath with white hairs; frontalia deep black, widening towards the
face, with a row of bristles along each side and beyond; facialia
without bristles; epistoma not prominent; eyes pubescent; palpi
black, short; antennae almost reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint slightly
widening towards the tip, which is rounded; arista slender, very much
longer than the 3rd joint; thorax with four black lines; scutellum
red, black at the base; abdomen black, conical, somewhat pilose at the
tip, hardly broader or longer than the thorax, with cinereous nearly
interrupted bands; 2nd segment reddish on each side; legs black,
slightly bristly; wings grey, brownish at the base; veins black;
praebrachial vein forming a slightly obtuse angle at its flexure, from
whence it is hardly curved inward to its tip; discal transverse vein
very slightly undulating, parted by a little more than half its length
from the border, and by about half its length from the flexure of the
praebrachial; alulae whitish. Length of the body 5 lines; of the wings 8
lines.

106. EURYGASTER APTA, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, capite albo, oculis
nudis, palpis, antennis, pedibusque nigris, thorace vittis quatuor
indistinctis, abdominis vitta dorsali et segmentorum marginibus
posticis nigris, alis cinereis apud costam fuscescentibus, alulis
albido-cinereis.

_Female._ Cinereous, with few bristles; head white; frontalia black,
narrow, linear, with a row of bristles along each side and beyond;
facialia without bristles; epistoma not prominent; eyes bare; palpi
black; antennae almost reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear, rounded
at the tip, about four times the length of the 2nd; arista slender,
very much longer than the 4th joint; thorax with four indistinct black
stripes; abdomen conical, especially setose towards the tip, very
little longer than the thorax; 1st segment, hind borders of the other
segments and dorsal stripe black; legs black; wings grey, brownish
along the costa; veins black; praebrachial vein forming an obtuse angle
at its flexure, hardly curved inward from thence to its tip; discal
transverse vein slightly undulating, parted by much less than its
length from the border, and by a little less than its length from the
flexure of the praebrachial; alulae whitish cinereous. Length of the
body 4 lines; of the wings 7 lines.

107. EURYGASTER CONGLOMERATA, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereo-nigra, capite
albo, oculis pubescentibus, palpis, antennis pedibusque nigris,
thorace lineis quatuor anticis nigris, thorace postico abdomineque
anthracinis, tibiis posticis subfimbriatis, alis cinereis, alulis
testaceo-albis.

_Female._ Cinereous black; head white, with white hairs behind
and beneath; frontalia deep black, linear, with a row of bristles
along each side and beyond; facialia without bristles; epistoma
not prominent; eyes pubescent; palpi black; antennae reaching the
epistoma; 3rd joint linear, rounded at the tip, six times the length
of the 2nd; arista much longer than the 3rd joint, stout to half its
length; thorax with four black lines; hind part and abdomen coal
black, shining, the latter conical, not longer than the thorax, setose
towards the tip; legs black; hind tibiae slightly fringed; wings grey;
veins black; praebrachial vein forming a hardly obtuse angle at its
flexure, almost straight from thence to its tip; discal transverse
vein undulating, parted by much less than its length from the
border, and by a little less than its length from the flexure of the
praebrachial; alulae testaceous white, very large. Length of the body
4-1/2 lines; of the wings 8 lines.

108. EURYGASTER PROMINENS, n. s. _Mas._ Cinereo-nigra, capite albo,
oculis pubescentibus, palpis, antennis pedibusque nigris, thorace
lineis quatuor indistinctis, abdominis basi vitta dorsali et
segmentorum marginibus posticis nigris, scutelli apice rufescente,
abdomine segmenti 2^{i} lateribus subrufescentibus, alis cinereis,
alulis albis.

_Male._ Cinereous black; head white, with white hairs behind and
beneath; frontalia deep black, widening to the epistoma, with a row
of bristles along each side and beyond; facialia without bristles;
epistoma not prominent; eyes pubescent; palpi black; antennae extending
to the epistoma; 3rd joint linear, narrow, rounded at the tip, full
four times the length of the 2nd; arista much longer than the 3rd
joint, stout to nearly half its length; thorax with four indistinct
black lines; scutellum reddish towards its tip; abdomen nearly oval,
cinereous, not longer than the thorax; 1st segment, hind borders of
the following segments, and dorsal stripe black; 2nd segment slightly
reddish on each side; legs black; wings grey; veins black; praebrachial
vein forming a right angle at its flexure, near which it is very
slightly curved inward, and is thence straight to its tip; discal
transverse vein hardly undulating, parted by much less than its length
from the border, and by less than its length from the flexure of the
praebrachial; alulae white, very large. Length of the body 3-1/4 lines;
of the wings 6-1/2 lines.

109. EURYGASTER DEDUCENS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, capite albo, oculis
nudis, palpis, antennis pedibusque nigris, thorace lineis quatuor,
abdominis basi fasciisque tribus nigris, scutello rufescente, alis
cinereis basi nigris, alulis albis.

_Female._ Cinereous, bristly, head white, with whitish hairs behind
and beneath; frontalia deep black, widening to the face, with black
bristles along each side and beyond; facialia without bristles, except
by the epistoma, which is slightly prominent; eyes bare; antennae
reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear, rather broad, slightly
rounded at the tip, about four times the length of the 2nd; arista
much longer than the 3rd joint, stout to half its length; thorax with
four black lines; scutellum reddish; abdomen conical, not longer than
the thorax, black at the base, and with three black bands on the hind
borders of the segments; wings grey, black at the base; veins black,
testaceous at the base, except along the costa; praebrachial vein
forming an obtuse angle at its flexure, slightly curved inward from
thence to its tip; discal transverse vein straight, except a slight
curve at its base, parted by a little more than half its length from
the border, and by much less than its length from the flexure of the
praebrachial; alulae white. Length of the body 3-3/4 lines; of the wings
7 lines.

110. EURYGASTER CONTRACTA, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, brevis, capite albo,
palpis, antennis pedibusque nigris, thorace vittis quatuor nigris,
abdomine nigro fasciis tribus latis subinterruptis argento-cinereis,
alis cinereis basi nigricantibus, alulis albis.

_Female._ Cinereous, short; head white; frontalia deep black, widening
slightly towards the face, with stout bristles along each side;
facialia without bristles; epistoma not prominent; eyes bare; palpi
and legs black; antennae reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear,
rounded at the tip, about four times the length of the second; arista
stout for almost one-third of the length; thorax with four black
stripes; abdomen black, nearly oval, not longer than the thorax,
with three broad slightly interrupted silvery cinereous bands; wings
cinereous, blackish at the base; veins black; praebrachial vein forming
an obtuse angle at its flexure, nearly straight from thence to its
tip; discal transverse vein curved inward towards its base, parted by
less than its length from the border, and by about its length from
the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae white. Length of the body 2-1/2
lines; of the wings 4-1/2 lines.

111. EURYGASTER PROGRESSA, n. s. _Foem._ Fulva, capite subtus et apud
oculos albido, antennis pallide luteis apice fuscescentibus, abdomine
maculis tribus dorsalibus nigris, alis cinereis apud costam luridis
apice fuscis, halteribus testaceis.

_Female._ Tawny, with black bristles; head testaceous, whitish
about the eyes and beneath; frontalia pale luteous, widening to the
epistoma, beset with bristles along each side; facialia without
bristles; epistoma not prominent; eyes bare; antennae pale luteous,
almost reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear, brownish towards the
tip; arista stout to about one-third of the length; abdomen nearly
oval, hardly longer or broader than the thorax, with three black
dorsal spots; tarsi piceous; wings grey, lurid along the costa, brown
towards the tips, except along the hind border; praebrachial vein
forming a slightly obtuse angle at its flexure, much curved inward
from thence to its tip; discal transverse vein undulating, parted by
much less than its length from the border, and by about its length
from the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae and halteres testaceous.
Length of the body 4 lines; of the wings 7 lines.


Gen. METOPIA, _Meigen_.

112. METOPIA INSPECTANS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, capite magno argenteo
subconico, facie perobliqua, thorace vittis quatuor, abdominis vitta
dorsali et segmentorum marginibus posticis nigris; alis cinereis,
alulis albis, halteribus piceis.

_Female._ Cinereous; head large, silvery, almost conical in front;
frontalia black, linear, with a few bristles along each side; face
very oblique; facialia without bristles; epistoma not prominent; eyes
bare; proboscis and palpi black, very short; antennae extending to
the epistoma, 3rd joint linear, rounded at the tip, full six times
the length of the 2nd; arista longer than the 3rd joint; stout to
nearly half its length; thorax with four black stripes, the outer pair
interrupted; abdomen conical, not longer than the thorax, hind borders
of the segments and dorsal stripe black; legs black, rather short and
stout; wings grey; veins black; praebrachial vein forming an almost
right angle and emitting a branch at its flexure, from whence it is
slightly curved inward to its tip; discal transverse vein straight,
parted by much less than its length from the border and by very much
less than its length from the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae white;
halteres piceous. Length of the body 3 lines; of the wings 5 lines.

113. METOPIA INSTRUENS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, capite subconico
argenteo micante, facie perobliqua, palpis antennis pedibusque nigris,
thorace vittis quatuor nigris, abdomine e maculis nigris trivittato,
alis cinereis.

_Female._ Cinereous; head brilliant silvery, almost conical; face
very oblique; facialia with bristles along each side; epistoma not
prominent; eyes bare; palpi and legs black; antennae reaching the
epistoma, 3rd joint linear, rounded at the tip, about six times
the length of the 2nd; arista longer than the 3rd, stout to about
one-third of its length; thorax with four black stripes; abdomen with
three rows of triangular black spots; wings cinereous; veins black;
praebrachial vein forming an obtuse angle, and emitting a branch at
its flexure, slightly curved inward from thence to its tip; discal
transverse vein straight, parted by more than its length from the
border and from the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae white. Length of
the body 3 lines; of the wings 5 lines.


Subfam. DEXIDES, _Walk._

Gen. DEXIA, _Meigen_.

114. DEXIA BASIFERA, n. s. _Foem._ Testaceo-alba, capitis antici
lateribus palpisque fulvis, oculis nudis, antennis pallide luteis,
thorace vittis quatuor nigris, abdomine fulvo fusiformi maculis
trigonis nigris, macula fasciaque testaceis, pedibus nigris longis,
femoribus fulvis apice nigris, tibiis ex parte fulvescentibus, alis
cinereis apud venas nigricantibus, fascia basali obliqua alba, alulis
albis.

Group of _D. longipes_.

_Female._ Testaceous white, narrow, bristly; head somewhat prominent;
frontalia black, slightly widening towards the epistoma, with
a few long stout black bristles on each side; facialia without
bristles; epistoma not prominent; sides of the peristoma tawny and
slightly produced; eyes bare; proboscis and palpi tawny, the former
geniculated, rather long; antennae pale luteous, 3rd joint lanceolate,
not reaching the epistoma, thrice the length of the second; arista
plumose; thorax with two slender deep black stripes and with two
exterior broad blackish stripes; scutellum with six black spines;
abdomen tawny, fusiform, longer than the thorax, with little black
hairs, with several black spines, and with a triangular black spot
on the hind border of each segment; 3rd segment with a testaceous
spot at the base, 4th with a testaceous basal band; legs long,
black; femora tawny, with black tips; tibiae partly dark tawny; wings
cinereous, blackish along the veins, with an oblique white basal band;
costa black at the base; veins black, testaceous in the white part;
praebrachial vein forming a slightly acute angle and emitting a short
stump at its flexure, curved inward from thence to its tip; discal
transverse vein undulating, parted by hardly more than half its length
from the border, and by less than its length from the flexure of the
praebrachial; alulae white. Length of the body 5 lines; of the wings 10
lines.

_Mas._ Subaurato-cinerea, abdomine testaceo lanceolato longissimo
fasciis maculisque trigonis nigris connexis, pedibus anticis
longissimis, alis apud costam nigricantibus, venis vis nigricante
marginatis.

_Male._ Pale gilded cinereous, narrow, bristly; frontalia piceous,
widening much towards the epistoma, with bristles along each side;
sides of the peristoma much produced; thorax with four deep black
stripes, the outer pair rather broad; abdomen testaceous, lanceolate,
twice the length of the thorax; hind border of each segment with a
black band which is connected with a triangular black spot; legs very
long, fore legs extremely long; wings blackish along the costa, hardly
blackish along the veins; praebrachial vein curved slightly inward near
its flexure, almost straight from thence to its tip. Length of the
body 8 lines; of the wings 12 lines.

115. DEXIA INCLUDENS, n. s. _Foem._ Atra, capite apud oculos albo,
palpis antennis pedibusque nigris, thorace vittis duabus cinereis,
abdomine lanceolato fasciis tribus albis late interruptis, pedibus
longiusculis, alis nigricanti-cinereis, halteribus testaceis.

_Female._ Deep black; head cinereous in front, white about the eyes;
vertex narrow; frontalia widening to the face, with bristles along
each side; facialia without bristles; epistoma not prominent; palpi
slender; antennae reaching the epistoma, 3rd joint narrow, linear,
about four times the length of the 2nd; thorax cinereous on each side,
and with two cinereous stripes; abdomen lanceolate, setose, nearly
twice the length of the thorax, with three widely interrupted white
bands; legs rather long; wings blackish grey; veins black; praebrachial
vein forming a very obtuse and slightly rounded angle at its flexure,
almost straight from thence to its tip; discal transverse vein almost
straight, parted by hardly less than its length from the border, and
by much more than its length from the flexure of the praebrachial;
alulae whitish; halteres testaceous. Length of the body 3-1/2 lines;
of the wings 6 lines.

116. DEXIA PRECEDENS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, capite albo lateribus
anticis piceis, palpis pedibusque nigris, antennis testaceis, thorace
vittis tribus nigris, abdomine basi lateribus fasciaque nigris,
punctis lateralibus albis, pedibus longiusculis, alis cinereis, alulis
albis.

_Female._ Cinereous; head white, piceous on each side in front;
frontalia deep black, slightly widening to the face, with bristles
along each side; facialia without bristles; epistoma not prominent;
palpi and legs black; antennae testaceous, not reaching the epistoma,
3rd joint not thrice the length of the 2nd; thorax with three black
stripes, the lateral pair abbreviated hindward; abdomen a little
longer than the thorax, black and with white points along each side,
black at the base and with a black band on the hind border of the 2nd
segment; legs rather long; wings cinereous; veins black; praebrachial
vein forming a rounded and very obtuse angle at its flexure, almost
straight from thence to its tip; discal transverse vein nearly
straight, parted by less than its length from the border, and by very
much more than its length from the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae
white; halteres piceous. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the wings
4 lines.


Gen. TOROCCA, n. g.

_Foem. Corpus_ gracile, sublineare. _Proboscis_ palpique brevissimi.
_Antennae_ brevissimae, arista nuda. _Thorax_ brevis. _Abdomen_
longissimum, thorace plus duplo longius. _Pedes_ longissimi. _Alae_
angustae.

_Female._ Body slender, nearly linear. Head as broad as the thorax.
Proboscis and palpi very short. Antennae very short, not nearly
extending to the epistoma; 3rd joint linear, rounded at the tip, about
twice the length of the 2nd; arista bare, stout towards the base,
full twice the length of the 3rd joint. Thorax short. Abdomen very
elongate-fusiform, more than twice the length of the thorax. Legs very
long. Wings narrow.

117. TOROCCA ABDOMINALIS, n. s. _Foem._ Viridis, capite pectoreque
albis, proboscide palpisque fulvis, antennis pedibusque nigris,
abdomine fulvo segmentorum marginibus posticis vittaque dorsali
nigris, alis nigricanti-cinereis, alulis albido-cinereis.

_Female._ Green, bristly; head and pectus white; frontalia deep black,
widening to the face, with a row of bristles along each side; facialia
without bristles; epistoma not prominent; eyes bare; proboscis and
palpi tawny; antennae black: abdomen tawny, with a few spines; hind
borders of the segments black; 1st segment black at the base, and with
a broad black stripe: legs black; wings blackish cinereous; veins
black; praebrachial vein forming an almost right angle, and emitting a
short stump at its flexure, nearly straight from thence to its tip;
discal transverse vein very undulating, parted by about half its
length from the border, and by much less than its length from the
flexure of the praebrachial; alulae whitish cinereous. Length of the
body 5-1/2 lines; of the wings 8 lines.


Subfam. SARCOPHAGIDES, _Walk._

Gen. SARCOPHAGA, _Meigen_.

118. Sarcophaga invaria, _Walk._ See Vol. III. p. 103.

119. Sarcophaga aliena, _Walk._ See Vol. I. p. 22.

120. SARCOPHAGA MENDAX, n. s. _Mas._ Cinerea, capite albo, palpis
antennis pedibusque nigris, thorace vittisque lineisque duabus nigris,
abdomine tessellato vittis tribus nigris, vittis lateralibus e strigis
lanceolatis, alis cinereis, alulis albis.

_Male._ Cinereous; head white, clothed behind and beneath with
cinereous hairs; frontalia deep black, widening towards the face;
palpi and antennae black; thorax with five black stripes, the exterior
pair incomplete, the middle cinereous intervals interlined; abdomen
tessellated, with three black stripes, the lateral pair forming
lanceolate streaks on the 3rd and 4th segments; legs black, very
stout; wings grey; veins black; praebrachial vein forming a right angle
at its flexure, near which it is curved inward, and is thence almost
straight to its tip; discal transverse vein slightly curved near each
end, parted by much less than its length from the border, and from the
flexure of the praebrachial; alulae white. Length of the body 6 lines;
of the wings 10 lines.

121. SARCOPHAGA INEXTRICATA, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, capitis lateribus
anticis, palpis, antennis pedibusque nigris, thorace vittis tribus
lineisque duabus nigris, abdomine fasciis tribus subinterruptis
albidis, alis cinereis, alulis albis.

_Female._ Cinereous; head with black hairs behind and beneath;
frontalia black, broad, slightly widening towards the face; a deep
black space on each side of the face; palpi black, rather long;
antennae rather short, not nearly reaching the epistoma, 3rd joint
slightly plumose; thorax with three black stripes, the two middle
cinereous intervals interlined; abdomen with three broad slightly
interrupted whitish bands; legs black, very stout; wings grey; veins
black, slightly blackish-bordered; praebrachial vein forming a right
angle at its flexure, near which it is curved inward, and is thence
straight to its tip; discal transverse vein very slightly undulating,
parted by much less than its length from the border and from the
flexure of the praebrachial; alulae white. Length of the body 5 lines;
of the wings 8-1/2 lines.


Subfam. MUSCIDES, _Walk._

Gen. IDIA, _Meigen_.

122. Idia australis, _Walk._ See Vol. III. p. 103.

123. IDIA PROLATA, n. s. (Group Rhyncomya, _Desvoidy_). _Foem_.
Viridis, sat angusta, capite testaceo frontalibus facie maculisque
duabus anticis nigris, antennis halteribusque testaceis, abdomine
cyaneo purpureo cupreoque vario fasciis duabus aureo-viridibus,
pedibus nigris, alis cinereis basi et apices versus fuscis.

_Female._ Green, rather narrow, with slight cinereous tomentum; head
testaceous, white behind; frontalia and face black and shining, the
former linear; a black spot on each side of the peristoma; epistoma
rather prominent; eyes bare; antennae testaceous, not near reaching
the epistoma, 3rd joint about thrice the length of the 2nd; abdomen
blue, tinged with purple and with cupreous, a little broader than
the thorax, with two golden green bands which are widely interrupted
above; legs black; wings grey, brown at the base and towards the tips,
with the exception of the hind border; veins black; praebrachial vein
forming a much rounded and very obtuse angle at its flexure, which
is near the border, nearly straight from thence to its tip; discal
transverse vein slightly curved outward, parted by much less than its
length from the border, and by about its length from the flexure of
the praebrachial; alulae and halteres testaceous. Length of the body
3-1/2 lines; of the wings 5 lines.


Gen. MUSCA, _Linn._

124. MUSCA PROSPERA, n. s. (Gen. Silbomyia, _Macq._). _Foem._
Aurato-viridis, capite argenteo, facie palpis antennis pedibusque
nigris, oculis nudis, pectore maculis duabus argenteis, abdomine
spinoso, apice purpureo maculis duabus argenteis, alis nigricantibus
basi et apud costam nigris, alulis albis. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}._ Thoracis
disco cupreo, abdomine subtus cyaneo-purpureo. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER GAMMA~}._
Abdominis disco cupreo, palpis fulvis.

_Female._ Deep golden green, thickly beset with very stout bristles;
head silvery white; vertex green on each side; frontalia piceous,
very broad, with long stout bristles on each side; facialia without
bristles; face black, deeply keeled, the keel partly white; epistoma
slightly prominent; eyes bare; palpi long, subclavate; antennae almost
reaching the epistoma, 3rd joint full four times the length of the
2nd; pectus with a silvery spot on each side; abdomen elongate-oval, a
little longer than the thorax, with long stout spines hindward, purple
at the tip, where there is a silvery spot on each side; legs black,
very stout; wings blackish, black at the base and along part of the
costa; veins black; praebrachial vein forming a rounded right angle at
its flexure, near which it is curved inward, and is thence straight to
its tip; discal transverse vein undulating, parted by more than half
its length from the border and by less than half its length from the
flexure of the praebrachial; alulae white. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}._ Disk of the thorax
bright cupreous; abdomen blue and purple beneath, _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER GAMMA~}._ Like _Var.
{~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~};_ palpi tawny; disk of the abdomen bright cupreous. Length of the body
7-8 lines; of the wings 12-14 lines.

125. MUSCA DELECTANS, n. s. (n. subg. Isomyia). _Foem._ Cuprea, capite
cinereo lateribus anticis fulvis, palpis fulvis latiusculis, antennis
rufescentibus, scutello aurato, viridi-abdominis fasciis pedibusque
nigris, alis cinereis apud costam nigricantibus apud venas posticas
subluridis, alulis albido-testaceis, halteribus fulvis.

_Female._ Bright cupreous, rather long; head cinereous, tawny and
somewhat produced on each side of the peristoma; frontalia black,
slightly widening towards the face, with a few bristles along each
side; facialia without bristles; epistoma somewhat prominent; eyes
bare; palpi tawny, rather broad; antennae reddish, not near reaching
the epistoma, 3rd joint about one-third of the length of the 2nd;
scutellum mostly golden green; abdomen nearly oval, broader but hardly
longer than the thorax, with a black band on the hind border of each
segment; legs black; wings grey, blackish along the costa towards the
base, slightly lurid along the hinder veins; veins black; praebrachial
vein forming a slightly obtuse and rounded angle at its flexure, much
curved inward from thence to its tip; discal transverse vein deeply
undulating, parted by more than half its length from the border and by
much more than half its length from the flexure of the praebrachial;
alulae whitish testaceous; halteres tawny. Length of the body 7 lines;
of the wings 12 lines.

126. MUSCA INGENS. n. s. (Gen. Calliphora, _Desv._). _Foem._
Nigricanti-cyanea, valde setosa, capite albo, palpis antennis
pedibusque nigris, pectore cinereo, abdomine spinoso fasciis tribus
argenteis late interruptis, alis nigricantibus margine postico
cinereo, alulis albidis.

_Female._ Blackish blue, thickly beset with long stout bristles; head
white; frontalia deep black, widening in front, with a few bristles on
each side; facialia beset with bristles, except towards the frontalia;
palpi and antennae black, the latter reaching the epistoma, 3rd joint
six times the length of the 2nd; pectus and sides of the thorax
cinereous; abdomen a little longer and broader than the thorax, with
spines towards the tip, and with three broadly interrupted silvery
bands; legs black; wings blackish, cinereous along the hind border and
in the disks of the hinder areolets; veins black; praebrachial vein
forming a right and much rounded angle at its flexure, curved inward
beyond, and thence nearly straight to its tip; discal transverse
vein slightly undulating, parted by less than half its length from
the border, and by full half its length from the flexure of the
praebrachial; alulae whitish. Length of the body 9 lines; of the wings
14 lines.

127. MUSCA PROMITTENS, n. s. (Gen. Ochromyia, _Macq._). _Mas et
Foem._ Fulva, capite albo, palpis testaceis, tibiis supra tarsisque
apice piceis, alis cinereis basi luridis. _Foem._ Abdomine
purpurascenti-cyaneo basi fulvo.

_Male and Female._ Tawny with black bristles; head white; frontalia
piceous, linear, with a few bristles along each side; facialia without
bristles; epistoma rather prominent; eyes bare; palpi testaceous;
antennae almost reaching the epistoma, 3rd joint four times the length
of the 2nd; abdomen of the female purplish blue, tawny towards the
base, broader but not longer than the thorax; tibiae above, and tarsi
towards the tips, piceous; wings grey, lurid towards the base; veins
black, tawny towards the base; praebrachial vein forming a right and
much rounded angle at its flexure, much curved inward from thence to
its tip; discal transverse vein undulating, long, parted by more than
half its length from the border, and by less than its length from the
flexure of the praebrachial; alulae testaceous. Length of the body 4-5
lines; of the wings 8-10 lines.

128. MUSCA FAVILLACEA, n. s. (n. subg. Anisomyia). _Foem._
Fulva, longiuscula, capite antico palpisque testaceis, antennis
cinereo-fulvis, thorace vittis tribus cinereis, abdomine nigra basi
testaceo fasciis tribus argenteo-cinereis, alis cinereis. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}._
Thorace cinereo, abdomine fulvo cinereo-tessellato segmentis nigro
marginatis.

_Female._ Tawny, rather long, with black bristles; head testaceous in
front, whitish and with whitish hairs beneath and hindward; frontalia
extremely broad, with a cinereous line, beset with six bristles along
each side; facialia without bristles; epistoma prominent; eyes bare;
palpi testaceous; antennae greyish tawny, reaching the epistoma, 3rd
joint four times the length of the 2nd; thorax with three indistinct
cinereous stripes; abdomen black, elongate-oval, a little longer and
broader than the thorax, with a testaceous basal band, and with three
silvery grey bands which are testaceous beneath, ventral segments
wholly testaceous; wings cinereous; veins black, tawny towards the
base; praebrachial vein forming a rounded and obtuse angle at its
flexure, slightly curved inward from thence to its tip; discal
transverse vein slightly undulating, parted by a little more than half
its length from the border, and from the flexure of the praebrachial;
alulae testaceous. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}._ Thorax cinereous; abdomen tawny,
tessellated with cinereous, hind borders of the segments black. Length
of the body 5-6 lines; of the wings 10-12 lines.

129. Musca obtrusa, _Walk._ See Vol. III. p. 105.

130. Musca flaviceps, _Macq._ See Vol. I. p. 23.

131. MUSCA SELECTA, n. s. (Gen. Lucilia, _Desv._). _Foem._
Aureo-viridis, longiuscula, capite testaceo, epistomate elevato,
palpis fulvis, antennis pallide rufis, thorace vittis tribus cupreis,
pedibus nigris, alis nigricanti-cinereis margine postico cinereo,
alulis albidis testaceo marginatis, halteribus fulvis.

_Female._ Bright golden green, rather long; head testaceous,
cinereous and with whitish hairs behind and beneath; frontalia deep
black, linear, thickly beset with bristles along each side; epistoma
prominent; palpi tawny; antennae pale red, not near reaching the
epistoma, 3rd joint less than thrice the length of the 2nd; thorax
with three slender bright cupreous stripes; abdomen wanting; legs
black; wings blackish grey, grey along the hind border; veins black;
praebrachial vein forming a very obtuse and much rounded angle at its
flexure, slightly curved inward between the flexure and the tip;
discal transverse vein undulating, parted by more than half its length
from the border, and by much less than its length from the flexure
of the praebrachial; alulae whitish, with testaceous borders; halteres
tawny. Length of the body 5 lines; of the wings 10 lines.

132. MUSCA SPERATA, n. s. (Gen. Lucilia, _Desv._) _Mas._
Aureo-viridis, capite nigro-cinereo, proboscide palpis antennis
pedibusque nigris, thoracis disco cupreo, alis cinereis basi et apud
costam subluridis, alulis obscure cinereis.

_Male._ Golden green; head cinereous black; eyes bare; proboscis,
palpi, and antennae black, the latter not reaching the epistoma; disk
of the thorax bright cupreous; abdomen shorter than the thorax; legs
black; wings grey, with a lurid tinge at the base and along part of
the costa; veins black; praebrachial vein forming a rounded and very
obtuse angle at its flexure, hardly curved inward from thence to its
tip; discal transverse vein very slightly curved inward behind the
middle, parted by much less than its length from the border, and by
hardly less than its length from the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae
dark grey. Length of the body 4 lines; of the wings 8 lines.

133. MUSCA INSCRIBENS, n. s. (Gen. Chrysomyia, _Desv._). _Foem._
Aureo-viridis, capite albo, palpis fulvis antennis piceis, abdomine
segmentorum marginibus pedibusque nigris, alis cinereis basi
nigricantibus, alulis cinereo-albis.

_Female._ Deep bright green; head white; frontalia black, linear;
palpi tawny; antennae piceous, nearly reaching the epistoma; abdomen
almost as long as the thorax, hind borders of the segments black; legs
black; wings grey, blackish at the base; veins black; praebrachial vein
forming an obtuse and rounded angle at its flexure, hardly curved
inward from thence to its tip; discal transverse vein nearly straight,
parted by little more than half its length from the border, and by
much less than its length from the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae
cinereous with white borders, the upper pair white. Length of the body
4-1/2 lines; of the wings 8 lines.

134. MUSCA ELECTA, n. s. (Gen. Lucilia, _Desv._). _Mas et Foem._
Viridis, capite albo, palpis antennis pedibusque nigris, alis
cinereis, alulis albido-cinereis. _Foem._ Frontis lateribus nigris.
_Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}, Mas._ Aureo-viridis.

_Male and Female._ Bright green; head white, that of the female
black and shining on each side of the broad dull black frontalia;
antennae black, nearly reaching the epistoma; abdomen a little broader
and shorter than the thorax; legs black; wings grey; veins black;
praebrachial vein forming a very obtuse and much-rounded angle at its
flexure, almost straight from thence to the border; discal transverse
vein slightly curved inward in the middle, parted by much less than
its length from the border, and by hardly less than its length from
the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae whitish cinereous; lower alulae
of the male dark cinereous. Length of the body 4-1/2 lines; of the
wings 8 lines.

_Male. Var._ {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}. Golden-green; the four alulae dark cinereous.

135. MUSCA FORTUNATA, n. s. (Gen. Chrysomyia, _Desv._). _Mas._
Subaurato viridis, capite albo, palpis fulvis, antennis piceis,
abdomine segmentorum marginibus posticis cyaneis, pedibus nigris, alis
obscure cinereis basi nigricantibus, alulis albidis.

_Male._ Bright green, slightly gilded; head white; eyes not
contiguous; frontalia black, narrow, linear; palpi tawny; antennae
piceous, nearly reaching the epistoma; abdomen not longer than the
thorax, hind borders of the segments dark blue; legs black; wings dark
grey, blackish at the base; veins black; praebrachial vein forming an
obtuse and slightly-rounded angle at its flexure, almost straight from
thence to its tip; discal transverse vein hardly undulating, parted
by little more than half its length from the border, and by much
more than half its length from the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae
whitish. Length of the body 3-3-1/2 lines; of the wings 6-7 lines.

136. MUSCA INTRAHENS, n. s. (Gen. Lucilia, _Desv._). _Foem._
Cyanescenti-viridis, capite albo, palpis antennis pedibusque nigris,
alis cinereis, alulis obscure cinereis, halteribus testaceis.

_Female._ Bright bluish green; head white; frontalia dull black;
palpi, antennae, and legs black; abdomen not longer than the thorax;
legs black; wings grey; veins black; praebrachial vein forming a
rounded and very obtuse angle at its flexure, straight from thence to
its tip; discal transverse vein hardly bent inward, parted by more
than half its length from the border, and by about its length from the
flexure of the praebrachial; alulae dark cinereous; halteres testaceous.
Length of the body 3 lines; of the wings 6 lines.

This species very much resembles _M. electa_, but may be distinguished
by its narrower body and by some slight differences in the veins of
the wings.

137. MUSCA OPTATA, n. s. (Gen. Pyrellia, _Desv._). _Mas._ Viridis,
capite albido, palpis antennis pedibusque nigris, alis cinereis,
alulis cinereis testaceo marginatis.

_Male._ Bright green; head whitish in front; palpi and antennae black;
abdomen a little broader and shorter than the thorax; legs black;
wings cinereous; veins black; praebrachial vein forming a gentle curve
at the flexure, straight from thence to the tip; discal transverse
vein straight, parted by much more than half its length from the
border, and by about its length from the flexure of the praebrachial;
alulae cinereous, with testaceous borders. Length of the body 3-3-1/2
lines; of the wings 6-7 lines.

138. MUSCA PROFERENS, n. s. (Gen. Pyrellia, _Desv._). _Mas._
Nigricanti-viridis, palpis antennis pedibusque nigris, alis cinereis,
alulis obscure cinereis, halteribus apice pallidis.

_Male._ Blackish-green, shining; eyes contiguous; palpi and antennae
black, the latter nearly reaching the epistoma; abdomen a little
broader and shorter than the thorax; legs black; wings cinereous;
veins black; praebrachial vein forming a gentle curve at its flexure,
straight from thence to its tip; discal transverse vein straight,
parted by more than half its length from the border, and hardly more
than its length from the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae dark
cinereous; halteres with pale knobs. Length of the body 3 lines; of
the wings 6 lines.

139. Musca refixa, _Walk._ See Vol. I. p. 26.

140. MUSCA GAVISA, n. s. (n. subg. Neomyia). _Foem._ Purpurea,
pubescens capite nigro, facie subobliqua, palpis antennis pedibusque
nigris, abdomine lato crasso, alis fuscescenti-cinereis basi
nigricantibus, alulis obscurioribus. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}._ Viridescenti-cyanea,
scutello purpureo.

_Female._ Brilliant purple; head black, shining, narrower than the
thorax; frontalia dull, linear; face slightly oblique; palpi and
antennae black, the latter not reaching the epistoma; thorax and abdomen
with thick black pubescence; abdomen very thick, shorter and much
broader than the thorax; legs black; wings brownish grey, blackish at
the base; veins black; praebrachial vein forming a much-rounded and very
oblique curve at its flexure, hardly curved inward from thence to its
tip; discal transverse vein hardly undulating, parted by much more than
half its length from the border, and by much less than its length from
the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae dark brownish grey. _Var_. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}.
Bright greenish blue; scutellum purple. Length of the body 5 lines; of
the wings 10 lines.

141. Musca domestica, _Linn._ See Vol. I. p. 128.

142. MUSCA CONDUCENS, n. s. _Mas._ Cinerea, capite albo, palpis
antennis pedibusque nigris, thorace vittis duabus latis nigris,
abdomine testaceo linea dorsali nigra basi apiceque cinereo-nigris,
alis cinereis.

_Male._ Cinereous; head white; eyes bare; palpi slender, subclavate;
antennae not reaching the epistoma; thorax with two broad black
stripes; abdomen dull testaceous, cinereous black at the base and
towards the tip, and with a black dorsal line; wings cinereous; veins
black; praebrachial vein forming a rounded and very obtuse angle at
its flexure, slightly curved inward from thence to its tip; discal
transverse vein curved inward, parted by full half its length from the
border, and by a little more than its length from the flexure of the
praebrachial; alulae cinereous. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the
wings 4-1/2 lines.

143. MUSCA XANTHOMELA, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, capite albido, abdomine
ochraceo, alis subcinerascentibus, halteribus pallide testaceis.

_Female._ Black; head whitish about the eyes, which are red and
bare; antennae not reaching the epistoma; abdomen ochraceous, a
little shorter than the thorax; wings slightly greyish; veins black,
testaceous towards the base; praebrachial vein forming an obtuse angle
at the flexure, straight from thence to the border; discal transverse
vein straight, parted by less than its length from the border, and by
more than its length from the flexure of the praebrachial; halteres
pale testaceous. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the wings 4 lines.

144. MUSCA PRAEDICENS, n. s. (Gen. Graptomyza, _Desv._). _Foem._ Nigra,
capite albido-cinereo, palpis antennis pedibusque nigris, thorace
vittis quatuor albido-cinereis, abdomine testaceo maculis nigris, alis
cinereis, halteribus testaceis.

_Female._ Black; head whitish cinereous; frontalia deep black, linear,
with bristles along each side; facialia without bristles; epistoma not
prominent; proboscis and palpi black; antennae reaching the epistoma,
3rd joint about four times the length of the 2nd; thorax with four
stripes, metathorax and pectus whitish cinereous; abdomen testaceous;
four black spots on each segment excepting the 1st; legs black; wings
cinereous; veins black, testaceous towards the base; praebrachial vein
forming a curve at its flexure, which is very near the border; discal
transverse vein almost straight, parted by little more than half its
length from the border, and by more than its length from the flexure
of the praebrachial; alulae and halteres testaceous. Length of the body
3-1/2 lines; of the wings 7 lines.

145. MUSCA COLLECTA, n. s. _Mas._ Viridis, cinereo tomentosa, capite
albo antice testaceo, palpis antennisque fulvis, abdomine testaceo
apice viridi linea dorsali nigra, pedibus nigris, tibiis obscure
fulvis, alis cinereis, halteribus testaceis.

_Male._ Green, with cinereous tomentum; head white, testaceous
and rather prominent in front; eyes bare, contiguous; epistoma
slightly prominent; proboscis black; palpi tawny; antennae tawny,
not near reaching the epistoma, 3rd joint not more than twice the
length of the 2nd; arista simple, more than twice the length of the
3rd joint; abdomen testaceous, green towards the tip, with a black
dorsal line; legs black; tibiae dark tawny; wings grey; veins black,
testaceous towards the base; praebrachial vein forming a very obtuse
and much-rounded angle at its flexure, from whence it is hardly curved
inward to its tip; discal transverse vein curved outward, parted by
much more than half its length from the border, and by hardly less
than its length from the flexure of the praebrachial; alulae pale
cinereous with testaceous borders; halteres testaceous. Length of the
body 2-3/4 lines; of the wings 5 lines.


Subfam. ANTHOMYIDES, _Walk._

Gen. ARICIA, _Macq._

146. Aricia significans, _Walk._ See Vol. III. p. 107.

147. ARICIA CONTRARIA, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Picea, capite argenteo,
palpis pedibusque nigris, antennis testaceis, scutello fulvo, abdomine
nigro, alis cinereis basi et apud costam subluridis.

_Male and Female._ Piceous, head silvery about the eyes; frontalia
dull black; palpi and legs black; antennae testaceous, reaching the
epistoma, 3rd joint about four times the length of the 2nd; thorax
with four indistinct cinereous stripes; scutellum tawny; abdomen
black, shining, a little broader but not longer than the thorax; wings
grey, rather broad, with a lurid tinge towards the base and along the
costa; veins black, tawny towards the base; discal transverse vein
hardly undulating, or slightly curved inward, parted by much more than
its length from the praebrachial, and by much less than its length from
the border. Length of the body 3-4 lines; of the wings 6-8 lines.

148. ARICIA INTEGRA, n. s. _Mas._ Testaceo-cinerea, capite albo,
palpis nigris, antennis testaceis basi nigris, thorace lineis quatuor
nigris postice obsoletis, pedibus fulvis tarsis piceis, alis cinereis
apud costam subluridis, halteribus testaceis.

_Male._ Testaceous-cinereous; head white; frontalia deep black,
widening in front; palpi black; antennae testaceous, black at the
base, nearly reaching the epistoma, 3rd joint about four times the
length of the 2nd; thorax with four black lines which are obsolete
hindward; abdomen nearly oval, not longer than the thorax; legs
tawny; tarsi piceous; wings grey, with a slight lurid tinge towards
the costa; veins black; discal transverse vein curved inward towards
the base, parted by about its length from the praebrachial transverse,
and by much less than its length from the border; alulae and halteres
testaceous. Length of the body 3-1/2 lines; of the wings 7 lines.

149. ARICIA NIGRICOSTA, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Cinerea, capite argenteo,
palpis nigris, antennis piceis, thorace vittis quatuor nigris,
abdomine maculis quatuor nigris, pedibus fulvis, alis cinereis apud
costam subluridis, costa nigra.

_Male and Female._ Cinereous; head silvery white; palpi black;
antennae piceous, tawny at the base, reaching the epistoma, 3rd joint
about four times the length of the 2nd; thorax with four black
stripes; abdomen nearly oval, not longer than the thorax, 2nd and 3rd
segments with two black spots on each; legs tawny; tarsi black; wings
cinereous, with a lurid tinge along the costa, which is black; veins
black, tawny towards the base; discal transverse vein slightly bent
inward, parted by about its length from the praebrachial transverse,
and by much less than its length from the border. Length of the body 4
lines; of the wings 8 lines.


Gen. SPILOGASTER _Macq._

150. SPILOGASTER XANTHOCERAS, n. s. _Foem._ Alba, capite argenteo,
palpis pedibusque nigris, antennis pallide testaceis basi nigris,
thoracis fascia lata scutelloque nigris, thorace vitta fasciisque
duabus nigris, alis cinereis apud costam subluridis.

_Female._ White; head silvery white; frontalia broad, deep black;
proboscis, palpi, and legs black; antennae pale testaceous, reaching
the epistoma, black at the base, 3rd joint about four times the length
of the 2nd; thorax with a broad black band; scutellum black; abdomen
cinereous, elongate, with a slender black stripe and with two black
bands; wings cinereous, with a lurid tinge along the costa; veins
black, tawny towards the base; discal transverse vein bent inward
towards the base, parted by hardly more than its length from the
praebrachial transverse, and by much less than its length from the
border; alulae white. Length of the body 3-1/2 lines; of the wings 7
lines.


Gen. ANTHOMYIA, _Meigen_.

151. Anthomyia procellaria, _Walk._ See Vol. III. p. 108.


Gen. LISPE, _Meigen_.

152. LISPE BIMACULATA, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, capite atro antice aurato
subtus albido, pectore pedibusque cinereis, abdomine vitta cinerea
maculis duabus subapicalibus albis, femoribus intermediis basi
dilatatis, alis cinereis, halteribus testaceis.

_Female._ Black; head deep black above, gilded in front, whitish on
each side beneath; pectus and legs cinereous; abdomen with a slender
cinereous stripe, and with a white spot on each side near the tip;
knees pale; middle femora dilated at the base; wings cinereous; veins
black, tawny at the base; discal transverse vein parted by less than
its length from the border, and by about twice its length from the
praebrachial transverse; halteres testaceous. Length of the body 3
lines; of the wings 6 lines.


Gen. CAENOSIA, _Meigen_.

153. CAENOSIA LUTEICORNIS, _Walk._ (see Vol. III. p. 108). _Foem._
Cana, capite aurato, frontalibus pedibusque fulvis, palpis albis,
antennis pallide luteis, abdomine subtestaceo apice cano maculis
quatuor nigris alis cinerascentibus; halteribus testaceis.

This is probably the female of C. _luteicornis_, though the wings have
no trace of an apical spot.

_Female._ Hoary; head pale gilded, hoary behind and beneath; frontalia
tawny, widening slightly in front; palpi white; antennae pale luteous,
reaching the epistoma, 3rd joint linear, rounded at the tip, six
times the length of the 2nd; arista plumose to full half its length;
abdomen dull testaceous, hoary towards the tip, where it is very
bristly above, 3rd and 4th segments with a black dorsal spot on each,
4th and 5th segments with a black spot on each side; legs tawny;
tarsi piceous; wings greyish; veins black, testaceous at the base;
discal transverse vein parted by a little less than its length from
the border, and by much more than its length from the praebrachial
transverse; alulae pale cinereous; halteres testaceous. Length of the
body 3 lines; of the wings 6 lines.

154. CAENOSIA SIGNATA, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereo-fulva, capite antennis
pedibus halteribusque testaceis, thoracis vittis quatuor scutelli
disco abdominisque vitta nigris, alis cinereis subluridis.

_Female._ Cinereous-tawny; head testaceous, white about the eyes;
antennae testaceous, not near reaching the epistoma, 3rd joint
elongate-conical, about twice the length of the 2nd; arista plumose to
the tip; thorax with four black stripes, the outer pair interrupted;
disk of the scutellum black; abdomen with a black stripe, which is
interrupted on the hind border of each segment; legs testaceous; wings
grey with a slight lurid tinge; veins tawny, costal vein black, discal
transverse vein parted by little more than half its length from the
border, and by about twice its length from the praebrachial transverse;
halteres testaceous. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the wings 5
lines.

155. COENOSIA RESPONDENS, n. s. _Foem._ Cana, capite apud oculos albo,
palpis albidis, antennis halteribusque testaceis, thorace lineis
tribus nigris, abdomine subfusiformi e maculis nigris trivittato,
pedibus nigris, femoribus apice tibiisque fulvis, alis cinereis,
alulis albis.

_Female._ Hoary; head white about the eyes; frontalia reddish; palpi
whitish; antennae testaceous, 3rd joint long, slender, nearly reaching
the epistoma; thorax with three black lines; abdomen nearly fusiform,
a little longer than the thorax, with three black spots on each
segment, legs black, femora towards the tips and tibiae tawny; wings
grey; discal transverse vein parted by about twice its length from the
praebrachial transverse, and by about its length from the border; alulae
white; halteres testaceous. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the
wings 5 lines.


Subfam. HELOMYZIDES, _Fallen_.

Gen. XARNUTA, _Walk._

156. XARNUTA LEUCOTELUS, _Walk._ See Vol. I. p. 28.


Gen. CORDYLURA, _Fallen_.

157. CORDYLURA BISIGNATA, n. s. _Mas._ Nigra, vix nitens, antennis
breviusculis, arista pubescente, abdomine cylindrico maculis duabus
lateralibus albis, pedibus non spinosis, alis obscure cinereis, alulis
albis.

_Male._ Black, hardly shining; head white behind, testaceous towards
the epistoma; antennae not near reaching the epistoma. 3rd joint
linear, rounded, at the tip, full twice the length of the second;
arista pubescent; abdomen cylindrical, a little longer than the
thorax, with a white spot on each side in the middle; legs unarmed,
moderately long; wings dark grey; veins black; discal transverse vein
straight, upright, parted by a little less than its length from the
border, and by full twice its length from the praebrachial transverse;
alulae white. Length of the body 2 lines; of the wings 3-1/2 lines.


Gen. HELOMYZA, _Fallen_.

158. HELOMYZA OBSERVANS, n. s. _Mas._ Fulva, antennarum articulo 3 deg.
conico brevi, arista plumosa, abdomine guttis quatuor dorsalibus
nonnullisque ventralibus nigris, segmentis albido marginatis, alis
subcinereis.

_Male._ Tawny, with a few black bristles; antennae short, 3rd joint
conical, less than twice the length of the 2nd; arista plumose;
abdomen conical, not longer than the thorax, hind borders of the
segments whitish, fourth segment with a black dot, fifth segment with
three black dots, some black dots along each side beneath; wings
greyish; veins black, testaceous at the base; discal transverse vein
straight, upright, parted by full half its length from the border, and
by nearly twice its length from the praebrachial transverse. Length of
the body 2-1/2 lines; of the wings 5 lines.

159. HELOMYZA TRIPUNCTIFERA, n. s. _Foem._ Fulva, antennarum articulo
3 deg. conico, arista plumosa, abdomine fasciis pallidis guttaque apicali
atra, alis cinereis antice subluridis.

_Female._ Tawny, with black bristles; head whitish about the eyes;
third joint of the antennae; conical, hardly twice the length of the
2nd; arista plumose to the tip; abdomen with a pale band on the hind
border of each segment, and with a black apical dot; wings grey, with
a lurid tinge in front; veins black; discal transverse vein straight,
upright, clouded with brown, parted by less than its length from
the border, and by more than twice its length from the praebrachial
transverse. Length of the body 2 lines; of the wings 4 lines.

160. HELOMYZA COPIOSA, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, capite vitta testacea,
antennis fulvis brevissimis basi nigris, arista plumosa, thorace
maculis plurimis fuscis, scutello fulvo basi nigro, abdomine nigro
vitta et segmentorum marginibus posticis fulvis, tibiis fulvo cinctis,
alis cinereis nigricante maculatis.

_Female._ Cinereous; head slightly ferruginous, with a dull testaceous
stripe on the front, whitish about the eyes; epistoma not prominent;
antennae tawny, black towards the base, very short, not extending
beyond half the length of the face, 3rd joint conical, much longer
than the 2nd; arista plumose; thorax with three rows of various brown
spots; scutellum tawny, black at the base; pectus with brown spots;
abdomen black, oval, not longer than the thorax, with a stripe and
the hind borders of the segments tawny: legs black, short; tibiae
tawny, black at the base and at the tips: wings grey, slightly lurid
in front, with numerous partly confluent blackish spots; veins black;
discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by much less than
its length from the border, and by about twice its length from the
praebrachial transverse; halteres tawny. Length of the body 2-1/2
lines; of the wings 4 lines.


Gen. SCIOMYZA, _Fallen_.

161. SCIOMYZA REPLENA, n. s. _Foem._ Picea, capite ferrugineo lituris
albis, antennis pedibus thoracisque vittis quatuor rufescentibus,
abdomine nigro fasciis rufescentibus, femoribus nigris, tibiis nigro
bifasciatis, alis nigricantibus albido trifasciatis margine postico
cinereo.

_Female._ Piceous; head with several black bristles, white about the
eyes, ferruginous above, with a white transverse line hindward, with a
partly black partly white mark on each side, and with an abbreviated
whitish streak in the middle; antennae reddish, piceous towards the
tips, 3rd joint conical, less than twice the length of the 2nd; arista
plumose; thorax with four reddish stripes, the outer pair incomplete;
abdomen black, with a reddish band on the fore border of each segment;
legs reddish, femora black, tibiae with two black bands; wings
blackish, with three irregular abbreviated whitish bands, cinereous
along the hind border; veins black; discal transverse vein straight,
upright, parted by less than its length from the border, and by nearly
twice its length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres testaceous.
Length of the body 2-3/4 lines; of the wings 5 lines.

162. SCIOMYZA? LEUCOMELANA, n. s. _Foem._ Picea, nitens, subtus alba,
capite plano, antennis rufis apice nigris, arista plumosa, abdomine
nigro, pedibus halteribusque testaceis, alis nigricantibus acutis.

_Female._ Piceous, shining; head flat above, a little narrower than
the thorax; epistoma, sides of the peristoma, under side and disk of
the pectus white; antennae red, reaching the epistoma, third joint
elongate-conical, black towards the tip; arista plumose; scutellum
large; abdomen oval, black, hardly longer or broader than the thorax;
legs short, testaceous; wings blackish, paler along the hind border,
rather pointed at the tips; costa very convex; veins black, radial
vein slightly curved, cubital vein and praebrachial vein converging
towards the tip; discal transverse vein nearly straight and upright,
parted by more than its length from the border, and by nearly twice
its length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres testaceous.
Length of the body 2 lines; of the wings 4 lines.


Gen. AMBLADA, n. g.

_Foem. Corpus_ sat robustum. _Caput_ transversum, thorace vix
angustins. _Antennae_ capitis latitudine breviores; articulus 3^{us}
lanceolatus, 2 deg. longior; arista pubescens. _Abdomen_ brevi-ovatum,
thorace multo brevius, _Pedes_ simplices. _Alae_ mediocres.

_Female._ Body moderately stout. Head transverse, almost as broad
as the thorax, somewhat flat above; proboscis and palpi very short.
Antennae shorter than the breadth of the head; 3rd joint lanceolate,
longer than the 2nd; arista pubescent. Abdomen short-oval, much shorter
than the thorax. Legs simple, moderately long. Wings of moderate size;
veins of the usual structure.

163. AMBLADA ATOMARIA, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, capite guttis quatuor
fuscis maculisque duabus atris, arista alba filiformi, thorace
lineis duabus punctisque plurimis fuscis, abdomine fulvo segmentorum
marginibus nigro punctatis, pedibus fulvis, tibiis albidis nigro
bifasciatis, alis lurido-cinereis.

_Female._ Cinereous; head white about the eyes, with two brown dots on
each side of the vertex, and with a deep black spot on each side in
front; antennae cinereous-brown; arista, white, filiform, seated on the
base of the 3rd joint, which it much exceeds in length; thorax with
two slender brown lines and with very numerous brown points; abdomen
tawny, with black points on the hind borders of the segments; legs
tawny; tibiae dingy whitish, with two black bands on each; wings grey,
with a lurid tinge; veins tawny, black by the costa at the base; discal
transverse vein straight, upright, parted by less than its length
from the border, and by full twice its length from the praebrachial
transverse; halteres testaceous. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the
wings 5 lines.


Gen. SEPEDON, _Latr._

164. Sepedon Javanensis, _Desv. Essai Myod._ 677. 2.

Inhabits also Java.


Subfam. LAUXANIDES, _Walk._

Gen. LONCHOEA, _Fallen_.

165. LONCHOEA ? PUNCTIPENNIS. _Foem._ Nigra, nitens, capite antico
argenteo, antennarum articulo 3 deg. longe-conico, arista plumosa, tarsis
halteribusque piceis, alis cinereis basi nigris puncto costali nigro.

_Female._ Black, shining, with several stout bristles; head silvery in
front; face flat; antennae short; third joint elongate-conical, arista
very plumose; abdomen oval, convex, a little shorter and narrower than
the thorax; tarsi and halteres piceous; wings grey, black at the base,
with a black costal point at the tip of the subcostal vein; veins
yellowish, black at the base; costal vein black; discal transverse vein
straight, upright, parted by less than its length from the border, and
by nearly twice its length from the praebrachial transverse. Length of
the body 2-1/4 lines; of the wings 4-1/2 lines.

166. LONCHOEA? CONSENTANEA, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, nitens, arista nuda,
abdomine cyanescente-nigro, alis cinereis, halteribus albis.

_Female._ Black, shining; antennae black, nearly reaching the epistoma;
3rd joint linear, about thrice the length of the 2nd; arista simple;
abdomen bluish black; wings grey; veins black, testaceous at the
base; discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by less than
its length from the border and by more than twice its length from the
praebrachial transverse; halteres white. Length of the body 2 lines; of
the wings 3-1/2 lines.

167. LONCHOEA? ATRATULA, n. s. _Foem._ Atra, pubescens, antennis
epistoma attingentibus, arista plumosa, abdomine subovato, alis
nigricantibus.

_Female._ Deep black, pubescent, not shining; antennae; reaching the
epistoma; 3rd joint linear, rounded at the tip, about four times the
length of the 2nd; arista plumose; abdomen somewhat oval, a little
broader but hardly longer than the thorax; wings blackish; veins
black; discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by less than
its length from the border, and by about twice its length from the
praebrachial transverse. Length of the body 2 lines; of the wings 3-1/2
lines.


Gen. THRESSA, n. g.

_Foem. Corpus_ breve, crassum. _Caput_ thorace multo latius. _Oculi_
magni. _Antennae_ epistoma fere attingentes; articulus 3^{us} linearis,
2 deg. plus duplo longior; arista plumosa. _Abdomen_ subovatum, thorace non
longius. _Pedes_ longiusculi. _Alae_ parvae.

_Female._ Body short, thick. Head much broader than the thorax; front
wide. Eyes large. Antennae nearly reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint
linear, rounded at the tip, more than twice the length of the 2nd;
arista plumose. Thorax a little longer than broad; scutellum rather
prominent. Abdomen nearly oval, not longer than the thorax. Legs rather
short. Wings small; costal vein ending at the tip of the wing; radial
vein very near the costa; cubital vein ending at a little in front of
the tip; transverse veins much retracted, very short.

168. THRESSA SIGNIFERA, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, nitens, capite cyaneo,
antennis pedibusque fulvis, thorace strigis duabus lateralibus albis,
femoribus nigris, alis hyalinis apud costam nigris, halteribus albis.
_Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}._ Alis apud costam hyalinis macula apicali nigra.

_Female._ Black, shining; head blue; antennae tawny; thorax with a
white transverse streak on each side; legs tawny; femora black, with
tawny tips; wings hyaline, black along the costa; veins black; discal
transverse vein parted by four times its length from the border, and by
six times its length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres white.
_Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}._ Wings not black along the costa, with the exception of a
black apical spot. Length of the body 1-1/2 line; of the wings 2-1/2
lines.


Gen. OCHTHIPHILA, _Fallen_.

169. OCHTHIPHILA DISCOGLAUCA, n. s. _Foem._ Fusca, capite thoracisque
disco glucescente-albidis, arista plumosa, thorace lineis duabus
lateralibus albidis, abdomine lineis transversis vittaque albidis,
tibiis tarsisque rufescentibus, alis cinereis, halteribus testaceis.

_Female._ Brown; head glaucous-whitish; antennae black, nearly reaching
the epistoma; third joint conical, arista plumose; thorax with a very
broad glaucous-whitish stripe, a whitish line on each side and two
on each side of the pectus; abdomen oval, a little shorter than the
thorax, with a whitish band on the hind border of each segment and with
a whitish stripe, the whitish hue appearing tawny in some aspects;
tibiae and tarsi reddish; wings gray; veins black; discal transverse
vein straight, upright, parted by much less than its length from the
border, and by nearly twice its length from the praebrachial transverse;
halteres testaceous. Length of the body 2 lines; of the wings 4 lines.


Gen. CELYPHUS, _Dalman_.

170. Celyphus obtectus, _Dalman_. See Vol. I. p. 30.

171. Celyphus scutatus, _Wied._ See Vol. I. p. 131.


Subfam. ORTALIDES, _Haliday_.

Gen. LAMPROGASTER, _Macq._

172. Lamprogaster marginifera, _Walk._ See Vol. II. p. 111.


Gen. PTEROGENIA _Bigot_, MSS.

_Mas et Foem. Platystomati_ affinis. _Corpus_ breve, latum, crassum,
Caput thorace latius, antice planum, genis dilatatis. _Antennae_ parvae;
articulus 3^{us} longi-conicus; arista plumosa. _Thorax_ subconvexus;
scutellum magnum. _Abdomen_ thorace brevius et angustius. _Pedes_
breves, validi; tibiae arcuatae. _Alae_ sat parvae; alulae maximae. _Mas._
Genae angulatae, valde dilatatae.

This genus is allied to _Platystoma_ and more especially to
_Trigonosoma_.

_Male and Female._ Body short, broad, thick. Head broader than the
thorax, flat in front; vertex broad; sides of the face or genae dilated;
epistoma rather prominent. Eyes oblong. Antennae; small, resting in the
cavity of the broad face; 3rd joint elongate-conical, more than twice
the length of the 2nd; arista plumose. Thorax compact, slightly convex;
scutellum large, conical. Abdomen short, conical, shorter and narrower
than the thorax. Legs short, stout; tibiae curved, especially the hind
pair. Wings rather small; alulae very large. _Male._ Sides of the face
more dilated than those of the female, and forming an angle or short
horn on each side.

173. PTEROGENIA SINGULARIS, _Bigot_, MSS. _Mas et Foem._ Nigra, nitens,
capite flavescente-albo fasciis quatuor nigris, antennis pallide
luteis basi nigris, abdominis segmentis flavo marginatis, tarsis albis
apice nigris, alis subcinereis dimidio basali lutescente fasciis
contiguis fuscis, fascia strigisque exterioribus fuscis, halteribus
fulvis.

_Male and Female._ Black, shining. Head yellowish-white, with four
black bands; 1st band on the vertex, broader than the others; 2nd
across the base of the antennae; 3rd in front of the face; 4th on the
epistoma; antennae pale luteous, black at the base; hind borders of the
abdominal segments yellow; sides dark tawny towards the base; legs
pubescent; tarsi white, with black tips; wings slightly cinereous;
basal half somewhat luteous, with several partly confluent brown
bands, exterior part with one brown band and with several transverse
brown streaks; veins black, pale luteous exteriorly; discal transverse
vein slightly curved outward, parted by about one-third of its length
from the border, and by more than its length from the praebrachial
transverse; alulae white; halteres tawny. Length of the body 3 lines; of
the wings 7 lines.


Gen. PLATYSTOMA, _Latr._

174. PLATYSTOMA ATOMARIUM, n. s. _Mas._ Cinereum, nigro pulverosum,
facie alba nigro biguttata, antennis pedibusque nigris, arista
plumosa, pectore albido, alis nigricantibus guttis plurimis limpidis.

_Male._ Cinereous; head flat above, white about the eyes; face white,
with a black dot on each side in front; antennae black, nearly extending
to the peristoma; 3rd joint linear, rounded at the tip, more than twice
the length of the 2nd; arista plumose; thorax with numerous lines of
minute black points; pectus whitish, with black points; abdomen oval,
powdered with black, not longer than the thorax; legs short, stout,
black; wings blackish, covered with limpid dots, excepting a narrow
oblique band on the transverse veins; veins black; discal transverse
vein straight, upright, parted by less than half its length from the
border, and by a little more than half its length from the praebrachial
transverse. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the wings 4-1/2 lines.

175. PLATYSTOMA BASALE, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, capite lineis tribus
albidis, antennis basi nigris, arista plumosa, thorace vittis
indistinctis fuscis maculisque lateralibus nigris testaceo-marginatis,
scutello nigro vitta cinerea, abdominis segmentis albido-marginatis,
femoribus anticis tibiisque albido fasciatis, alis subcinereis
lituris transversis fascia exteriore costam versus dilatata fasciaque
subapicali nigricantibus, halteribus albis.

_Female._ Cinereous; head white about the eyes and beneath, and with
three whitish lines on the front; epistoma not prominent; proboscis
large; antennae black towards the base, not near reaching the epistoma;
3rd joint elongate-conical, about twice the length of the 2nd; arista
plumose; thorax with indistinct brown stripes, and on each side with
black shining testaceous-bordered spots; scutellum black, shining,
with a cinereous stripe; abdomen cinereous-black, oval, tawny on each
side at the base, a little shorter and narrower than the thorax; hind
borders of the segments whitish; legs black; tibiae and fore femora with
a whitish band on each; wings slightly greyish, with several irregular
transverse blackish marks near the base, with a broad exterior blackish
band, which is dilated and contains a whitish streak towards the costa,
and with an irregular subapical blackish band; veins black; discal
transverse vein nearly straight and upright, parted by more than half
its length from the border, and by nearly twice its length from the
praebrachial transverse; halteres white. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines;
of the wings 4-1/2 lines.


Gen. DACUS, _Fabr._

176. DACUS DIVERGENS, n. s. _Mas._ Purpureus, longus, angustus; fronte
tumida, facie carinata fulvo maculata, palpis fulvis, antennis piceis,
arista alba subpubescente, thorace vittis tribus cinereis, abdomine
fusiformi apicem versus cylindrico et cyaneo, pedibus piceo-nigris,
femoribus fulvis, tarsis posticis rufescentibus, alis cinereis apices
versus et apud venas transversas fuscis, halteribus albido-flavis.

_Male._ Bluish purple, long, slender; head whitish about the eyes;
front tumid, convex; face keeled, with a large elongated tawny spot;
palpi tawny; antennae piceous, reaching the epistoma, tawny at the
base; 3rd joint linear, conical at the tip, six times the length of
the 2nd; arista white, minutely pubescent, very much longer than the
3rd joint; thorax slightly compressed, with three cinereous stripes;
pectus cinereous; abdomen fusiform, cylindrical, and mostly blue
towards the tip, very much longer than the thorax; legs piceous black;
femora tawny; hind tarsi reddish except at the tips; wings cinereous,
brown on the fore part towards the tips and about the transverse
veins, the brown part including a curved cinereous streak between the
cubital and praebrachial veins; veins black; praebrachial vein very
slightly undulating; discal transverse vein curved outward, parted
by one-fourth of its length from the border, and by much more than
its length from the oblique praebrachial transverse; halteres whitish
yellow. Length of the body 7 lines; of the wings 12 lines.

The genus _Dacus_ includes many distinct forms, and will probably be
soon divided into numerous subgenera; the characters of the preceding
species differ much from those of the type, _D. Oleae_. Some of the
following species may belong to _Senopterina_, Macq.

177. DACUS ADDENS, n. s. _Foem._ Cyaneus, longus, angustus, capite
nigro, facie plana perobliqua, arista cinerea nuda, thorace vittis
tribus cinereis, abdomine aeneo-viridi, tibiis tarsis halteribusque
nigris, alis cinereis apud costam et apud venam transversam discalem
nigricantibus.

_Female._ Blue, long, narrow; head black, depressed above, white about
the eyes; face very oblique, forming before the front a protuberance
on which the antennae are seated, its fore part oblong quadrate,
almost flat, with whitish furrows for the antennae; palpi and antennae
black, the latter reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear, rather
obtuse at the tip, six times the length of the 2nd; arista cinereous,
bare, hardly longer than the 3rd joint; thorax with three indistinct
cinereous stripes; abdomen aeneous-green, nearly linear, slightly
compressed, much longer than the thorax; oviduct protuberant, slender;
legs short, stout; tibiae and tarsi black; wings grey, blackish along
the costa and about the transverse veins; veins and halteres black;
discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by full one-fourth of
its length from the border, and by much more than its length from the
praebrachial transverse. Length of the body 6 lines; of the wings 12
lines.

178. DACUS BILINEATUS, n. s. _Foem._ Fulvus, longiusculus, nigro
bivittatus, capite antennisque rufescentibus, arista plumosa, palpis
porrectis; pedibus breviusculis nigro fasciatis, alis cinereis, costa
venaque transversa discali fusco nebulosis, halteribus testaceis.

_Female._ Tawny, rather long; head reddish in front; epistoma rather
prominent; palpi porrect; antennae reddish, nearly reaching the
epistoma; 3rd joint linear, rounded at the tip, about thrice the length
of the 2nd; arista somewhat plumose; thorax elongate-elliptical, with
two black stripes; abdomen lanceolate, shining, with two broad black
stripes, longer than the thorax; legs rather short, with diffuse black
bands; wings grey, brownish along the costa and about the discal
transverse vein; veins black, tawny at the base; discal transverse
vein nearly straight and upright, parted by one-fourth of its length
from the border, and by much more than its length from the praebrachial
transverse; halteres testaceous. Length of the body 4 lines; of the
wings 7 lines.

179. DACUS IMITANS, n. s. _Foem._ Cyaneus, angustus, capite atro,
antennis pedibusque nigris, tarsis posticis basi albidis, alis
cinereis, costa vittaque nigris, halteribus piceis.

This species is closely allied to _D. longivitta_, and _D. exigens_ and
_D. contrahens_ belong to the same group.

_Female._ Dark blue, narrow, with slight cinereous tomentum; head deep
black above, white about the eyes; peristoma very prominent; proboscis
large; antennae black, nearly reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear,
conical at the tip, about four times the length of the 2nd; arista
bare, slender; abdomen fusiform, narrower and a little longer than the
thorax; oviduct protuberant, slender; legs black, moderately long;
first joint of the hind tarsi whitish above; wings cinereous, black
along most of the costa to the tips, and black on the space between
the cubital and praebrachial veins as far as the praebrachial transverse
vein; discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by less than
half its length from the border, and by very much more than its length
from the praebrachial transverse; halteres piceous. Length of the body
3-1/2 lines; of the wings 6 lines.

180. DACUS EXIGENS, n. s. _Mas._ Viridescente cyaneus, angustus,
capite rufescente piceo, antennis luteis, arista nuda, thorace vittis
tribus cinereis, pedibus fulvis, alis cinereis striga costali apiceque
fuscis, halteribus testaceis.

_Male._ Greenish blue, narrow; head reddish, piceous above, white
about the eyes, black in front; antennae luteous, reaching the
epistoma; 3rd joint slightly lanceolate, full four times the length of
the 2nd; arista slender, simple; thorax with three cinereous stripes;
abdomen almost cylindrical, much longer than the thorax; legs tawny;
tarsi black towards the tips; wings grey, brown at the tips and with
a brown streak on the middle of the costa; veins black, tawny towards
the base; discal transverse vein straight, upright, clouded with
brown, parted by less than half its length from the border, and by
much more than its length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres
testaceous. Length of the body 3-1/4 lines; of the wings 5-1/2 lines.

181. DACUS CONTRAHENS, n. s. _Foem._ Cyaneus, angustus, capite
supra atro apud oculos albo, antennis luteis, thorace vittis tribus
cinereis, pedibus piceis, alis cinereis vitta costali interrupta
nigricante, vena transversa discali nigricante nebulosa, halteribus
albidis.

_Female._ Dark blue, narrow; head deep black above, white about the
eyes, piceous in front; antennae luteous, reaching the epistoma; 3rd
joint linear, conical at the tip, about six times the length of the
2nd; arista slender, simple; thorax with three cinereous stripes;
abdomen compressed, a little longer than the thorax; legs piceous;
wings grey, with a blackish interrupted costal stripe, which is
dilated at the tip of the wing; veins black; discal transverse vein
clouded with blackish, parted by half its length from the border, and
by a little more than its length from the praebrachial transverse;
halteres whitish. Length of the body 3 lines; of the wings 5 lines.

182. DACUS INAPTUS, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Viridis, capite atro, facie
fulva basi alba, antennis piceis, pedibus halteribusque nigris, alis
angustis cinereis.

_Male and Female._ Green, with slight cinereous tomentum; head deep
black, white about the eyes; face tawny, white at the base; antennae
piceous, reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint lanceolate, full four
times the length of the 2nd; arista bare, long, slender; thorax
long, slightly compressed; abdomen slightly compressed at the
base, linear, narrower and a little shorter than the thorax in the
male, fusiform and much attenuated towards the tip in the female;
legs black, moderately long; wings narrow, cinereous; veins black,
straight; discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by less
than half its length from the border, and by almost twice its length
from the praebrachial transverse; halteres black. Length of the body
3-1/2-4-1/2 lines; of the wings 6-8 lines.

183. DACUS TERMINIFER, n. s. _Foem._ Niger, nitens, breviusculus,
capite rufescente, antennis fulvis, arista nuda, scutello pectorisque
maculis duabus flavis, pedibus breviusculis, tibiis anterioribus
femoribus posticis basi tarsisque albidis, alis vitreis, striga
costali puncto apicali vittaque postica nigricantibus, halteribus
testaceis.

_Female._ Black, shining, rather short; head reddish above; antennae
tawny, reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear, piceous towards the
tip, which is rounded, about six times the length of the 2nd; arista
slender, bare; scutellum dull yellow; pectus with an oblique yellow
spot on each side; abdomen hardly broader than long, a little broader
and shorter than the thorax; legs rather short; tarsi and anterior
tibiae whitish; hind femora whitish towards the base; wings vitreous,
with a short black stripe extending from the base to near the hind
border; costa with a blackish streak in the middle and with a blackish
apical point; discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by
about one-third of its length from the border, and by more than its
length from the praebrachial transverse, which is oblique and unusually
long; halteres testaceous. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the
wings 5 lines.

184. DACUS EMITTENS, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Fulvus, facie brevi nigro
biguttata, antennis pallide luteis, arista nuda, thorace lineis
quinque rufescentibus, disco nonnunquam nigricante-cinereo, scutello
callisque humeralibus flavis, abdomine nigro-fasciato, alis vitreis
fusco plus minusve strigatis, halteribus albido-testaceis.

_Male and Female._ Tawny, convex, minutely pubescent; face short, with
a black dot on each side; antennae pale luteous, reaching the epistoma;
3rd joint linear, conical at the tip, full four times the length of
the 2nd; arista slender, bare, much longer than the 3rd joint; thorax
with five reddish lines; scutellum and humeral calli yellow; metathorax
with a blackish mark on each side; abdomen short, oval, broader than
the thorax, concave beneath, from whence in the female the lanceolate
apical part proceeds; a protuberance on each side at the base, and a
black middle band, behind which there is a slight longitudinal black
line; wings vitreous, lurid and partly brown along the costa, brown
along the subanal vein, and brown about the tips, excepting most of
the space between the discal transverse vein and the border; veins
tawny, partly black, slightly deviating; discal transverse vein nearly
straight, parted by about one-third of its length from the border, and
by more than its length from the oblique and rather long praebrachial
transverse; halteres whitish testaceous. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}._ Abdomen with two
black bands. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER GAMMA~}, Male_. Discal transverse vein not clouded
with brown. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA~}, Male_. Praebrachial transverse vein clouded
with brown. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}, Male_. Disk of the thorax blackish grey;
wings vitreous, excepting a slight brown line along the costa, and
another along the subanal vein. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER ZETA~}. Male_. Abdomen with a black
interrupted subapical band. Length of the body 3-6 lines; of the wings
5-10 lines.

This species is closely allied to _D. ferrugineus_ and to _D.
trivittatus_, but may be distinguished by the luteous hue along the
costa.

185. DACUS DIFFUSUS, n. s. _Foem._ Testaceus, facie nigro fasciata,
palpis nigro notatis, thoracis vittis duabus angustis abbreviatis et
metathoracis fasciis duabus angustis nigris, abdomine fusiformi, alis
subcinereis apud venas fuscescente subnebulosis.

_Female._ Testaceous, not shining; head paler about the eyes, with
a black band on the face near the epistoma; palpi with a black mark
on each outer side; antennae reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear,
rounded at the tip, more than four times the length of the 2nd; arista
bare; thorax with two narrow abbreviated black stripes; metathorax
with two slender black bands; abdomen fusiform, narrower and a little
longer than the thorax; legs moderately long; wings slightly greyish,
irregularly clouded with very pale brown about the veins; the latter
black, testaceous towards the base; discal transverse vein straight,
upright, parted by about one-fourth of its length from the border, and
by much less than its length from the praebrachial transverse, which is
undulating and very oblique. Length of the body 4 lines; of the wings
7 lines.

186. DACUS FULVITARSIS, n. s. _Foem._ Niger, longiusculus, capite
apud oculos albo, antennis piceis, abdomine lanceolato, femoribus
basi fulvis, metatarsis subdilatis, tarsis posterioribus fulvis, alis
cinereis nigricante nebulosis, halteribus testaceis.

_Female._ Black, rather long and narrow; head white about the
eyes; face small; antennae piceous, short; 3rd joint nearly round,
a little longer than broad; arista long, bare; thorax elongate;
abdomen lanceolate, longer than the thorax; femora tawny at the
base; metatarsi slightly dilated; posterior tarsi tawny, with black
tips; wings grey, partly clouded with blackish; veins black; discal
transverse vein straight, upright, parted by about twice its length
from the border, and by about thrice its length from the praebrachial
transverse; halteres testaceous. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of
the wings 4 lines.


Gen. CALLANTRA, n. g.

_Foem. Corpus_ convexum. _Caput_ thorace vix angustius. _Palpi_
distincti, porrecti. _Antennae_ longae, petiolo aut articulo 1 deg. communi,
arista nuda. _Thorax_ brevis. _Abdomen_ petiolatum, postice ovatum et
valde convexum, subtus concavum. _Pedes_ mediocres. _Alae_ sat angustae.

_Female._ Body convex. Head almost as broad as the thorax; face
vertical; palpi distinct, porrect; antennae long, seated on a common
petiole or first joint, with which the succeeding part forms a right
angle; 3rd joint very slightly increasing in breadth from the base
to the tip, full thrice the length of the 2nd joint, which is rather
long; arista bare, slender, a little longer than the 3rd joint. Thorax
short. Abdomen petiolated, oval and very convex hindward, concave
beneath, very much longer than the thorax. Legs moderately long. Wings
rather narrow.

187. CALLANTRA SMIEROIDES, n. s. _Foem._ Fulva, facie nigro-biguttata,
antennis testaceis, thoracis fascia, scutello, callis duobus
humeralibus, pectoris lituris duabus, abdominis fasciis duabus
lituraque subapicali flavis, alis subcinereis apud costam
fuscescentibus, halteribus testaceis.

_Female._ Tawny; head testaceous about the eyes; face with a black
dot on each side; antennae testaceous, extending beyond the epistoma;
thorax with two yellow humeral calli, and with a yellow band which is
continued on each side of the pectus, the latter having a yellow mark
on each side hindward; scutellum yellow; abdomen with the hind borders
of the 1st and 2nd segments yellow; a yellow capitate subapical mark,
which is dilated on each side; wings slightly grey, brownish along the
costa; veins black, tawny towards the base; a lurid tinge along the
subanal vein; discal transverse vein oblique, nearly straight, parted
by less than half its length from the border, and by more than its
length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres testaceous. Length of
the body 4-1/2 lines; of the wings 7-1/2 lines.


Gen. ARAGARA, n. g.

_Foem. Corpus_ angustum. _Caput_ supra planum, thorace latius; facies
valde retracta. _Antennae_ brevissimae; articulus 3^{us} subrotundus;
arista nuda. _Thorax_ longus, subcompressus. _Abdomen_ ovatum, thorace
brevius. _Pedes_ antici raptorii, coxis longissimis, femoribus
incrassatis. _Alae_ sat angustae.

Allied to _Dacus_.

_Female._ Body narrow. Head flat above, broader than the thorax; face
much retracted. Antennae very short; 3rd joint nearly round, a little
longer than the 2nd; arista bare, slender. Thorax long, slightly
compressed. Abdomen oval, shorter but hardly broader than the thorax.
Fore legs raptorious; coxae very long; femora incrassated; tibiae
shorter than the femora to which they are applied. Posterior legs
moderately long and stout. Wings rather narrow.

188. ARAGARA CRASSIPES, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereo-nigra, capite cyaneo,
tarsis testaceis, alis cinereis, halteribus albis.

_Female._ Black, slightly covered with cinereous tomentum; head
blue, shining, luteous on each side in front; antennae black; thorax
cinereous on each side; tarsi testaceous, with black tips; wings grey;
veins black; praebrachial vein and subanal vein very near each other
from the base to the discal transverse vein, which is straight and
parted by four times its length from the border, and by more than
four times its length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres white.
Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the wings 4 lines.


Gen. ENICOPTERA, _Macq._

189. ENICOPTERA PICTIPENNIS, n. s. _Mas._ Fulva, longa, nitens,
pubescens, capite luteo vitta lata, litura antica arcuata maculisque
duabus lateralibus nigris, palpis nigro notatis, antennis basi nigro
guttatis apice nigricantibus, abdomine longi-fusiformi nigricante basi
fulvo, alis longis luteis apud costam nigris postice cinereis, vittis
quatuor deviis fuscis.

_Male._ Tawny, long, shining, pubescent, testaceous beneath; head pale
luteous, with a broad black stripe, which is dilated on each side; a
black U-shaped mark about the face, which is black; a large black spot
on each side of the peristoma; palpi partly black; antennae blackish at
the tips, and with a black dot on each at the base; 3rd joint linear,
rounded at the tip, more than twice the length of the 2nd; arista
plumose; pectus with a minute blackish mark on each side in front;
abdomen blackish, except towards the base, elongate-fusiform, much
longer and narrower than the thorax; legs long, testaceous, minutely
pubescent; wings long, luteous, cinereous along the inner part of the
hind border; black along the exterior part of the costa, and with
four irregular brown stripes which are abbreviated towards the base,
the first also interrupted; veins luteous, black in the dark parts;
radial vein undulating; cubital vein hardly undulating; praebrachial
vein curved and inclined forward towards its tip; discal transverse
vein very oblique, slightly curved outwards, parted by less than half
its length from the border, and by more than its length from the
praebrachial transverse. Length of the body 7 lines; of the wings 16
lines.

190. ENICOPTERA TORTUOSA, n. s. _Mas._ Fulva, longa, nitens,
pubescens, facie argenteo bistrigata, thoracis vittis duabus fasciaque
metathorace pectorisque disco nigris, abdomine lineari vittis duabus
ventralibus nigris, alis longis vitreis subdilatatis, vitta costali
fulva nigricante nebulosa apice furcata, vittis duabus obliquis
flavo-fuscis.

_Male._ Tawny, long, shining, minutely pubescent; head depressed
above, with a silvery streak on each side of the face; antennae
reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear, slightly and obliquely
truncated at the tip, full four times the length of the 2nd; arista
plumose; thorax with an irregular black stripe along each side, and
with a black band adjoining the scutellum; metathorax and disc of
the pectus black; abdomen linear, much longer and narrower than the
thorax, with a black stripe beneath; legs long, minutely pubescent;
wings long, vitreous, somewhat dilated, tawny and partly shaded
with blackish along the costa; this costal stripe dilated towards
the base, and emitting a fork towards the tip; two oblique brown
and yellow stripes, which part from the hind border, are united on
the praebrachial transverse vein, and there join the costal stripe,
the exterior one very short; veins black; radial vein excessively
contorted towards its tip; cubital vein straight till near its
tip, where it is inclined hindward, and is slightly undulating;
praebrachial vein very undulating exteriorly; subanal vein straight;
discal transverse vein very oblique, nearly straight, parted by full
one-fourth of its length from the border, and by full half its length
from the praebrachial transverse, which is straight, upright, and
unusually long. Length of the body 7 lines; of the wings 16 lines.

_Enicoptera flava_, Macq. (Dipt. Exot. Suppl. 3, 63), the type of this
genus, inhabits Java, and is closely allied to _E. tortuosa_, and
may be a local variety of the latter species, but differs from the
character and figure. Macquart states that his description was taken
from an apparently immature specimen.

191. _Enicoptera arcuosa_, n. s. _Mas._ Fulva, longa, nitens,
pubescens, capite pallide luteo vitta lata biramosa fasciaque antica
nigris, thoracis lineolis duabus maculisque duabus anterioribus
pectorisque lituris duabus nigris, abdomine fusiformi, alis longis
lutescentibus sat angustis apices versus fuscis postice cinereis,
vitta discali albida, fascia exteriore alba antice furcata et arcuata.

_Male._ Tawny, long, shining, minutely pubescent; head pale luteous,
with a broad black stripe which emits an oblique branch on each side
to the eye, and with a black band by the epistoma; antennae nearly
reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear, rounded at the tip, thrice
the length of the 2nd; arista plumose; thorax with two short black
lines, each with a black spot in front; pectus with a black mark on
each side; abdomen fusiform, longer but hardly narrower than the
thorax; legs long, hardly pubescent; wings long, rather narrow,
somewhat luteous, brown towards the tips, grey along the hind border,
with a short whitish discal stripe which terminates in a white band,
the latter abbreviated hindward and forked in front, the exterior fork
much curved and terminating behind the tip of the wing; veins tawny,
black towards the tips; radial vein slightly undulating opposite
the praebrachial transverse vein; the other veins straight; discal
transverse vein slightly oblique, slightly curved outward, parted by
full one-third of its length from the border, and by nearly twice its
length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres testaceous. Length of
the body 6 lines; of the wings 14 lines.

192. ENICOPTERA? PLAGIFERA, n. s. _Foem._ Testacea, longiuscula,
frontis puncto nigro, facie nigricante-cinerea, palpis nigro
guttatis, antennis luteis, thoracis lineis tribus strigisque duabus
exterioribus, metathorace pectorisque lituris nigris, abdomine
fusiformi fasciis duabus basalibus nigris; alis vitreis longiusculis,
strigis duabus basalibus fasciis duabus plagaque subapicali fuscis.

_Female._ Testaceous, rather long, not shining, with a few black
bristles; head a little narrower than the thorax, with a black point
on the front; face blackish grey; palpi with a black dot on each outer
side; antennae pale luteous, not reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint
linear, rounded at the tip, about four times the length of the 2nd;
arista bare; thorax with three black lines and with two short and
more exterior black streaks; metathorax black, shining; pectus with
some black marks on each side; abdomen fusiform, hardly longer than
the thorax, with two black bands near the base; legs moderately long;
wings vitreous, rather long, with two narrow brown bands, the interior
band emitting two brown streaks to the base of the wing, the exterior
band curved, continued along the costa to the tip of the radial vein,
the space beyond it mostly occupied by an elliptical brown patch;
veins black, straight; discal transverse vein straight, upright,
parted by more than half its length from the border, and by nearly
twice its length from the oblique praebrachial transverse. Length of
the body 4-1/2 lines; of the wings 9 lines.


Gen. ORTALIS, _Fallen_.

The two following species belong to a new group of _Ortalis_, and will
probably form a distinct genus.

193. ORTALIS DECATOMOIDES, n. s. _Mas._ Obscure rufa, thorace brevi,
abdomine nigro, fusiformi, basi rufo, pedibus fulvis, femoribus
posterioribus basi albidis, tibiis posticis nigris, alis subcinereis,
macula apicali fasciisque duabus nigricantibus.

_Male._ Dull red; head rather large, a little broader than the thorax,
blackish on each side of the face; antennae wanting; thorax short;
abdomen black, shining, fusiform, red at the base, a little narrower
but hardly longer than the thorax; legs tawny; posterior femora
whitish at the base; hind tibiae black; wings slightly greyish, rather
convex along the hind border, blackish at the tips, and with two
blackish bands; first band rather oblique; veins black; praebrachial
vein and cubital vein slightly curved and approximating towards the
tip of the wing; discal transverse vein straight, upright, short,
parted by much more than its length from the border, and by full twice
its length from the praebrachial transverse, which is extremely short;
Length of the body 1-1/4 line; of the wings 2-1/2 lines.

194. ORTALIS VACILLANS, n. s. _Foem._ Fulva, arista pubescente,
abdomine nigro postice lanceolato, alis limpidis, costa striga basali
fasciisque tribus nigricantibus.

Closely allied to _D. decatomoides_. _Female._ Tawny, shining; head
full as broad as the thorax; epistoma slightly prominent; antennae
nearly reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear, conical towards the
tip, about four times the length of the 2nd; arista pubescent; abdomen
black, a little longer than the thorax, lanceolate hindward; wings
limpid, blackish along the costa, with a blackish streak, and with
three slender blackish bands; 1st band short, oblique, abbreviated
hindward by the end of the basal streak; 2nd curved, slightly
abbreviated hindward; 3rd nearly straight, entire; discal transverse
vein upright, nearly straight, parted by less than half its length
from the border, and by much more than its length from the praebrachial
transverse. Length of the body 2 lines; of the wings 4 lines.


Gen. TRYPETA, _Meigen_.

195. TRYPETA BASIFASCIA. _Foem._ Ferruginea, longiuscula, capite
antennisque luteis, arista plumosa, metathorace nigro, pectoris disco
nigricante, abdomine nigro basi fulvo, pedibus halteribusque fulvis,
femoribus posterioribus nigricantibus, alis nigris albo notatis basi
vitreis.

_Female._ Ferruginous, shining, rather long; head luteous, white about
the eyes, narrower than the thorax; face rather long; sides of the
peristoma slightly dilated; antennae luteous, very short, not extending
to half the length of the face; 3rd joint conical, much longer
than the 2nd; arista plumose; metathorax black; disk of the pectus
blackish; abdomen black, fusiform, tawny towards the base, a little
longer than the thorax; legs and halteres tawny; posterior femora
blackish; wings black, mostly vitreous towards the base, with two
white spots on the costa, with two on the hind border, and with four
or five transverse white dots on the disk; veins black, tawny at the
base; discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by much less
than its length from the border, and by much more than its length from
the praebrachial transverse. Length of the body 4 lines; of the wings 7
lines.

196. TRYPETA NIGRIFASCIA, n. s. _Mas._ Fulva, capite antennisque
pallide luteis, arista plumosa, thoracis lineis duabus et fascia
metathoraceque nigris, abdomine elliptico, alis vitreis latiusculis,
vitta costali fulva vittaque postica fusca.

_Male._ Tawny, shining; head pale luteous, whitish on the face and
about the eyes; antennae pale luteous, not near reaching the epistoma;
3rd joint elongate-conical, about twice the length of the 2nd; arista
plumose; thorax with an irregular black line on each side, and with
a black band in front of the scutellum; metathorax black; abdomen
elliptical, much shorter and a little narrower than the thorax; wings
vitreous, rather broad, with a broad tawny stripe, which occupies
the whole base and extends beyond the tip along the costa, where
it contains some grey marks; a brown stripe near the hind border,
abruptly angular exteriorly; veins tawny; discal transverse nearly
straight and upright, parted by less than half its length from the
border, and by more than its length from the praebrachial transverse.
Length of the body 3 lines; of the wings 6 lines.

197. TRYPETA LATIVENTRIS, n. s. _Mas._ Fusca, lata, depressa, capite,
antennis, scutello abdomineque rufescentibus, arista subpubescente,
abdomine vitta interrupta nigra, pedibus testaceis, femoribus
nigricantibus postice cinereis, lituris costalibus et marginalibus
vitreis.

_Male._ Brown, rather broad and flat; head reddish, a little narrower
than the thorax, testaceous on the face and about the eyes; face
quite flat; antennae reddish, not near reaching the epistoma; 3rd
joint linear, rounded at the tip, more than twice the length of the
2nd; arista minutely pubescent; thorax with black bristles on each
side; scutellum and abdomen dark reddish, the latter broader and not
longer than the thorax, with a black stripe which is interrupted on
the hind border of each segment; legs testaceous; femora blackish,
testaceous towards the tips; wings blackish, rather broad, cinereous
along the basal part of the hind border, with two small vitreous marks
towards the tip of the costa, and with three vitreous marks hindward,
the middle one much larger than the other two; veins black; discal
transverse vein nearly straight and upright, parted by a little less
than half its length from the border, and by a little less than its
length from the praebrachial transverse; alulae and halteres testaceous.
Length of the body 3-1/2 lines; of the wings 5 lines.

198. TRYPETA STELLIPENNIS, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Ferruginea,
capite antennisque pallide luteis, arista plumosa, metathorace
nigricante, abdomine fusiformi, pedibus halteribusque testaceis, alis
nigricantibus latiusculis, guttis marginalibus punctisque discalibus
albis.

_Male and Female._ Ferruginous, paler beneath; head pale luteous, not
so broad as the thorax; epistoma not prominent; antennae pale luteous,
not near reaching the epistoma; 3rd joint linear, rounded at the
tip, full twice the length of the 2nd; arista plumose; metathorax
blackish; abdomen fusiform, narrower and a little longer than the
thorax; oviduct of the female cylindric-lanceolate; legs and halteres
testaceous; wings blackish, rather broad, white at the tips, with
white marginal dots and with white discal points; veins black; discal
transverse vein upright, nearly straight, parted by a little more than
one-fourth of its length from the border, and by about its length from
the praebrachial transverse, which is rather long. Length of the body
2-1/2-3-1/2 lines; of the wings 5-6 lines.

199. TRYPETA AMPLIPENNIS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, capite antennis
pedibus halteribusque fulvis, arista nuda, abdomine nigro fusiformi
basi fulvo apicem versus lanceolato, alis nigris latissimis albo
guttatis.

_Female._ Cinereous, dull; head tawny, whitish about the eyes; face
flat; antennae tawny, very short, not extending beyond half the length
of the face; 3rd joint conical, a little longer than the 2nd; arista
bare; abdomen fusiform, black, shining, tawny towards the base,
lanceolate towards the tip, a little narrower and much longer than
the thorax; legs and halteres tawny; wings black, very broad, with a
white apical spot, with some white marginal and discal dots, and with
two larger white transverse costal marks; veins black, tawny at the
base; discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by about half
its length from the border, and by a little less than its length from
the praebrachial transverse. Length of the body 3 lines; of the wings 6
lines.

200. TRYPETA APPROXIMANS, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, nitens, capite
rufescente, facie cinerea, abdomine elliptico apicem versus
lanceolato, pedibus fulvis, femoribus nigris, alis nigricantibus albo
maculatis.

_Female._ Black, shining; head reddish; face cinereous; abdomen
elliptical, lanceolate towards the tip, much longer than the thorax;
legs tawny; femora black; wings blackish, with two white triangular
spots on the costa, with three white dots on the disk, with three
white streaks on the hind border, and with two white subapical
streaks; veins black; discal transverse vein nearly straight and
upright, parted by much less than its length from the border, and by a
little less than its length from the praebrachial transverse. Length of
the body 1-1/4 line; of the wings 2-1/2 lines.


Gen. SOPHIRA, _Walk._

201. SOPHIRA BISTRIGA, n. s. _Foem._ Fulva, capite luteo, arista
plumosa, thorace pectoreque nigro maculatis, metathorace vittis
duabus nigris, abdomine fusiformi maculis lateralibus nigris oviductu
lanceolato, alis nigricantibus albo bifasciatis basi fulvis.

_Female._ Tawny, shining; head luteous, hardly as broad as the thorax,
white about the eyes; antennae tawny, not near reaching the epistoma;
3rd joint elongate-conical, more than twice the length of the 2nd;
arista plumose; thorax with four large black spots; metathorax with
two black stripes; pectus with two elongated black spots on each side;
abdomen fusiform, with a long lanceolate flat oviduct, much longer
than the thorax; each segment with two large lateral black spots;
wings blackish, tawny towards the base, with two white bands, the
exterior band curved outward in front, and not extending to the costa;
veins black, tawny towards the base; discal transverse vein curved
outward, parted by full one-fourth of its length from the border, and
by very much more than its length from the praebrachial transverse.
Length of the body 4-1/2 lines; of the wings 8 lines.


Gen. PALLOPTERA, _Fallen_.

202. PALLOPTERA DETRACTA, n. s. _Mas._ Testacea, capite apud oculos
cinereo, arista subpubescente, abdomine guttis duabus lateralibus
subapicalibus nigris, alis cinereis.

_Male._ Testaceous; head pale cinereous behind and about the eyes;
antennae short, tawny; arista very minutely pubescent; abdomen oval,
not longer than the thorax, with a black dot on each side of the
subapical segment; wings grey; veins black, testaceous at the base;
discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by hardly half its
length from the praebrachial transverse. Length of the body 2-1/2
lines; of the wings 5 lines.


Subfam. DIOPSIDES, _Walk._

Gen. DIOPSIS, _Linn._

203. DIOPSIS SUBNOTATA, _Westw. Orient. Ent._ pl. 18. f. 2. Inhabits
also the Philippine Islands.

204. DIOPSIS DETRAHENS, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, capite ex parte
ferrugineo, oculorum petiolis breviusculis, abdomine subtus lurido,
coxis femoribusque fulvis, his apice nigris, alis nigricantibus macula
subcostali alba.

_Female._ Black; head partly ferruginous; petioles of the eyes each
equal in length to the space between them; abdomen lurid beneath; coxae
and femora tawny, the latter with black tips; wings blackish, with a
white subcostal spot towards the tip; veins black; halteres piceous.
Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the wings 4 lines.


Subfam. SEPSIDES, _Walk._

Gen. CALOBATA, _Fabr._

205. CALOBATA RESOLUTA, n. s. _Mas._ Nigra, abdomine lineari
longo, segmentis albido marginatis, pedibus longissimis, femoribus
posterioribus testaceo trifasciatis, femoribus anticis basi coxisque
anticis testaceis, tarsis anticis albis, alis cinereis apices versus
obscurioribus fascia subapicali albida.

_Male._ Black, slightly shining; pectus with an oblique cinereous
band on each side; abdomen linear, pale beneath, much narrower than
the thorax, and nearly twice its length, hind borders of the segments
whitish; legs black, very long; posterior femora with three testaceous
bands; fore femora at the base, and fore coxae, testaceous; fore tarsi
white; wings dark grey, blackish grey on each side of a whitish
subapical band; veins black; discal transverse vein straight, upright,
parted by about half its length from the border, and by more than four
times its length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres piceous.
Length of the body 6 lines; of the wings 10 lines.

206. CALOBATA IMPINGENS, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Obscure cyanea,
antennis rufis abdomine subtus ferrugineo segmentis albo marginatis,
pedibus fulvis, femoribus tibiisque anticis nigris, illis basi
fulvis, femoribus posterioribus nigro trifasciatis, tibiis tarsisque
posterioribus obscure fulvis, tarsis anticis albis basi nigris, alis
cinereis fusco bifasciatis.

_Male and Female._ Dark blue; head white about the eyes; antennae red;
abdomen lanceolate, ferruginous beneath, narrower and very much longer
than the thorax, hind borders of the segments white; legs tawny, very
long; posterior coxae and fore tibiae black; posterior femora with three
black bands; fore femora black, tawny towards the base; posterior tibiae
and posterior tarsi dark tawny; fore tarsi white, black at the base;
wings grey, with two brown bands, the second apical; veins black;
cubital vein and praebrachial vein converging to the tip of the wing;
discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by much less than its
length from the border, and by more than thrice its length from the
praebrachial transverse. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}:_ Bands of the wings broader and more
complete. Length of the body 4-5 lines; of the wings 7-8 lines.

This species is erroneously recorded as _C. indica_ in Vol. III. p.
124.

207. CALOBATA BIFASCIATA, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, longissima, gracillima,
capite litura transversa albida, arista breviuscula basi robusta,
abdominis dimidio antico subclavato fasciis duabus cinereis,
dimidio postico lanceolato, femoribus posticis basi albidis apice
rufescentibus, tarsis anticis albis apice nigris, alis cinereis
nigricante bifasciatis.

_Female._ Black, very long and slender; head with a whitish transverse
mark in front of the face, which is very short; 3rd joint of the
antennae elongate-conical, more than twice the length of the 2nd;
arista rather short, stout towards the base; thorax attenuated in
front; abdomen more than twice the length of the thorax, broadest in
the middle, subclavate to half its length, lanceolate from thence to
the tip, two cinereous bands on the basal half; legs long; hind femora
whitish at the base, reddish at the tips; fore tarsi white, with black
tips; wings grey, slightly blackish at the tips, and with two blackish
bands, the second broader and more complete than the first; veins
black; cubital vein and praebrachial vein slightly converging towards
the tip of the wing; discal transverse vein straight, oblique, parted
by less than its length from the border, and by more than thrice its
length from the praebrachial transverse. Length of the body 5 lines; of
the wings 8 lines.


Gen. CARDIACEPHALA, _Macq._

208. CARDIACEPHALA VARIPES, n. s. _Mas._ Testacea, gracillima,
capite subelongato, antennis pallide rufis basi nigris, thorace
antico attenuato, abdomine lineari apicem versus tumido, femoribus
intermediis subincrassatis, tibiis intermediis nigris, tarsis
intermediis albis apice nigris, alis pallide fuscescentibus, basi
fasciaque cinerascentibus.

MALE. Testaceous, very slender; head somewhat elongated; antennae pale
red, black at the base; thorax long, attenuated in front; abdomen
linear, tumid towards the tip, narrower and much longer than the
thorax; legs very long; fore legs much shorter and more slender than
the others; middle femora slightly incrassated, except towards the
tips; middle tibiae black; middle tarsi white, with black tips; wings
pale brownish, greyish towards the base and with a greyish band beyond
the discal transverse vein; veins black, testaceous towards the base;
cubital vein and praebrachial vein slightly converging towards the tip
of the wing; discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by less
than its length from the border, and by about thrice its length from
the praebrachial transverse. Length of the body 3-1/2 lines; of the
wings 6 lines.


Gen. SEPSIS, _Fallen_.

209. SEPSIS TESTACEA, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Testacea aut fulva,
antennis pallide rufis, abdomine subpubescente, alis cinerascentibus,
costa basali nigra. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}._ Abdomine piceo basi fulvo.

_Male and Female._ Testaceous or tawny, slightly setose; antennae pale
red, 3rd joint conical, about twice the length of the 2nd; abdomen
slightly pubescent; wings greyish, black along the costa towards the
base; veins black; discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by
a little more than its length from the border, and by more than its
length from the praebrachial transverse. _Var. {~GREEK SMALL LETTER BETA~}:_ Abdomen piceous,
tawny towards the base. Length of the body 2-3 lines; of the wings 3-4
lines.

210. SEPSIS FRONTALIS, n. s. _Mas._ Nigra, capite antico, antennis,
pedibus anticis femoribusque posterioribus basi testaceis, alis
vitreis. _Foem._ Fulva, abdomine nigro.

_Male._ Black, shining; head in front and antennae testaceous; fore
legs testaceous; posterior femora testaceous towards the base; wings
vitreous; veins black; discal transverse vein straight, oblique,
parted by twice its length from the border, and from the praebrachial
transverse. _Female._ Tawny; abdomen black. Length of the body 1 line;
of the wings 2 lines.

211. SEPSIS FASCIPES, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, subnitens, antennis pallide
rufis, abdomine fusiformi postice attenuato, pedibus albis, tibiis
intermediis femoribusque nigris, tibiis posticis basi apiceque nigris,
alis cinereis macula apicali nigra.

_Female._ Black, slightly shining; antennae pale red, very short,
3rd joint conical; abdomen fusiform, lanceolate and much attenuated
towards the tip, much longer than the thorax; legs white; femora and
middle tibiae black; hind tibiae black at the base and at the tips;
wings grey, with a black spot at the tip of the costa; veins black;
discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by its length
from the border, and by full twice its length from the praebrachial
transverse. Length of the body 3/4 line; of the wings 3 lines.

212. SEPSIS REVOCANS, n. s. _Foem._ Cupreo-nigra, antennis nigris,
pedibus halteribusque testaceis, alis subcinerascentibus basi
nigricantibus.

_Female._ Cupreous-black, shining; antennae black, very short; legs
testaceous; wings slightly greyish, blackish at the base of the costa;
veins black; discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by more
than twice its length from the border, and by less than twice its
length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres testaceous. Length of
the body 1-1/2 line; of the wings 2 lines.


Subfam. PSILIDES, _Walk._

Gen. MICROPEZA, _Macq._

213. Micropeza fragilis, _Walk._ See Vol. I. p. 37.


Gen. COENURGIA, n. g.

_Mas._ Corpus gracile. _Caput_ elongatum, antice conicum. _Antennae_
porrectae; articulus 3^{us} lanceolatus; arista apicalis, sat robusta.
_Thorax_ linearis. _Abdomen_ fusiforme, thorace vix angustius, non
longius. _Pedes_ longi; femora lata, compressa; tarsi antici articulo
1 deg. dilatato fusiformi. _Alae_ breviusculae, sat angustae.

Allied to _Nerius_. _Male._ Body slender. Head elongate, conical in
front, as broad as the thorax. Antennae porrect; 1st and 2nd joints
short; 3rd lanceolate; arista rather stout, apical, larger than all
the preceding joints. Thorax linear. Abdomen fusiform, hardly narrower
and not longer than the thorax. Legs long, femora broad, compressed;
fore tarsi with the first joint dilated, fusiform. Wings rather short
and narrow.

214. COENURGIA REMIPES, n. s. _Mas._ Fulva, capite guttis tribus
nigris, antennis basi nigris, arista alba, thorace maculis duabus
nigris, pedibus nigris, coxis femoribusque luteis apice nigris, alis
flavo-cinereis, halteribus apice nigris.

_Male._ Tawny; head with a black spot on the vertex, and with two
black dots on each side, one in front, the other behind; antennae black
towards the base; arista white; thorax with a black spot on each side
in front; legs black; coxae and femora luteous, with black tips; wings
grey, tinged with yellow; veins black; cubital vein and praebrachial
vein converging towards the tip of the wing; discal transverse vein
straight, oblique, parted by less than its length from the border,
and by more than twice its length from the praebrachial transverse;
halteres with black knobs. Length of the body 3-1/2 lines; of the
wings 5-1/2 lines.


Gen. NERIUS, _Wied._

215. Nerius fuscipennis, _Macq._ See Vol. I. p. 38.


Gen. SERACA, n. g.

_Foem. Corpus_ longiusculum. _Caput_ transversum, thorace vix
angustius. Antennae breves, articulo 3 deg. conico, arista plumosa.
_Thorax_ ellipticus. _Abdomen_ ellipticum. _Pedes_ mediocres. _Alae_
longiusculae, latiusculae.

_Female._ Body rather long. Head transverse, nearly as broad as the
thorax; epistoma not prominent. Antennae short, not near reaching the
epistoma; 3rd joint conical, much longer than the 2nd; arista plumose.
Thorax and abdomen elliptical, about equal in length. Legs moderately
long and slender. Wings rather long and broad.

216. SERACA SIGNIFERA, n. s. _Foem._ Fulva, thorace vittis quatuor
metathorace vittis duabus abdomine maculis lateralibus nigris, alis
obscure fuscis albo quinquesignatis apud costam nigricantibus basi
flavis.

_Female._ Tawny, shining; head testaceous about the eyes; thorax with
four black stripes, the outer pair incomplete; metathorax with two
black stripes; abdomen with a row of black spots along each side;
wings dark brown, blackish along the costa, yellow at the base, with
five lanceolate white marks, two of these resting on the costa, the
third between them near the hind border, the fourth exterior, discal,
slender, oblique, the fifth on the hind border near the tip; veins
black, tawny at the base; discal transverse vein curved outward,
parted by about one-fourth of its length from the border, and by much
more than its length from the praebrachial transverse. Length of the
body 4 lines; of the wings 8 lines.

217. SERACA SIGNATA, n. s. _Foem._ Testacea, longiuscula, epistomate
guttis duabus nigris, arista plumosa, abdomine postice attenuato
maculis duabus lateralibus subapicalibus, alis cincrascentibus, costa
exteriore nigricante.

_Female._ Testaceous, shining, rather long; head nearly as broad as
the thorax, with a black dot on each side of the epistoma; antennae
short, 3rd joint elongate-conical, arista plumose; thorax elliptical;
abdomen attenuated hindward, longer than the thorax, with a black spot
on each side of the 5th segment; wings greyish, blackish along the
apical half of the costa; veins testaceous, black towards the tips;
discal transverse vein nearly straight and upright, parted by about
one-fourth of its length from the border, and by hardly more than
its length from the praebrachial transverse. Length of the body 3-1/2
lines; of the wings 7 lines.


Gen. PSILA, _Meigen_.

218. PSILA BIPUNCTIFERA, n. s. _Foem._ Testacea, facie nigro
bipunctata, antennarum articulo 3 deg. longiconico, arista pubescente,
abdomine guttis duabus apicalibus nigris, alis pallide cinereis flavo
suffusis.

_Female._ Testaceous; head somewhat pilose beneath, with a black point
on each side of the face; 3rd joint of the antennae elongate-conical,
about twice the length of the 2nd; arista pubescent; thorax elongate,
somewhat flat above; abdomen fusiform, a little longer than the
thorax; 5th segment with a black dot on each side; wings pale
cinereous, tinged with yellow; veins yellow; discal transverse vein
straight, oblique, parted by hardly more than one-fourth of its length
from the border, and by more than its length from the praebrachial
transverse. Length of the body 5 lines; of the wings 10 lines.

219. PSILA MUNDA, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Nigra, nitens, facie testacea
nigro notata, antennis testaceis basi nigris, arista plumosa, thorace
subcinerascente, scutello obscure testaceo, pedibus testaceis, alis
cinereis apud costam nigricantibus, halteribus albidis.

_Male and Female._ Black, shining; head testaceous, blackish above;
disk of the face black, shining; antennae short, testaceous, black at
the base; 3rd joint linear, rounded at the tip, about twice the length
of the 2nd; arista plumose; thorax linear, with slight cinereous
tomentum; scutellum dull testaceous; abdomen fusiform, a little longer
than the thorax; legs testaceous; wings grey, blackish along the
costa towards the tips; veins black; discal transverse vein straight,
upright, parted by about half its length from the border, and by
nearly thrice its length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres
whitish. Length of the body 2-1/2-3 lines; of the wings 4-5 lines.


Gen. TEXARA, _Walk._

220. TEXARA DIOCTRIOIDES, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Nigra, longa, gracilis,
capite nigro-cyaneo, thorace vittis quatuor cinereis, segmentorum
abdominalium lateribus albo marginatis, pedibus fulvo fasciatis, alis
cinereis, halteribus testaceis.

_Male and Female._ Black, long, slender; head bluish-black, white
about the eyes in front; antennae of the male piceous, of the
female tawny, 3rd joint round, arista minutely pubescent; thorax
with four cinereous stripes; abdomen about twice the length of the
thorax, cylindrical towards the base, subclavate in the male and
elongate-fusiform in the female hindward; hind borders of the segments
white on each side; fore femora, hind tibiae and hind tarsi tawny at
the base; middle legs and hind femora tawny, the latter with a broad
black band; fore tibiae white, black at the base; wings grey; veins
black; discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by less than
its length from the border, and by almost four times its length from
the praebrachial transverse; halteres testaceous. Length of the body
4-4-1/2 lines; of the wings 6-7 lines.


Gen. GOBRYA, n. g.

_Mas. Corpus_ gracillimum. _Caput_ thorace multo latius; frons sat
angusta; facies plana. _Oculi_ magni. _Antennae_ brevissimae; articulus
3^{us} conicus; arista pubescens. _Thorax_ sat parvus. _Abdomen_
cylindricum, gracillimum, apice clavatum, thorace duplo longius.
_Pedes_ graciles; anteriores breves; postici longiusculi. _Alae_
perangustae.

_Male._ Body very slender. Head much broader than the thorax; front
rather narrow; face vertical, flat; eyes large, prominent. Antennae
very short; 3rd joint conical, longer than the 2nd; arista pubescent.
Thorax rather small. Abdomen clavate, about twice the length of the
thorax, cylindrical and very slender till near its tip. Legs slender;
anterior legs short; hind legs rather long. Wings very narrow; discal
transverse vein straight, upright, parted by more than its length
from the border, and by more than four times its length from the
praebrachial transverse.

221. GOBRYA BACCHOIDES, n. s. _Mas._ Cyanea, nitens, antennis
pedibusque pallide flavis, abdomine nigro fasciis duabus flavis,
femoribus posterioribus tibiisque posticis nigris, tarsis posticis
basi nigris, alis vix cinerascentibus, halteribus flavis apice nigris.

_Male._ Blue, shining; proboscis, antennae, and legs pale yellow;
abdomen black, with two pale yellow bands, the hind one very slender;
posterior femora and hind tibiae black, the former pale yellow at both
ends; middle tibiae and tarsi wanting; hind tarsi black towards the
base; wings hardly greyish, apical third part brown; veins black;
halteres pale yellow, with black knobs. Length of the body 2-3/4
lines; of the wings 4 lines.


Subfam. OSCINIDES, _Haliday_.

Gen. OSCINIS, _Fabr._

222. OSCINIS FEMORATA, n. s. _Mas._ Atra, nitens, capite nigro-cyaneo,
femoribus anterioribus basi, tibiis anterioribus apice, tarsis
halteribusque flavis, femoribus posticis incrassatis, alis
cinerascentibus.

_Male._ Deep black, shining; head bluish-black; abdomen conical,
shorter than the thorax; legs black; anterior femora at the base,
anterior tibiae at the tips, and tarsi yellow; hind femora incrassated;
wings greyish; veins black; discal transverse vein straight, upright,
parted by more than its length from the border, and by much more than
its length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres yellow. Length of
the body 1-1/4 line; of the wings 2 lines.


Gen. PIOPHILA, _Fallen_.

223. PIOPHILA CONTECTA, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, nitens, oviductu
lanceolato, pedibus halteribusque fulvis, pedibus anticis nigris,
femoribus basi fulvis, alis cinereis.

_Female._ Black, shining; oviduct prominent, lanceolate; legs and
halteres tawny; fore legs black; coxae, femora at the base and knees
tawny; wings grey; veins black; discal transverse vein straight,
upright, parted by less than its length from the border, and by more
than its length from the praebrachial transverse. Length of the body 2
lines; of the wings 4 lines.


Gen. OPOMYZA, _Fallen_.

224. OPOMYZA NIGRIFINIS, n. s. _Foem._ Cinerea, capite antennisque
pallide rufis, arista plumosa, thorace bilineato, pectore halteribusque
albis, abdomine fulvo lanceolato apicem versus nigro, pedibus fulvis,
alis nigris albo guttatis.

_Female._ Cinereous; head pale red, white beneath; antennae pale red,
very short, 3rd joint nearly round, arista plumose; thorax with two
indistinct darker lines; pectus and halteres white; abdomen lanceolate,
tawny, shining, black towards the tip; legs tawny; wings black, rather
narrow, with about ten white dots, of which two are larger than the
others, and form a broken and almost interrupted band near the base;
veins black; discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by about
half its length from the border; no praebrachial transverse vein. Length
of the body 1-1/4-1-1/2 lines; of the wings 2-1/2-3 lines.
{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}

Gen. DROSOPHILA, _Fallen_.

225. DROSOPHILA SOLENNIS, n. s. _Mas._ Testacea, facie carinata,
thorace vittis quatuor fulvis, abdomine fasciis abbreviatis
nigricantibus, alis cinereis.

_Male._ Testaceous; face keeled; antennae wanting; thorax with four
tawny stripes; abdomen elliptical, a little longer than the thorax,
with blackish abbreviated bands; wings grey; veins black; discal
transverse vein straight, upright, parted by hardly less than its
length from the border, and by about thrice its length from the
praebrachial transverse. Length of the body 1-1/2 line; of the wings 3
lines.

226. DROSOPHILA RUDIS, n. s. _Mas._ Fulva, facie albida, abdomine
nigro nitente basi fulvo, pedibus halteribusque testaceis, alis
cinereis apud costam obscurioribus maculis quatuor nigricantibus.

_Male._ Tawny, testaceous beneath; face whitish; antennae wanting;
abdomen elongate-oval, black, shining, tawny at the base, not longer
than the thorax; legs and halteres testaceous; wings grey, darker
along the costa, with four blackish spots, first spot subcostal,
larger than the second which is discal, third apical, band between the
second and third spots irregular, attenuated hindward; veins black;
discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by nearly its length
from the border, and by nearly twice its length from the praebrachial
transverse. Length of the body 2 lines; of the wings 3-1/2 lines.

227. DROSOPHILA ILLATA, n. s. _Foem._ Fulva, segmentorum abdominalium
marginibus pedibusque testaceis, alis cinereis.

_Female._ Tawny; antennae very short, 3rd joint conical, arista thinly
plumose; abdomen oval, not longer than the thorax, hind borders of the
segments and legs testaceous; wings grey; veins black, tawny at the
base; discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted by about its
length from the border, and by nearly four times its length from the
praebrachial transverse. Length of the body 1-1/4 line; of the wings
2-1/2 lines.

228. DROSOPHILA LURIDA, n. s. _Mas._ Atra, capite piceo, arista
plumosa, abdomine lurido subpubescente, pedibus obscure fulvis,
alis lurido-cinereis, punctis marginalibus nigris, vena transversa
praebrachiali nigro nebulosa.

_Male._ Deep black; head piceous; antennae short, 3rd joint
elongate-conical, arista thinly plumose; pectus piceous; abdomen oval,
lurid red, minutely pubescent, not longer than the thorax; legs dull
tawny; wings lurid grey, blackish at the base, with black points at
the tips of the longitudinal veins; veins yellowish; discal transverse
vein straight, upright, with a black point at each end, parted by less
than its length from the border, and by about twice its length from
the praebrachial transverse, which is clouded with black. Length of the
body 2 lines; of the wings 4 lines.

229. DROSOPHILA LATERALIS, n. s. _Mas._ Fulva, subtus testacea,
abdomine maculis lateralibus nigris, pedibus halteribusque testaceis,
alis cinereis.

_Male._ Tawny, testaceous beneath; antennae short, 3rd joint conical,
arista plumose; abdomen not longer than the thorax, with black spots
along each side; legs and halteres testaceous; wings grey; veins
black. Length of the body 1-1/2 line; of the wings 3 lines.


Gen. DISCOMYZA, _Meigen_.

230. DISCOMYZA OBSCURATA, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereo-nigra, capite
abdomineque nigris nitentibus, antennis obscure rufis, arista plumosa,
pectoris lateribus albido conspersis, alis cinereis fascia informi
maculaque apicali nigricantibus, halteribus albis.

_Female._ Cinereous black; head black, shining; antennae short, dark
red, 3rd joint conical, longer than the 2nd, arista thinly plumose;
sides of the pectus with minute whitish speckles; abdomen elliptical,
flat, black, shining, longer than the thorax; legs black; wings
grey, with an irregular blackish band which does not extend to the
hind border, and with a blackish apical spot; veins black; discal
transverse vein straight, oblique, parted by much less than its length
from the border, and by very much more than its length from the
praebrachial transverse, which is clouded with black; halteres white.
Length of the body 2 lines; of the wings 3 lines.


Gen. NOMBA, n. g.

_Mas et Foem. Corpus_ latum, crassum. _Frons_ lata. _Antennae_
brevissimae; articulus 3^{us} subrotundus; arista subpubescens. _Thorax_
subpubescens, quasi coriaceus; scutellum parvum; metathorax maximus,
abdomen alasque incumbentes obtegens. _Pedes_ breves, robusti; femora
subincrassata; tibiae arcuatae. _Alae_ parvae.

_Male and Female._ Body broad, thick, compact. Head almost as broad as
the thorax; front broad, narrower than the epistoma; face vertical.
Antennae very short; third joint nearly round; arista very minutely
pubescent. Thorax solid, apparently horny, very minutely pubescent;
scutellum small; metathorax elliptical, enormously developed, covering
the whole abdomen, sheltering the wings when in repose. Legs short,
stout; femora slightly incrassated; tibiae curved. Wings concealed
beneath the metathorax.

231. _Nomba tecta_, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Nigra, obscura, antennis
piceis, tarsis flavis apice nigris, alis cinereis.

_Male and Female._ Black, dull; antennae piceous; tarsi yellow, with
black tips; wings grey; veins black. Length of the body 1-1/2-1-3/4
line; of the wings 2-1/2-3 lines.


Subfam. HYDROMYZIDES, _Haliday_.

Gen. NOTIPHILA, _Fallen_.

232. NOTIPHILA LINEOSA, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Fusca, obscura, capite
apud oculos linea frontali et epistomate albidis, arista plumosa,
thorace lineis sex albidis abdomine nigro segmentorum marginibus
fulvis, pedibus nigris, tibiis anticis genubus tarsis halteribusque
fulvis, alis cinereis.

_Male and Female._ Brown, dull; head whitish about the eyes, and
with a whitish line on the front; epistoma whitish; antennae not near
reaching the epistoma, 3rd joint elongate, arista thinly plumose;
thorax with six whitish lines, the lateral pair incomplete; abdomen
black, not longer than the thorax, hind borders of the segments tawny;
legs black, tarsi, knees, posterior tibiae at the tips, and fore tibiae
tawny; wings grey; veins black; discal transverse vein straight,
upright, parted by more than its length from the border, and by full
thrice its length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres tawny.
Length of the body 1-3/4-2 lines; of the wings 3-1/2-4 lines.

The two following species belong to the group of which _N. Cinerea_ is
the type.

233. NOTIPHILA QUADRIFASCIA, n. s. _Foem._ Fusca, subtus cinerea,
capite antico amplo, facie convexa, antennis nigris, arista plumosa,
metathorace abdominisque maculis duabus basalibus fasciisque quatuor
albidis, genubus tarsisque rufescentibus, alis cinereis puncto costali
nigro, halteribus testaceis.

_Female._ Brown, cinereous beneath; head large and somewhat tumid in
front and beneath; face cinereous, convex; antennae black, very small,
3rd joint conical, arista plumose; metathorax whitish; abdomen with a
whitish spot on each side at the base, and with four whitish bands, of
which the 3rd and 4th are interrupted; legs cinereous black, knees and
tarsi reddish; wings grey, with a black costal point at the tip of the
subcostal vein; veins black; discal transverse vein oblique, nearly
straight, parted by less than half its length _from_ the border, and
by nearly thrice its length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres
testaceous. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the wings _4_ lines.

234. NOTIPHILA flavilinea, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Piceo-nigra, capite
apud oculos testaceo, antennis rufescentibus, arista plumosa,
abdominis segmentis flavo marginatis, alis cinereis apud costam
subluridis, halteribus testaceis.

_Male and Female._ Piceous brown; head rather paler, testaceous about
the eyes; antennae reddish, very short, 3rd joint conical, arista
plumose; abdomen oval, not longer than the thorax; hind borders of
the segments yellow; wings grey, with a slight lurid tinge along the
costa; veins black; discal transverse vein straight, upright, parted
by less than its length from the border, and by a little more than
twice its length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres testaceous.
Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the wings 4 lines.


Gen. EPHYDRA. _Fallen_.

235. EPHYDRA BORBOROIDES, n. s. _Foem._ Nigra, lata, crassa,
pubescens, subsetosa, antennis piceis, arista pubescente, tibiis
tarsisque flavo fasciatis, alis nigricantibus latiusculis cinerascente
sexguttatis.

_Female._ Black, broad, thick, somewhat pubescent and with a few
bristles; antennae piceous, short, 3rd joint round, arista pubescent;
abdomen broader than the thorax; legs rather setose, tibiae and
tarsi with yellow bands; wings blackish, rather broad, with about
six greyish dots on each; veins black; posterior longitudinal veins
abbreviated; discal transverse vein parted by more than twice
its length from the border, and by less than its length from the
praebrachial transverse. Length of the body 1-1/2 line; of the wings 3
lines.

236. EPHYDRA MACULICORNIS, n. s. _Mas._ Cinereo-nigra, capite
antennisque rufis, his puncto nigro, arista nuda, abdomine nigro
nitente, tarsis testaceis, alis cinereis apud costam pubescentibus.

_Male._ Cinereous black; head red in front and about the eyes; antennae
red, 3rd joint round with a black point above; arista short, simple;
abdomen oval, black, shining, not longer than the thorax; tarsi
testaceous; wings grey, minutely pubescent along the border; veins
black; discal transverse vein straight, oblique, parted by more than
twice its length from the border and from the praebrachial transverse;
halteres piceous. Length of the body 2 lines; of the wings 4 lines.


Gen. OCHTHERA, _Latr._

237. OCHTHERA INNOTATA, n. s. _Foem._ Cinereo-nigra, capite
antico flavescenti-albo, pectore pedibusque cinereis, abdomine
cyanescenti-nigro, alis cinereis, halteribus albidis.

_Female._ Cinereous black; head yellowish white in front, silvery
white hindward; pectus and legs cinereous; abdomen bluish black;
wings grey; veins black; pobrachial vein forming an obtuse angle at
its junction with the discal transverse vein, the latter very oblique,
parted by little more than half its length from the border, and by
nearly thrice its length from the praebrachial transverse; halteres
whitish. Length of the body 2-1/2 lines; of the wings 4-1/2 lines.


Fam. PHORIDAE, _Haliday_.

Gen. PHORA, _Latr._

238. PHORA BIFASCIATA, n. s. _Foem._ Atra, subtus flavescenti-alba,
antennis fulvis, abdomine lanceolato, fasciis duabus apice pedibus
halteribusque flavescenti-albis, pedibus posticis nigris basi
flavescenti-albis, tarsis intermediis nigricantibus, alis cinereis.

_Female._ Deep black, yellowish white beneath; antennae tawny; abdomen
lanceolate, much longer than the thorax; sides elevated, a broad basal
yellowish white band, and a narrower one beyond the middle, tip also
yellowish white; anterior legs and halteres yellowish white, middle
tarsi blackish, hind femora with the basal half yellowish white;
wings cinereous, veins black, pale at the base; costal vein ending
at a little beyond half the length of the wing; radial cubital,
praebrachial, and pobrachial veins parallel and equally distinct.
Length of the body 2-2-1/2 lines; of the wings 5-6 lines.

       *       *       *       *       *




On the Zoological Geography of the Malay Archipelago. By ALFRED R.
WALLACE, Esq. Communicated by CHARLES DARWIN, Esq., F.R.S. & L.S.

[Read Nov. 3rd, 1859.]


In Mr. Sclater's paper on the Geographical Distribution of Birds,
read before the Linnean Society, and published in the 'Proceedings'
for February 1858, he has pointed out that the western islands of the
Archipelago belong to the Indian, and the eastern to the Australian
region of Ornithology. My researches in these countries lead me to
believe that the same division will hold good in every branch of
Zoology; and the object of my present communication is to mark out
the precise limits of each region, and to call attention to some
inferences of great general importance as regards the study of the
laws of organic distribution.

The Australian and Indian regions of Zoology are very strongly
contrasted. In one the Marsupial order constitutes the great mass of
the mammalia,--in the other not a solitary marsupial animal exists.
Marsupials of at least two genera (_Cuscus_ and _Belideus_) are found
all over the Moluccas and in Celebes; but none have been detected
in the adjacent islands of Java and Borneo. Of all the varied forms
of _Quadrumana_, _Carnivora_, _Insectivora_ and _Ruminantia_ which
abound in the western half of the Archipelago, the only genera found
in the Moluccas are _Paradoxurus_ and _Cervus_. The _Sciuridae_, so
numerous in the western islands, are represented in Celebes by only
two or three species, while not one is found further east. Birds
furnish equally remarkable illustrations. The Australian region is
the richest in the world in Parrots; the Asiatic is (of tropical
regions) the poorest. Three entire families of the Psittacine order
are peculiar to the former region, and two of them, the Cockatoos
and the Lories, extend up to its extreme limits, without a solitary
species passing into the Indian islands of the Archipelago. The genus
_Paloeornis_ is, on the other hand, confined with equal strictness to
the Indian region. In the Rasorial order, the _Phasianidae_ are Indian,
the _Megapodiidae_ Australian; but in this case one species of each
family just passes the limits into the adjacent region. The genus
_Tropidorhynchus_, highly characteristic of the Australian region,
and everywhere abundant as well in the Moluccas and New Guinea as in
Australia, is quite unknown in Java and Borneo. On the other hand,
the entire families of _Bucconidae_, _Trogonidae_ and _Phyllornithidae_,
and the genera _Pericrocotus_, _Picnonotus_, _Trichophorus_, _Ixos_,
in fact, almost all the vast family of Thrushes and a host of
other genera, cease abruptly at the eastern side of Borneo, Java,
and Bali. All these groups are _common birds_ in the great Indian
islands; they abound everywhere; they are the characteristic features
of the ornithology; and it is most striking to a naturalist, on
passing the narrow straits of Macassar and Lombock, suddenly to miss
them entirely, together with the _Quadrumana_ and _Felidae_, the
_Insectivora_ and _Rodentia_, whose varied species people the forests
of Sumatra, Java, and Borneo.

To define exactly the limits of the two regions where they are
(geographically) most intimately connected, I may mention that during
a few days' stay in the island of Bali I found birds of the genera
_Copsychus_, _Megalaima_, _Tiga_, _Ploceus_, and _Sturnopastor_,
all characteristic of the Indian region and abundant in Malacca,
Java, and Borneo; while on crossing over to Lombock, during three
months collecting there, not one of them was ever seen; neither have
they occurred in Celebes nor in any of the more eastern islands I
have visited. Taking this in connexion with the fact of _Cacatua_,
_Tropidorhynchus_, and _Megapodius_ having their western limit in
Lombock, we may consider it established that the Strait of Lombock
(only 15 miles wide) marks the limits and abruptly separates two of
the great Zoological regions of the globe. The Philippine Islands are
in some respects of doubtful location, resembling and differing from
both regions. They are deficient in the varied Mammals of Borneo,
but they contain no Marsupials. The Psittaci are scarce, as in the
Indian region; the Lories are altogether absent, but there is one
representative of the Cockatoos. Woodpeckers, Trogons, and the genera
_Ixos_, _Copsychus_, and _Ploceus_ are highly characteristic of India.
_Tanysiptera_ and _Megapodius_, again, are Australian forms, but
these seem represented by only solitary species. The islands possess
also a few peculiar genera. We must on the whole place the Philippine
Islands in the Indian region, but with the remark that they are
deficient in some of its most striking features. They possess several
isolated forms of the Australian region, but by no means sufficient to
constitute a real transition thereto.

Leaving the Philippines out of the question for the present, the
western and eastern islands of the Archipelago, as here divided,
belong to regions more distinct and contrasted than any other of the
great zoological divisions of the globe. South America and Africa,
separated by the Atlantic, do not differ so widely as Asia and
Australia; Asia with its abundance and variety of large Mammals and
no Marsupials, and Australia with scarcely anything but Marsupials;
Asia with its gorgeous _Phasianidae_, Australia with its dull-coloured
_Megapodiidae_; Asia the poorest tropical region in Parrots, Australia
the richest; and all these striking characteristics are almost
unimpaired at the very limits of their respective districts; so that
in a few hours we may experience an amount of zoological difference
which only weeks or even months of travel will give us in any other
part of the world!

Moreover there is nothing in the aspect or physical character of
the islands to lead us to expect such a difference; their physical
and geological differences do not coincide with the zoological
differences. There is a striking homogeneity in the TWO _halves_ of
the Archipelago. The great volcanic chain runs through both parts;
Borneo is the counterpart of New Guinea; the Philippines closely
resemble the equally fertile and equally volcanic Moluccas; while
in eastern Java begins to be felt the more arid climate of Timor
and Australia. But these resemblances are accompanied by an extreme
zoological diversity, the Asiatic and Australian regions finding in
Borneo and New Guinea respectively their highest development.

But it may be said: "The separation between these two regions is not
so absolute. There _is_ some transition. There _are_ species and
genera common to the eastern and western islands." This is true, yet
(in my opinion) proves no transition in the proper sense of the word;
and the nature and amount of the resemblance only shows more strongly
the absolute and original distinctness of the two divisions. The
exception here clearly proves the rule.

Let us investigate these cases of supposed transition. In the western
islands almost the only instance of a group peculiar to Australia and
the eastern islands is the _Megapodius_ in North-west Borneo. Not one
of the Australian forms of Mammalia passes the limits of the region.
On the other hand, Quadrumana occur in Celebes, Batchian, Lombock,
and perhaps Timor; Deer have reached Celebes, Timor, Buru, Ceram, and
Gilolo, but not New Guinea; Pigs have extended to New Guinea, probably
the true eastern limit of the genus _Sus_; Squirrels are found in
Celebes, Lombock, and Sumbawa: among birds, _Gallus_ occurs in Celebes
and Sumbawa, Woodpeckers reach Celebes, and Hornbills extend to the
North-west of New Guinea. These cases of identity or resemblance in
the animals of the two regions we may group into three classes; 1st,
identical species; 2nd, closely allied or representative species; and
3rd, species of peculiar and isolated genera. The common Grey Monkey
(_Macacus cynomolgus_) has reached Lombock, and perhaps Timor, but
not Celebes. The Deer of the Moluccas seems to be a variety of the
_Cervus rufus_ of Java and Borneo. The Jungle Cock of Celebes and
Lombock is a Javanese species. _Hirundo javanica_, _Zosterops flavus_,
_Halcyon collaris_, _Eurystomus gularis_, _Macropygia phasianella_,
_Merops javanicus_, _Anthreptes lepida_, _Ptilonopus melanocephala_,
and some other birds appear the same in the adjacent islands of
the eastern and western divisions, and some of them range over the
whole Archipelago. But after reading Lyell on the various modes of
dispersion of animals, and looking at the proximity of the islands, we
shall feel astonished, not at such an amount of interchange of species
(most of which are birds of great powers of flight), but rather that
in the course of ages a much greater and almost complete fusion has
not taken place. Were the Atlantic gradually to narrow till only a
strait of twenty miles separated Africa from South America, can we
help believing that many birds and insects and some few mammals would
soon be interchanged? But such interchange would be a fortuitous
mixture of faunas essentially and absolutely dissimilar, not a natural
and regular transition from one to the other. In like manner the
cases of identical species in the eastern and western islands of the
Archipelago are due to the gradual and accidental commingling of
originally absolutely distinct faunas.

In our second class (representative species) we must place the Wild
Pigs, which seem to be of distinct but closely allied species in each
island; the Squirrels also of Celebes are of peculiar species, as are
the Woodpeckers and Hornbills, and two Celebes birds of the Asiatic
genera _Phaenicophaeus_ and _Acridotheres_. Now these and a few more of
like character are closely allied to other species inhabiting Java,
Borneo, or the Philippines. We have only therefore to suppose that the
species of the western passed over to the eastern islands at so remote
a period as on one side or the other to have become extinct, and to
have been replaced by an allied form, and we shall have produced
exactly the state of things now existing. Such extinction and such
replacement we know has been continually going on. Such has been the
regular course of nature for countless ages in every part of the earth
of which we have geological records; and unless we _are_ prepared
to show that the Indo-Australian Archipelago was an altogether
exceptional region, such must have been the course of nature here
also. If these islands have existed in their present form only during
one of the later divisions of the Tertiary period, and if interchange
of species at very rare and distant intervals has occurred, then the
fact of some identical and other closely allied species is a necessary
result, even if the two regions in question had been originally
peopled by absolutely distinct creations of organic beings, and there
had never been any closer connexion between them than _now_ exists.
The occurrence of a limited number of representative species in the
two divisions of the Archipelago does not therefore prove any true
transition from one to the other.

The examples of our third class--of peculiar genera having little
or no affinity with those of the adjacent islands--are almost
entirely confined to Celebes, and render that island a district _per
se_, in the highest degree interesting. _Cynopithecus_, a genus of
Baboons, the extraordinary Babirusa and the singular ruminant _Ansa
depressicornis_ have nothing in common with Asiatic mammals, but seem
more allied to those of Africa. A quadrumanous animal of the same
genus (perhaps identical) occurs in the little island of Batchian,
which forms the extreme eastern limit of the highest order of
mammalia. An allied species is also said to exist in the Philippines.
Now this occurrence of quadrumana in the Australian region proves
nothing whatever as regards a transition to the western islands,
which, among their numerous monkeys and apes, have nothing at all
resembling them. The species of Celebes and Batchian have the high
superorbital ridge, the long nasal bone, the dog-like figure, the
minute erect tail, the predaceous habits and the fearless disposition
of the true Baboons, and find their allies nowhere nearer than in
tropical Africa. The _Anoa_ seems also to point towards the same
region, so rich in varied forms of Antelopes.

In the class of birds, Celebes possesses a peculiar genus of Parrots
(_Prioniturus_), said to occur also in the Philippines; _Meropogon_,
intermediate between an Indian and an African form of Bee-eaters; and
the anomalous _Scissirostrum_, which Prince Bonaparte places next to a
Madagascar bird, and forms a distinct subfamily for the reception of
the two. Celebes also contains a species of _Coracias_, which is here
quite out of its normal area, the genus being otherwise confined to
Africa and continental India, not occurring in any other part of the
Archipelago. The Celebes bird is placed, in Bonaparte's 'Conspectus,'
between two African species, to which therefore I presume it is more
nearly allied than to those of India. Having just received Mr. Smith's
Catalogue of the Hymenoptera collected during my first residence in
Celebes, I find in it some facts of an equally singular nature. Of 103
species, only 16 are known to inhabit any of the western islands of
the Archipelago, while 18 are identical with species of continental
India, China, and the Philippine Islands, two are stated to be
identical with insects hitherto known only from tropical Africa, and
another is said to be most closely allied to one from the Cape.

These phenomena of distribution are, I believe, the most anomalous
yet known, and in fact altogether unique. I am aware of no other spot
upon the earth which contains a number of species, in several distinct
classes of animals, the nearest allies to which do not exist in any
of the countries which on every side surround it, but which are to be
found only in another primary division of the globe, separated from
them all by a vast expanse of ocean. In no other case are the species
of a genus or the genera of a family distributed in _two_ distinct
areas separated by countries in which they do not exist; so that it
has come to be considered a law in geographical distribution, "that
both species and groups inhabit continuous areas."

Facts such as these can only be explained by a bold acceptance of vast
changes in the surface of the earth. They teach us that this island of
Celebes is more ancient than most of the islands now surrounding it,
and obtained some part of its fauna before they came into existence.
They point to the time when a great continent occupied a portion
at least of what is now the Indian Ocean, of which the islands of
Mauritius, Bourbon, &c. may be fragments, while the Chagos Bank and
the Keeling Atolls indicate its former extension eastward to the
vicinity of what is now the Malayan Archipelago. The Celebes group
remains the last eastern fragment of this now submerged land, or of
some of its adjacent islands, indicating its peculiar origin by its
zoological isolation, and by still retaining a marked affinity with
the African fauna.

The great Pacific continent, of which Australia and New Guinea are
no doubt fragments, probably existed at a much earlier period, and
extended as far westward as the Moluccas. The extension of Asia as far
to the south and east as the Straits of Macassar and Lombock must have
occurred subsequent to the submergence of both these great southern
continents; and the breaking up and separation of the islands of
Sumatra, Java, and Borneo has been the last great geological change
these regions have undergone. That this has really taken place as
here indicated, we think is proved by the following considerations.
Not more than twenty (probably a smaller number) out of about one
hundred land birds of Celebes at present known are found in Java
or Borneo, and only one or two of twelve or fifteen Mammalia. Of
the Mammalia and birds of Borneo, however, at least three-fourths,
probably five-sixths, inhabit also Java, Sumatra, or the peninsula of
Malacca. Now, looking at the direction of the Macassar Straits running
nearly north and south, and remembering we are in the district of the
monsoons, a steady south-east and north-west wind blowing alternately
for about six months each, we shall at once see that Celebes is more
favourably situated than any other island to receive stray passengers
from Borneo, whether drifted across the sea or wafted through the
air. The distance too is less than between any of the other large
islands; there are no violent currents to neutralize the action of
the winds; and numerous islets in mid-channel offer stations which
might rescue many of the wanderers, and admit, after repose, of
fresh migrations. Between Java and Borneo the width of sea is much
greater, the intermediate islands are fewer, and the direction of
the monsoons _along_ and not _across_ the Java sea, accompanied by
alternating currents in the same direction, must render accidental
communication between the two islands exceedingly difficult; so that
where the facilities for intercommunication are greatest, the number
of species common to the two countries is least, and _vice versa_.
But again, the mass of the species of Borneo, Java, &c., even when not
_identical_ are _congeneric_, which, as before explained, indicates
_identity_ at an earlier epoch; whereas the great mass of the fauna
of Celebes is widely different from that of the western islands,
consisting mostly of genera, and even of entire families, altogether
foreign to them. This clearly points to a former total diversity
of forms and species,--existing similarities being the result of
intermixture, the extreme facilities for which we have pointed out. In
the case of the great western islands a former more complete identity
is indicated, the present differences having arisen from their
isolation during a considerable period, allowing time for that partial
extinction and introduction of species which is the regular course
of nature. If the very small number of western species in Celebes is
all that the most favourable conditions for transmission could bring
about, the complete similarity of the faunas of the western islands
could never (with far less favourable conditions) have been produced
by the same means. And what other means can we conceive but the former
connexion of those islands with each other and with the continent of
Asia?

In striking confirmation of this view we have physical evidence
of a very interesting nature. These countries are in fact _still
connected_, and that so completely that an elevation of only 300 feet
would nearly double the extent of tropical Asia. Over the whole of the
Java Sea, the Straits of Malacca, the Gulf of Siam, and the southern
part of the China Sea, ships can anchor in less than fifty fathoms.
A vast submarine plain unites together the apparently disjointed
parts of the Indian zoological region, and abruptly terminates,
exactly at its limits, in an unfathomable ocean. The deep sea of the
Moluccas comes up to the very coasts of Northern Borneo, to the Strait
of Lombock in the south, and to near the middle of the Strait of
Macassar. May we not therefore from these facts very fairly conclude
that, according to the system of alternate bands of elevation and
depression that seems very generally to prevail, the last great rising
movement of the volcanic range of Java and Sumatra was accompanied
by the depression that now separates them from Borneo and from the
continent?

It it worthy of remark that the various islands of the Moluccas,
though generally divided by a less extent of sea, have fewer species
in common; but the separating seas are in almost every case of immense
depth, indicating that the separation took place at a much earlier
period. The same principle is well illustrated by the distribution
of the genus _Paradisea_, two species of which (the common Birds
of Paradise) are found only in New Guinea and the islands of Aru,
Mysol, Waigiou, and Jobie, all of which are connected with New Guinea
by banks of soundings, while they do not extend to Ceram or the Ke
Islands, which are no further from New Guinea, but are separated from
it by deep sea. Again, the chain of small volcanic islands to the west
of Gilolo, though divided by channels of only ten or fifteen miles
wide, possess many distinct representative species of insects, and
even, in some cases, of birds also. The Baboons of Batchian have not
passed to Gilolo, a much larger island, only separated from it by a
channel ten miles wide, and in one part almost blocked up with small
islands.

Now looking at these phenomena of distribution, and especially at
those presented by the fauna of Celebes, it appears to me that a much
exaggerated effect, in producing the present distribution of animals,
has been imputed to the accidental transmission of individuals across
intervening seas; for we have here as it were a test or standard by
which we may measure the possible effect due to these causes, and we
find that, under conditions perhaps the most favourable that exist
on the globe, the percentage of species derived from this source is
extremely small. When my researches in the Archipelago are completed,
I hope to be able to determine with some accuracy this numerical
proportion in several cases; but in the mean time we will consider
20 per cent. as the probable maximum for birds and mammals which in
Celebes have been derived from Borneo or Java.

Let us now apply this standard to the case of Great Britain and
the Continent, in which the width of dividing sea and the extent
of opposing coasts are nearly the same, but in which the species
are almost all identical,--or to Ireland, more than 90 per cent. of
whose species are British,--and we shall at once see that no theory
of transmission across the present Straits is admissible, and shall
be compelled to resort to the idea of a very recent separation (long
since admitted), to account for these zoological phenomena.

It is, however, to the oceanic islands that we consider the
application of this test of the most importance. Let any one try to
realize the comparative facilities for the transmission of organized
beings across the Strait of Macassar from Borneo to Celebes, and
from South Europe or North Africa to the island of Madeira, at least
four times the distance, and a mere point in the ocean, and he
would probably consider that in a given period a hundred cases of
transmission would be more likely to occur in the former case than
one in the latter. Yet of the comparatively rich insect-fauna of
Madeira, 40 per cent. are continental species; and of the flowering
plants more than 60 per cent. The Canary Islands offer nearly similar
results. Nothing but a former connexion with the Continent will
explain such an amount of specific identity (the weight of which will
be very much increased if we take into account the representative
species); and the direction of the Atlas range towards Teneriffe, and
of the Sierra Nevada towards Madeira, are material indications of such
a connexion.

The Galapagos are no further from South America than Madeira is from
Europe, and, being of greater extent, are far more liable to receive
chance immigrants; yet they have hardly a species identical with any
inhabiting the American continent. These islands therefore may well
have originated in mid-ocean; or if they ever were connected with the
mainland, it was at so distant a period that the natural extinction
and renewal of species has left not one in common. The character of
their fauna, however, is more what we should expect to arise from the
chance introduction of a very few species at distant intervals; it
is very poor; it contains but few genera, and those scattered among
unconnected families; its genera often contain several closely allied
species, indicating a single antitype.

The fauna and flora of Madeira and of the Canaries, on the other hand,
have none of this chance character. They are comparatively rich in
genera and species; most of the principal groups and families are
more or less represented; and, in fact, these islands do not differ
materially, as to the general character of their animal and vegetable
productions, from any isolated mountain in Europe or North Africa of
about equal extent.

On exactly the same principles, the very large number of species
of plants, insects, and birds, in Europe and North America, either
absolutely identical or represented by very closely allied species,
most assuredly indicates that some means of land communication
in temperate or sub-arctic latitudes existed at no very distant
geological epoch; and though many naturalists are inclined to
regard all such views as vague and unprofitable speculations, we
are convinced they will soon take their place among the legitimate
deductions of science.

Geology can detect but a portion of the changes the surface of the
earth has undergone. It can reveal the past history and mutations
of what is now dry land; but the ocean tells nothing of her bygone
history. Zoology and Botany here come to the aid of their sister
science, and by means of the humble weeds and despised insects
inhabiting its now distant shores, can discover some of those past
changes which the ocean itself refuses to reveal. They can indicate,
approximately at least, where and at what period former continents
must have existed, from what countries islands must have been
separated, and at how distant an epoch the rupture took place. By the
invaluable indications which Mr. Darwin has deduced from the structure
of coral reefs, by the surveys of the ocean-bed now in progress,
and by a more extensive and detailed knowledge of the geographical
distribution of animals and plants, the naturalist may soon hope to
obtain some idea of the continents which have now disappeared beneath
the ocean, and of the general distribution of land and sea at former
geological epochs.

Most writers on geographical distribution have completely overlooked
its connexion with well-established geological facts, and have thereby
created difficulties where none exist. The peculiar and apparently
endemic faunae and florae of the oceanic islands (such as the Galapagos
and St. Helena) have been dwelt upon as something anomalous and
inexplicable. It has been imagined that the more simple condition
of such islands would be to have their productions identical with
those of the nearest land, and that their actual condition is an
incomprehensible mystery. The very reverse of this is however the
case. We really require no speculative hypothesis, no new theory, to
explain these phenomena; they are the logical results of well-known
laws of nature. The regular and unceasing extinction of species,
and their replacement by allied forms, is now no hypothesis, but an
established fact; and it necessarily produces such peculiar faunae and
florae in all but recently formed or newly disrupted islands, subject
of course to more or less modification according to the facilities
for the transmission of fresh species from adjacent continents. Such
phenomena therefore are far from uncommon. Madagascar, Mauritius,
the Moluccas, New Zealand, New Caledonia, the Pacific Islands, Juan
Fernandez, the West India Islands, and many others, all present such
peculiarities in greater or less development. It is the instances
of identity of species in distant countries that presents the real
difficulty. What was supposed to be the more normal state of things is
really exceptional, and requires some hypothesis for its explanation.
The phenomena of distribution in the Malay Archipelago, to which I
have here called attention, teach us that, however narrow may be
the strait separating an island from its continent, it is still an
impassable barrier against the passage of any considerable number and
variety of land animals; and that in all cases in which such islands
possess a tolerably rich and varied fauna of species mostly identical,
or closely allied with those of the adjacent country, we are forced to
the conclusion that a geologically recent disruption has taken place.
Great Britain, Ireland, Sicily, Sumatra, Java and Borneo, the Aru
Islands, the Canaries and Madeira, are cases to which the reasoning is
fully applicable.

In his introductory Essay on the Flora of New Zealand, Dr. Hooker
has most convincingly applied this principle to show the former
connexion of New Zealand and other southern islands with the southern
extremity of America; and I will take this opportunity of calling the
attention of zoologists to the very satisfactory manner in which this
view clears away many difficulties in the distribution of animals.
The most obvious of these is the occurrence of Marsupials in America
only, beyond the Australian region. They evidently entered by the
same route as the plants of New Zealand and Tasmania which occur in
South temperate America, but having greater powers of dispersion,
a greater plasticity of organization, have extended themselves
over the whole continent though with so few modifications of form
and structure as to point to a unity of origin at a comparatively
recent period. It is among insects, however, that the resemblances
approach in number and degree to those exhibited by plants. Among
Butterflies the beautiful _Heliconidae_ are strictly confined to
South America, with the exception of a single genus (_Hamadryas_)
found in the Australian region from New Zealand to New Guinea.
In Coleoptera many families and genera are characteristic of the
two countries; such are _Pseudomorphidae_ among the Geodephaga,
_Lamprimidae_ and _Syndesidae_ among the Lucani, _Anoplognathidae_ among
the Lamellicornes, _Stigmoderidae_ among the Buprestes, _Natalis_ among
the Cleridae, besides a great number of representative genera. This
peculiar distribution has hitherto only excited astonishment, and has
confounded all ideas of unity in the distribution of organic beings;
but we now see that they are in exact accordance with the phenomena
presented by the flora of the same regions, as developed in the
greatest detail by the researches of Dr. Hooker.

It is somewhat singular, however, that not one _identical species_
of insect should yet have been discovered, while no less than 89
species of flowering plants are found both in New Zealand and South
America. The relations of the animals and of the plants of these
countries must necessarily depend on the same physical changes which
the Southern hemisphere has undergone; and we are therefore led to
conclude that insects are much less persistent in their specific
forms than flowering plants, while among Mammalia and land birds (in
which no genus even is common to the countries in question) species
must die and be replaced much more rapidly than in either. And this
is exactly in accordance with the fact (well established by geology)
that at a time when the shells of the European seas were almost all
identical with species now living, the European Mammalia were almost
all different. The duration of life of species would seem to be in
an inverse proportion to their complexity of organization and vital
activity.

In the brief sketch I have now given of this interesting subject, such
obvious and striking facts alone have been adduced as a traveller's
note-book can supply. The argument must therefore lose much of its
weight from the absence of detail and accumulated examples. There
is, however, such a very general accordance in the phenomena of
distribution as separately deduced from the various classes or
kingdoms of the organic world, that whenever one class of animals or
plants exhibits in a clearly marked manner certain relations between
two countries, the other classes will certainly show similar ones,
though it may be in a greater or a less degree. Birds and insects will
teach us the same truths; and even animals and plants, though existing
under such different conditions, and multiplied and dispersed by such
a generally distinct process, will never give conflicting testimony,
however much they may differ as regards the amount of relationship
between distant regions indicated by them, and consequently
notwithstanding the greater or less weight either may have in the
determining of questions of this nature.

This is my apology for offering to the Linnean Society the present
imperfect outline in anticipation of the more detailed proofs and
illustrations which I hope to bring forward on a future occasion.


       *       *       *       *       *




  INDEX.


                                                            Page

  Acridotheres,                                              176
  Alligator,                                                   3
  Amblada, _Walk._,                                          144
  ---- atomaria, _Walk._,                                    145
  Ampsalis, _Walk._,                                          98
  ---- geniata, _Walk._,                                      99
  Ancylus fluviatilis,                                        39
  Anoa,                                                      177
  Anodon,                                                     38
  Anomia,                                                 37, 58
  Anopheles, _Meigen_,                                        91
  ---- vanus, _Walk._,                                        91
  Anoplognathidae,                                            183
  Ansa depressicornis,                                       176
  Anthomyia, _Meigen_,                                       141
  ---- procellaria, _Walk._,                                 141
  Anthomyides, _Walk._,                                      140
  Anthrax, _Fabr._,                                          111
  ---- antecedens, _Walk._,                                  111
  ---- congrua, _Walk._,                                     112
  ---- degenera, _Walk._,                                    113
  ---- demonstrans, _Walk._,                                 112
  ---- praedicans, _Walk._,                                   112
  ---- praetendens, _Walk._,                                  111
  ---- proferens, _Walk._,                                   113
  ---- semiscita, _Walk._,                                   111
  ---- Tantalus, _Fabr._,                                    111
  Anthreptes lepida,                                         175
  Aplysia,                                                38, 40
  Aragara, _Walk._,                                          154
  ---- crassipes, _Walk._,                                   154
  Arca,                                                       55
  Argonauta,                                              42, 60
  Aricia, _Macq._,                                           140
  ---- contraria, _Walk._,                                   140
  ---- integra, _Walk._,                                     140
  ---- nigricosta, _Walk._,                                  140
  ---- significans, _Walk._,                                 140
  Asilidae, _Leach_,                                          104
  Asilites, _Walk._,                                         106
  Asilus, _Linn._,                                           107
  ---- areolaris, _Walk._,                                   108
  ---- determinatus, _Walk._,                                107
  ---- introducens, _Walk._,                                 108
  ---- tenuicornis, _Walk._,                                 108
  Aspergillum,                                                36
  Aye-Aye (_Cheiromys madagascariensis_, L., Cuv.) H.
      Sandwith on the habits of the,                          28

  Babirusa,                                                  176
  Baccha, _Fabr._,                                           121
  ---- dispar, _Walk._,                                      121
  Baryterocera, _Walk._,                                     120
  ---- gibbula, _Walk._,                                     120
  Belideus,                                                  172
  Bombylidae, _Leach_,                                        111
  Bombylites, _Walk._,                                       111
  Buccinum,                                               41, 69
  Bucconidae,                                                 173
  Bulla,                                                      66

  Cacatua,                                                   173
  Cadrema, _Walk._,                                          117
  ---- lonchopteroides, _Walk._,                             117
  Caenosia, _Meigen_,                                         141
  ---- luteicornis, _Walk._,                                 141
  ---- respondens, _Walk._,                                  142
  ---- signata, _Walk._,                                     142
  Caiman,                                                      3
  Callantra, _Walk._,                                        153
  ---- smieroides, _Walk._,                                  154
  Calobata, _Fabr._,                                         161
  ---- bifasciata, _Walk._,                                  162
  ---- impingens, _Walk._,                                   161
  ---- resoluta, _Walk._,                                    161
  Calyptraea,                                                  39
  Cardiacephala, _Macq._,                                    162
  ---- varipes, _Walk._,                                     162
  Cardium,                                                    48
  Celyphus, _Dalman_,                                        147
  ---- obtectus, _Dalman_,                                   147
  ---- scutatus, _Wied._,                                    147
  Ceria, _Fabr._,                                            118
  ---- lateralis, _Walk._,                                   118
  Cervus,                                                    173
  Chama,                                                      54
  Chrysops, _Meigen_,                                        104
  ---- fasciatus, _Wied._,                                   104
  Chrysotus, _Meigen_,                                       116
  ---- exactus, _Walk._,                                     116
  Cleodora,                                                   42
  Cleridae,                                                   183
  Clitellaria, _Meigen_,                                      95
  Clitellaria festinans, _Walk._,                             95
  ---- gavisa, _Walk._,                                       95
  Coenurgia, _Walk._,                                        164
  ---- remipes, _Walk._,                                     164
  Conus,                                                      60
  Copsychus,                                            173, 174
  Coracias,                                                  177
  Cordylura, _Fallen_,                                       142
  ---- bisignata, _Walk._,                                   142
  Crania,                                                     37
  Crocodilia. Prof. _T. H. Huxley_ on the specific and
      generic Characters of,                                   I
  Crocodilidae,                                                 5
  Crocodilus,                                                  6
  ---- Americanus (acutus, _Cuv._),                           11
  ---- biporcatus,                                            11
  ---- bombifrons,                                            13
  ---- cataphractus,                                          16
  ---- galeatus,                                              15
  ---- Gravesii (planirostris),                               15
  ---- Journei,                                            11-16
  ---- marginatus,                                            15
  ---- Morelettii,                                            28
  ---- rhombifer,                                             14
  ---- Schlegelii,                                        16, 17
  ---- suchus,                                                15
  ---- vulgaris,                                               6
  Ctenophora, _Fabr._,                                        93
  ---- incunctans, _Walk._,                                   93
  ---- gaudens, _Walk._,                                      93
  Culex, Linn.,                                               91
  ---- impatibilis, _Walk._,                                  91
  ---- impellens, _Walk._,                                    91
  ---- obturbans, _Walk._,                                    91
  Culicidae, _Haliday_,                                        90
  Cuscus,                                                    172
  Cyclas,                                                     38
  Cynopithecus,                                               76
  Cypraea,                                                     63
  Cyrenoidea,                                                 37

  Dacus, _Fabr._,                                            149
  ---- addens, _Walk._,                                      149
  ---- bilineatus, _Walk._,                                  150
  ---- contrahens, _Walk._,                                  151
  ---- diffusus, _Walk._,                                    153
  ---- divergens, _Walk._,                                   149
  ---- emittens, _Walk._,                                    152
  ---- exigens, _Walk._,                                     151
  ---- fulvitarsis, _Walk._,                                 153
  ---- imitans, _Walk._,                                     150
  ---- inaptus.,                                             151
  ---- terminifer, _Walk._,                                  152
  Dasypogonites, _Walk._,                                    104
  Delphinula,                                                 41
  Dentalium,                                              36, 88
  Dexia, _Meigen_,                                           129
  ---- basifera, _Walk._,                                    129
  ---- includens, _Walk._,                                   130
  ---- praecedens, _Walk._,                                   131
  Dexides, _Walk._,                                          129
  Diaphorus, _Meigen_,                                       117
  ---- resumens, _Walk._,                                    117
  Diopsides, _Walk._,                                        161
  Diopsis, Linn.,                                            161
  ---- detrahens, _Walk._,                                   161
  ---- subnotata, Westw.,                                    161
  Dipterous insects collected at Makessar, in Celebes, by
      Mr. A. R. Wallace, Catalogue of, by Francis Walker,     90
  Discocephala, Macquart,                                    104
  ---- pandens, _Walk._,                                     104
  Discomyza, _Meigen_,                                       169
  ---- obscurata, _Walk._,                                   169
  Dolichopidae, _Leach_,                                      114
  Dolichopus, _Latr._,                                       115
  ---- cinereus, _Walk._,                                    115
  ---- praedicans, _Walk._,                                   115
  ---- praemissus, _Walk._,                                   116
  ---- provectus, _Walk._,                                   116
  ---- proveniens, _Walk._,                                  116
  Donax,                                                      50
  Doris,                                                      40
  Drosophila, _Fallen_,                                      168
  ---- illata, _Walk._,                                      168
  ---- lateralis, _Walk._,                                   169
  ---- lurida, _Walk._,                                      169
  ---- rudis, _Walk._,                                       168
  ---- solennis, _Walk._,                                    168

  Enicoptera, _Macq._,                                       155
  ---- arcuosa, _Walk._,                                     156
  ---- flava, _Macq._,                                       156
  ---- pictipennis, _Walk._,                                 155
  ---- ? plagifera, _Walk._,                                 156
  ---- tortuosa, _Walk._,                                    155
  Ephydra, _Fallen_,                                         171
  ---- borboroides, _Walk._,                                 171
  ---- maculicornis, _Walk._,                                171
  Eristalis, _Latr._,                                        119
  ---- AEsopus, _Walk._,                                      119
  ---- bomboides, _Walk._,                                   119
  ---- crassus, _Fabr._,                                     119
  Eumerus, _Meigen_,                                         121
  ---- figurans, _Walk._,                                    121
  Eurygaster, _Macq._,                                       125
  ---- apta, _Walk._,                                        126
  ---- conglomerata, _Walk._,                                126
  ---- contracta, _Walk._,                                   128
  ---- deducens, _Walk._,                                    127
  ---- progressa, _Walk._,                                   128
  ---- prominens, _Walk._,                                   127
  ---- remittens, _Walk._,                                   125
  ---- ridibunda, _Walk._,                                   125
  Eurystomus gularis,                                        175

  Fissurella,                                                 38

  Gallus,                                                    175
  Garner, Robert, on the Shell-bearing Mollusca,
      particularly with regard to structure and form,         35
  Gavialidae,                                                  16
  Gavialis,                                               16, 20
  ---- gangeticus,                                            20
  Gobrya, _Walk._,                                           166
  ---- bacchoides, _Walk._,                                  166
  Graptomyza, _Wied._,                                       118
  ---- tibialis, _Walk._,                                    118

  Halcyon collaris,                                          175
  Haliotis,                                                   87
  Hamadryas,                                                 183
  Hanley, Sylvanus, on the LinneanManuscript of the
      'Museum Ulricae',                                        43
  Heliconidae,                                                183
  Helix,                                                      83
  ---- aspersa,                                               41
  Helomyza, _Fallen_,                                        143
  ---- copiosa, _Walk._,                                     143
  ---- observans, _Walk._,                                   143
  ---- tripunctifera, _Walk._,                               143
  Helomyzides, _Fallen _,                                    142
  Helophilus, _Meigen_,                                      119
  ---- conclusus, _Walk._,                                   119
  ---- consors, _Walk._,                                     119
  Hermetia, _Latr._,                                          94
  ---- remittens, _Walk._,                                    94
  Hirundo javanica,                                          175
  Huxley, T. H., on the dermal Armour of _Jacare_ and
      _Caiman_, with notes on the Specific and Generic
      Characters of recent Crocodilia,                         I
  Hyalaea,                                                     42
  Hydromyzides, _Haliday_,                                   170

  Jacare,                                                      4
  ---- and Caiman, Prof. _T. H. Huxley_ on the dermal
      Armour of Idia, _Meigen_,                           I, 132
  ---- australis, _Walk._,                                   132
  ---- prolata, _Walk._,                                     133

  Ixos,                                                 173, 174

  Lamprimidae,                                                183
  Lamprogaster, _Macq._,                                     147
  ---- marginifera, _Walk._,                                 147
  Laphria, _Fabr._,                                          105
  ---- complens, _Walk._,                                    106
  ---- concludens, _Walk._,                                  105
  ---- partita, _Walk._,                                     105
  ---- requisita, _Walk._,                                   105
  ---- Taphius, _Walk._,                                     105
  ---- Vulcanus, _Wied._,                                    105
  Laphrites, _Walk._,                                        105
  Lauxanides, _Walk._,                                       145
  Leptidae, _Westw._,                                         110
  Leptis, _Fabr._,                                           110
  Leptis ferruginosa, _Walk._,                               110
  Leptogaster, _Meigen_,                                     109
  ---- munda, _Walk._,                                       109
  Limnobia, _Meigen_,                                         92
  ---- imponens, _Walk._,                                     92
  Lispe, _Meigen_,                                           141
  Lispe bimaculata, _Walk._,                                 141
  Lobster Common (_Homarus vulgaris_) and Shore Crab
      (_Carcinus Maenas_), _S. J. A. Salter_ on the
      Moulting of the,                                        30
  Lonchopteridae, _Curtis_,                                   117
  Lonchaea, _Fallen_,                                         145
  ---- ? atratula,                                           146
  ---- ? consentanea,                                        146
  Lymnaeus,                                                    41

  Macacus,                                                   175
  Macropygia phasianella,                                    175
  Magilus,                                                    40
  Malay Archipelago, _A. R. Wallace_ on the Zoological
      Geography of                                           172
  Marsupials,                                                183
  Masicera, _Macq._,                                         123
  ---- dotata, _Walk._,                                      123
  ---- horrens, _Walk._,                                     124
  ---- immersa, _Walk._,                                     124
  ---- prognosticans, _Walk._,                               124
  Mecistops,                                                  15
  ---- Bennettii,                                             16
  Megalainia,                                                173
  Megapodiidae,                                          173, 174
  Megapodius,                                           173, 174
  Megarhina, _Desvoidy_,                                      90
  ---- immisericors, _Walk._,                                 90
  Merodon, _Fabr._,                                          120
  ---- interveniens, _Walk._,                                120
  Meropogon,                                                 177
  Merops javanicus,                                          175
  Metopia, _Meigen_,                                         128
  ---- inspectans, _Walk._,                                  128
  ---- instruens, _Walk._,                                   129
  Micropeza, _Macq._,                                        164
  ---- fragilis, _Walk._,                                    164
  Milesia, _Latr._,                                          118
  ---- conspicienda, _Walk._,                                118
  Mollusca, shell-bearing, particularly with regard to
      structure and form, Rob. Garner on the,                 35
  Murex,                                                      75
  Musca, _Linn._,                                            133
  ---- collecta, _Walk._,                                    139
  ---- conducens, _Walk._,                                   138
  ---- delectans, _Walk._,                                   134
  ---- domestica. _Walk._,                                   138
  ---- electa, _Walk._,                                      136
  ---- favillacea, _Walk._,                                  135
  ---- flaviceps, _Walk._,                                   135
  ---- fortunata, _Walk._,                                   137
  ---- gavisa, _Walk._,                                      138
  ---- ingens, _Walk._,                                      134
  ---- inscribens, _Walk._,                                  136
  ---- intrabens, _Walk._,                                   137
  ---- obtrusa, _Walk._,                                     135
  ---- optata, _Walk._,                                      137
  ---- praedicens, _Walk._,                                   139
  ---- proferens _Walk._                                     138
  ---- promittens, _Walk._,                                  134
  ---- prospera, _Walk._,                                    133
  ---- refixa, _Walk._,                                      138
  ---- selecta, _Walk._,                                     135
  ---- sperata, _Walk._,                                     136
  ---- xanthomela, _Walk._,                                  139
  Muscidae, _Latr._,                                          122
  Muscides, _Walk._,                                         132
  Museum Ulricae, _Sylvanus Hanley_ on the Linnean
      manuscript of the,                                      43
  Mya,                                                        46
  Mydas basifasciata, _Walk._,                               104
  Mydasites, _Walk._,                                        104
  Mytilus,                                                    58
  ---- edulis,                                                38

  Natalis,                                                   183
  Natica,                                                     41
  Nautilus,                                                   60
  Nemoraea, _Macq._,                                          122
  ---- amplificans, _Walk._,                                 122
  ---- tenebrosa, _Walk._,                                   123
  Nerita,                                                     85
  ---- litoralis,                                             40
  Nerius, _Wied._,                                           164
  ---- fuscipennis, _Macq._,                                 164
  Nerna, _Walk._,                                             97
  ---- impendens, _Walk._,                                    97
  Nomba, _Walk._,                                            169
  ---- ticta, _Walk._,                                       170
  Notiphila, _Fallen_,                                       170
  ---- flavilinea, _Walk._,                                  171
  ---- lincosa, _Walk._,                                     170
  ---- quadrifascia, _Walk._,                                170

  Ochthera, _Latr._,                                         171
  ---- innotata, _Walk._,                                    171
  Ochthiphila, _Fallen_,                                     147
  ---- discoglauca, _Walk._,                                 147
  Ommatius, _Illiger_,                                       109
  ---- scitulus, _Walk._,                                    109
  ---- strictus, _Walk._,                                    109
  Opomyza, _Fallen_,                                         168
  ---- nigrifinis, _Walk._,                                  168
  Ortalides, _Haliday_,                                      147
  Ortalis, _Fallen_,                                         157
  ---- decatomoides, _Walk._,                                157
  ---- vacillans, _Walk._,                                   157
  Oscinides, _Haliday_,                                      167
  Oscinis, _Fabr._,                                          167
  ---- femorata, _Walk._,                                    167
  Ostrea,                                                     56
  Ovula,                                                      41
  Oxycera, _Meigen_,                                          96
  ---- manens, _Walk._,                                       96

  Palaeornis,                                                 173
  Palloptera, _Fallen_,                                      160
  ---- detracta, _Walk._,                                    160
  Paradisea,                                                 180
  Paradoxurus,                                               173
  Patella,                                            38, 39, 87
  Pecten maximus,                                             38
  Pericrocotus,                                              173
  Perna,                                                      37
  Phasianidae,                                           173, 174
  Philonotus melanocephala,                                  175
  Phoenicophaeus,                                             176
  Pholas,                                                 36, 46
  Phora, _Latr._,                                             17
  ---- bifasciata, _Walk._,                                  172
  Phoridae, _Haliday_,                                        172
  Phyllornithidae,                                            173
  Picnonotus,                                                173
  Pinna,                                                      60
  Piophila, _Fallen_,                                        167
  ---- contecta, _Walk._,                                    167
  Platypezidae, _Haliday_,                                    117
  Platypeza, _Meigen_,                                       117
  ---- glaucescens, _Walk._,                                 117
  Platystoma, _Latr._,                                       148
  ---- atomarium, _Walk._,                                   148
  ---- basale, _Walk._,                                      148
  Ploceus,                                              173, 174
  Prioniturus,                                               177
  Pseudomorphidae,                                            183
  Psila, _Meigen_,                                           165
  ---- bipunctifera, _Walk._,                                165
  ---- munda, _Walk._,                                       166
  Psilides, _Walk._,                                         164
  Psilopus, _Meigen_,                                        114
  ---- abruptus, _Walk._,                                    115
  ---- aestimatus, _Walk._,                                   114
  ---- filifer, _Walk._,                                     114
  ---- spectabilis, _Walk._,                                 114
  Pterogenia, _Bigot_,                                       147
  ---- singularis, _Bigot_,                                  147
  Pteropoda,                                                  42
  Ptilocera _Wied._,                                          94
  ---- smaragdina, _Walk._,                                   94
  ---- smaragdifera, _Walk._,                                 96
  Purpura,                                                    41

  Rhynchosuchus,                                              16
  Rosapha, _Walk._,                                          100
  ---- habilis, _Walk._,                                     100
  Ruba, _Walk._,                                             100
  ---- inflata, _Walk._,                                     101

  Salter, S. J. A., on the moulting of the common
      Lobster and Shore-Crab,                                 30
  Sandwith, Hon. Dr. On the habits of the Aye-Aye,
      (_Cheiromys madagascariensis_, Cuv.),                   28
  Sarcophaga, _Meigen_,                                      132
  ---- aliena, _Walk._,                                      132
  ---- inextricata, _Walk._,                                 132
  ---- invaria, _Walk._,                                     132
  ---- mendax, _Walk._,                                      132
  Sarcophagides, _Walk._,                                    132
  Sargus, _Fabr._,                                            96
  ---- inactus, _Walk._,                                      97
  ---- mactans, _Walk._,                                      97
  ---- redhibens, _Walk._,                                    97
  Sargus remeans, _Walk._,                                    96
  ---- repensans, _Walk._,                                    96
  Saruga, _Walk._,                                           101
  ---- conifera, _Walk._,                                    102
  Sciomyza, _Fallen_,                                        144
  ---- (?) leucomelana, _Walk._,                             144
  ---- replena, _Walk._,                                     144
  Scissirostrum,                                             177
  Sciuridae,                                                  173
  Sepedon, _Latr._,                                          145
  ---- Javanensis,                                           145
  Sepia,                                              36, 39, 42
  Sepsides, _Walk._,                                         161
  Sepsis, _Fallen_,                                          163
  ---- fascipes, _Walk._,                                    163
  ---- frontalis, _Walk._,                                   163
  ---- revocans, _Walk._,                                    163
  ---- testacea, _Walk._,                                    163
  Seraca, _Walk._,                                           164
  ---- signata, _Walk._,                                     165
  ---- signifera, _Walk._,                                   165
  Serpula,                                                    89
  Sipphidae, _Leach_,                                         118
  Solemya,                                                    37
  Solen,                                                      47
  Solva, _Walk._,                                             98
  ---- inamoena, _Walk._,                                     98
  Sophira, _Walk._,                                          160
  ---- bistriga, _Walk._,                                    160
  Spilogaster, _Macq._,                                      141
  ---- xanthoceras, _Walk._,                                 141
  Spondylus,                                                  54
  Stigmoderidae,                                              183
  Stratiomidae, _Haliday_,                                     94
  Stratiomys, _Geoff._,                                       94
  ---- finalis _Walk._,                                       94
  ---- immiscens, _Walk._,                                    94
  Strombus,                                                   73
  Sturnopastor,                                              173
  Suragina, _Walk._,                                         110
  ---- illucens, _Walk._,                                    110
  Sus,                                                       175
  Syndesidae,                                                 183
  Syritta, _St. Farg._,                                      121
  ---- illucida, _Walk._,                                    121
  Syrphus, _Fabr._,                                          122
  ---- consequens, _Walk._,                                  122
  Systropus, _Wied._,                                        113
  ---- sphegoides, _Walk._,                                  113

  Tabanidae, _Leach_,                                         102
  Tabanus, _Linn._,                                          102
  ---- factiosus, _Walk._,                                   102
  ---- flexilis, _Walk._,                                    104
  ---- immixtus, _Walk._,                                    103
  ---- reducens, _Walk._,                                    103
  Tabanus spoliatus, _Walk._,                                103
  ---- succurvus, _Walk._,                                   102
  Tachinides, _Walk._,                                       122
  Tanysiptera,                                               174
  Tellina,                                                    47
  Texara, _Walk._,                                           166
  ---- dioctrioides, _Walk._,                                166
  Thereva, _Latr._,                                          111
  ---- congrua, _Walk._,                                     111
  Therevites, _Walk._,                                       111
  Thressa, _Walk._,                                          146
  ---- signifera, _Walk._,                                   146
  Tiga,                                                      173
  Tinda, _Walk._,                                            101
  ---- modifera, _Walk._,                                    101
  Tipula, _Linn._,                                            92
  ---- infindens,                                             92
  ---- inordinans,                                            93
  Tipulidae, _Haliday_,                                        92
  Torocca, _Walk._,                                          131
  ---- abdominalis, _Walk._,                                 131
  Tracana, _Walk._,                                           99
  ---- iterabilis, _Walk._,                                   99
  Trichophorus,                                              173
  Trigonia,                                                   37
  Trochus,                                                40, 80
  Trogonidae,                                                 173
  Tropidorhynchus,                                           173
  Trupanea, _Macquart_,                                      106
  Trupanea calorifica, _Walk._,                              107
  ---- strenua, _Walk._,                                     106
  Trypeta, _Meigen_,                                         158
  ---- amplipennis, _Walk._,                                 159
  ---- approximans, _Walk._,                                 160
  ---- basifascia, _Walk._,                                  158
  ---- lativentris, _Walk._,                                 158
  ---- nigrifascia, _Walk._,                                 158
  ---- stellipennis, _Walk._,                                159
  Turbo,                                                      81

  Venus,                                                      51
  Volucella, _Geoff._,                                       120
  ---- docorata, _Walk._,                                    120
  Voluta,                                                     67
  Vulsella,                                                   37

  Walker, Francis, Catalogue of Dipterous Insects
      collected by Mr. A. R. Wallace at Makessar in
      Celebes,                                                90
  Wallace, A. R., on the Zoological Geography of the
      Malay Archipelago,                                     172

  Xarnuta, _Walk._,                                          142
  ---- leucotelus, _Walk._,                                  142

  Zosterops flavus,                                          175

THE END.

Printed by Taylor and Francis, Red Lion Court, Fleet Street.


[Transcriber's Note:

Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation are as in the original.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Journal of the Proceedings of the
Linnean Society - Vol. 4, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOURNAL--LINNEAN SOCIETY--VOL 4 ***

***** This file should be named 46491.txt or 46491.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/4/9/46491/

Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Wayne Hammond and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by the Posner Memorial Collection
(http://posner.library.cmu.edu/Posner/))


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
