The Project Gutenberg EBook of Chronicles of England, Scotland and Ireland
(3 of 6): England (3 of 9), by Raphael Holinshed

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Chronicles of England, Scotland and Ireland (3 of 6): England (3 of 9)

Author: Raphael Holinshed

Release Date: August 24, 2014 [EBook #46672]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRONICLES OF ENGLAND ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









HENRIE THE SIXT,

sonne and heire to Henrie the fift.


[Sidenote: 1422.]

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 1.]

[Sidenote: _Buchan lib. 10._]

After that death had bereft the world of that noble prince king
Henrie the fift, his onelie sonne prince Henrie, being of the age of
nine moneths, or thereabouts, with the sound of trumpets was openlie
proclamed king of England and France the thirtith daie of August, by
the name of Henrie the sixt; in the yeare of the world fiue thousand,
three hundred, eightie and nine, after the birth of our Sauiour 1422,
about the twelfe yeare of the emperour Frederike the third, the fortith
and two and last of Charles the sixt, and the third yeare of Mordaks
regiment (after his father Robert) gouernour of Scotland. The custodie
of this yoong prince was appointed to Thomas duke of Excester, & to
Henrie Beauford bishop of Winchester. The duke of Bedford was deputed
regent of France, and the duke of Glocester was ordeined protectour of
England; who taking vpon him that office, called to him wise and graue
councellors, by whose aduise he prouided and tooke order as well for
the good gouernment of the realme & subiects of the same at home, as
also for the maintenance of the warres abroad, and further conquest to
be made in France, appointing valiant and expert capteins, which should
be readie, when need required. Besides this, he gathered great summes
of monie to mainteine men of warre, and left nothing forgotten that
might aduance the good estate of the realme.

While these things were a dooing in England, the duke of Bedford regent
of France studied most earnestlie, not onelie to keepe and well order
the countries by king Henrie late conquered; but also determined not
to leaue off warre & trauell, till Charles the Dolphin (which was
now aflote, because king Charles his father in the moneth of October
in this present yeare was departed to God) should either be subdued,
or brought to obeisance. And suerlie the death of this king Charles
caused alterations in France. For a great manie of the nobilitie,
which before, either for feare of the English puissance, or for the
loue of this king Charles (whose authoritie they followed) held on
the English part, did now reuolt to the Dolphin, with all indeuour
to driue the English nation out of the French territories. Whereto
they were the more earnestlie bent, and thought it a thing of greater
facilitie, because of king Henries yoong yeares; whome (because he was
a child) they esteemed not, but with one consent reuolted from their
sworne fealtie: as the recorder of the Englishmens battels with forren
nations, verie aptlie doth note, saieng:

    Hic Franci puerum regem neglectui habentes
    Desciscunt, violatque fidem gens perfida sacro
    Consilio ante datam.

The duke of Bedford being greatlie mooued with these sudden changes,
fortified his townes both with garrisons of men, munition, and
vittels, assembled also a great armie of Englishmen and Normans, and
so effectuouslie exhorted them to continue faithfull to their liege
and lawfull lord yoong king Henrie, that manie of the French capteins
willinglie sware to king Henrie fealtie and obedience, by whose example
the communaltie did the same. Thus the people quieted, and the countrie
established in order, nothing was minded but warre, and nothing spoken
of but conquest.

[Sidenote: Pont Meulan surprised by the Fr[=e]ch.]

[Sidenote: 1423.]

[Sidenote: _Enguerant._]

The Dolphin which lay the same time in the citie of Poitiers, after
his fathers deceasse, caused himselfe to be proclamed king of France,
by the name of Charles the seuenth: and in good hope to recouer his
patrimonie, with an haultie courage preparing war, assembled a great
armie: and first the warre began by light skirmishes, but after it grew
into maine battels. The Dolphin thinking not to lose anie occasions
of well dooing, sent the lord Grauile to the towne of Pont Meulan,
standing on the riuer of Seine, who comming to the same vpon the
sudden, the fourteenth of Ianuarie, tooke it and slue a great number of
English souldiors, which he found within it.

[Sidenote: Lord Grauile falsified his oth.]

When the duke of Bedford the regent, aduertised of this sudden
surprise, appointed the lord Thomas Montacute earle of Salisburie (a
man both for policie and courage, liker to the old Romans than to men
of his daies) accompanied with the earle of Suffolke, the lord Scales,
the yoong lord Poinings, sir Iohn Fastolfe maister of the houshold,
with himselfe and diuerse others, to besiege the said towne of Pont
Meulan, which after two moneths siege was rendred to the said earle,
and the lord Grauile sware to be true to the king of England euer after
that day: but shortlie after, forgetting his oth, he turned French
againe.

The earle of Salisburie appointed sir Henrie Mortimer, and sir Richard
Vernon, capteins of the towne, and from thence went into Champaigne,
and there besieged the towne of Sens, tooke it, and sir William Marin
the capteine within it, and slue all the souldiors that kept it, made
capteins there sir Hugh Godding, and sir Richard Aubemond. [pilcrow] In this
season, Humfrie duke of Glocester, either striken in loue, or vpon some
other occasion, maried the ladie Iaquet or Iaquelin, daughter and sole
heire to William of Bauier duke of Holland, which was lawfull wife to
Iohn duke of Brabant then liuing, who afterwards (as after ye shall
heare) recouered hir out of the dukes hands.

[Sidenote: Affinitie an interteiner of friendship.]

The chances thus happening (as you before haue heard) Iohn duke of
Bedford, Philip duke of Burgognie, and Iohn duke of Britaine made a
freendlie meeting in the citie of Amiens, where they renewed the old
league and ancient amitie made betweene the noble prince king Henrie
the fift and them, adding thereto these conditions and agreements, ech
of them to be to the other freend and aider; and the enimie of the one
to be enimie to the other; and all they to be freends and aiders to
the king of England, welwiller to his welwillers, and aduersarie to
his aduersaries. And (bicause that affinitie is commonlie the bond of
amitie) there was concluded a mariage betweene the duke of Bedford,
and the ladie Anne sister to the duke of Burgognie, which was after
solemnized at Trois in Champaigne, in the presence of the duke of
Burgognie brother to the bride, and of hir vncle the duke of Brabant,
the earles of Salisburie and Suffolke, and of nine hundred lords,
knights, and esquiers, with such feast and triumph, as before that time
had not beene seene of the Burgognions.

[Sidenote: The Parisiens preuented of their practises.]

Whilest these matters were in hand, the Parisiens, thinking to blind
the eies of the duke of Bedford, wrote to him how diuerse castels and
fortresses lieng about their territories, were replenished with their
enimies, dailie stopping their passages, and robbing their merchants,
to their vtter vndooing, if they by his helpe were not relieued. But
this was but a glose of the Parisiens, meaning to cause him to go about
the winning of some strong hold, whilest they in his absence might
bring into the citie Charles the Dolphin, that then called himselfe
French king; for so had they appointed, assigning to him the daie of
his comming, and the post of his entrie. But their practise being
discouered to the duke of Bedford, he with a great power entered into
Paris, one daie before the faire was appointed, & two nights before he
was looked for of his enimies being vnprouided, and suddenlie caused
the conspirators within the citie to be apprehended, and openlie to be
put to execution.

This doone, putting a mistrust in the Parisiens, he caused the castels
and fortresses neere and adioining to the citie, to be furnished with
Englishmen. And to auoid all night-watchers about Paris, and the
confines thereof, he first tooke into his possession either by assault
or composition, the towne of Trainelle and Braie vpon Seine. And
bicause two castels, the one called Pacie, and the other Coursaie were
also euil neighbours to the Parisiens, he sent sir Iohn Fastolfe great
maister of his houshold with a notable armie to win the same castels;
which he did, and with preie and prisoners returned backe againe to his
maister the regent.

[Sidenote: The English armie entreth the riuer and winneth the banke.]

In this verie season, the Dolphin sent the lord William Steward earle
of Buchquhane that was constable of France, and the earle of Ventadour
in Auuergne, and manie other noble men of his part, to laie siege to
the towne of Crauant in the countie of Auxerre, within the parts of
Burgognie. Wherof hearing the lord regent, and the duke of Burgognie
they assembled a great armie, and appointed the earle of Salisburie
to haue the guiding thereof; who with his capteins and men of warre,
English and Burgognions, came in good arraie to giue battell to the
besiegers. And bicause the riuer of Yonne, which runneth by the said
towne, was betweene the English armie, and their aduersaries, they
could not well assaile their enimies, which defended the bankes and
passages verie stronglie: yet notwithstanding, both horssemen and
footmen of the English part couragiouslie put themselues into the
riuer, and with fine force recouered the banke, whome the Burgognions
incontinentlie followed.

When they were all gotten into the plaine, the archers shot, the
bill men strake, and long was the fight in doubtfull balance. But in
conclusion the Frenchmen not able to resist the force of the English
nation, were discomfited, slaine, and chased, leauing a glorious
victorie to the Englishmen and Burgognions. There were slaine of the
Frenchmen an eighteene hundred knights and esquiers, beside commons:
of Scots neere hand three thousand. Amongest the Frenchmen these were
chiefest that were slaine: the earle of Lestrake, the earl of Comigens,
the earle of Tonnoire, the lord Coquart de Comeron, the bastard of
Arminake, the viscount of Touraine, the bastard of Forrestes, the lord
de Port, and the lord Memorancie.

Of Scots the lord of saint Iohns towne, sir Iohn of Balgarie, sir
Iohn Turnbull, sir Iohn Holiburton, sir Robert Lislie, sir William
Coningham, sir William Dowglas, sir Alexander Hume, sir William Lislie,
sir Iohn Rotherford, sir William Craiford, sir Thomas Seton, sir
William Hamilton, and his sonne, Iohn Pillot. There were taken the
earle of Buchquhane constable of France, which lost his eie, the earle
of Ventadour, sir Alexander Meldrine, sir Lewes Ferignie, and two and
twentie hundred gentlemen of the French part. Of Englishmen there were
slaine sir Iohn Greie, sir William Hall, sir Gilbert Halsall one of the
marshals of the field, Richard ap Madocke, and one and twentie hundred
souldiers and men of warre.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 2]

After this fortunate victorie was the earle of Salisburie made (by
the lord regent) lieutenant and vicegerent for the king and the said
lord regent in the countries of France, Brie, and Champaigne; and sir
Iohn Fastolf was substituted deputie vnder the lord regent within the
duchie of Normandie on this side the riuer of Seine; and withall he
was also made gouernour of the countries of Aniou and Maine. The earle
of Salisburie after fiue moneths siege, wan by surrender the towne and
castell of Montaguillon in Brie; the capteins whereof, the one named
Pregent of Cotinie, and Guille Bourgois Britons, sware neuer to beare
armour against the Englishmen on this side the riuer of Loire. In the
mean time of that siege, the earle of Suffolke tooke by force the
castell of Coucie, and the strong castell of la Roch in Masconnois he
got by appointment.

[Sidenote: 1424]

[Sidenote: _Ann. 1423, per Buchanan._]

[Sidenote: Homage doone by the king of Scotland to king Henrie the
sixt.]

In this second yeare of king Henrie the sixt, Iames (the first of
that name & the hundred & second K. of Scotland, tooke to wife the
ladie Iane, daughter to Iohn earle of Summerset deceassed, and sister
to Iohn then duke of Summerset, and also coosine germane remoued to
king Henrie, and neece to the duke of Winchester, and to the duke of
Excester) was set at libertie, couenanting to paie a small portion
of monie more than was allowed to him for his wiues marriage monie,
and left hostages for the same. But before his departure out of the
realme, he did his homage vnto the the yoong king of England Henrie the
sixt at the castell of Windsor, before three dukes, two archbishops,
twelue earles, ten bishops, twentie barons, and two hundred knights
and esquiers, beside others, in order of words according to the tenour
hereafter following.




The formall recognisance or acknowledgement of the said homage.


I, IAMES STEWARD, K. of Scots, shall be true and faithfull vnto you
lord Henrie by the grace of God king of England & France, the noble
and superiour lord of the kingdome of Scotland; and to you I make my
fidelitie for the same kingdome of Scotland, which I hold and claime of
you; and I shall beare you my faith and fidelitie of life and lim, and
worldlie honour against all men; and faithfullie I shall knowledge and
shall doo you seruice due for the kingdome of Scotland aforesaid. So
God helpe me, and these holie euangelists.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: _Buchan. lib. 10. An. 1425. W. P._]

But notwithstanding this his oth, and the great bounteous liberalitie
of the mother & vncles of his wife, in bestowing on him abundance of
plate & treasure, with rich clothes of arras; he had not beene long at
home, but that soone out of France into Scotland ouer came there Iames
Steward, who (after manie of the Scotish nobilitie by diuerse occasions
in France consumed) grew to be capteine of the horssemen there.
With him came the archbishop of Remes with power and commission for
concluding a league betweene France and Scotland, and also of a mariage
betweene Lewes the Dolphins sonne and Margaret Iameses daughter,
though both verie yoong. Which matters acordinglie accomplished, to
France againe they got them. So Iames became as firm French as any of
his predecessours.

[Sidenote: Compeigne surrendered to the English by a policie.]

But now to leaue the Scotish king amongst his countriemen in Scotland,
and returne to the dooings of England. I find that the duke of
Glocester, being protector and gouernour of the realme, prepared an
armie of ten thousand men, and sent them ouer to his brother the regent
into France; who comming into the territorie of Paris, were ioifullie
of him receiued. About the same time the Frenchmen got by stealth
diuerse townes out of the Englishmens hands, and amongst other the
faire towne of Compiegne was one, and the pretie towne of Crotoie an
other. When the duke of Bedford was aduertised hereof, he determined
not to let the matter passe in such sort, but with all conuenient speed
sent foorth a force to recouer these townes againe. And first the earle
of Suffolke with the earle of Lignie, and diuerse other capteins of
the Englishmen went to besiege Compiegne, and lodged on the one side
of the riuer of Sohame, as the lord Lisle Adham, sir Thomas Ramston,
and the prouost of Paris laie on the other side. The Frenchmen within
the towne well furnished with good souldiers, munition, and vittels,
couragiouslie defended themselues.

[Sidenote: Compeigne & Crotoie recouered from the French.]

The Englishmen remembring that Guilliam Remond, other wise called
Mariolaine had been the leader of the souldiers within the towne (which
Mariolaine before at Pacie was taken prisoner by sir Iohn Fastolfe)
caused him to be brought from Paris vnto the campe, and set him in a
chariot with an halter about his necke, and conueied him to the gibet
without the towne, sending word to them within, that if they would not
without delaie render the towne, their capteine should incontinentlie
be strangled afore their faces. Which moued the souldiers so much, by
reason of the loue they bare to their old capteine and gouernour, that
for the deliuerance of him and partlie of themselues they yeelded the
towne, so that both he and they might depart with horsse and harnesse
onelie in sure conduct and safetie. Yet yer this towne of Compiegne
was deliuered, sir Philip Hall, which was sent to Crotoie by the
lord regent with eight hundred men to besiege it, got it suddenlie
by assault yer the Frenchmen had either disposed their garrison, or
appointed their lodgings.

About the same time sir Iohn de la Poole brother to the duke of
Suffolke, being capteine of Auranches in Normandie, assembled all
the garrisons of the base marches of the countrie of Aniou, and came
before the citie of Angiers, burnt the suburbes, spoiled and destroied
the whole countrie; and hauing as manie prisoners as his men might go
awaie with, he was incountered by the earle of Aumarle, the vicount of
Narbonne, and six thousand Frenchmen; which finding the Englishmen out
of araie, incumbred with carriage of their great spoile, suddenlie set
on them, gaue them the ouerthrow, slue three hundred and tooke manie
prisoners; as the said sir Iohn de la Poole, sir Iohn Basset, Iohn
Aufort lieutenant of Faleise, Iohn Clifton, Henrie Mortimer, and other
to the number of six hundred.

But though the Frenchmen got here in this place, they went not awaie
with like gaine in an other: for the bastard de la Baulme, and the
lord Craignar capteins of Courallon, with a great band made rode into
Masconnois, whom by chance Matthew [1]Gough and other Englishmen,
which were also abroad in the countrie, met and incountred. There was
a sore fight betweene the parties, being of courage and number in
maner equall. But after long conflict, the Frenchmen almost all were
slaine and taken, and the bastard being well horssed, fled; after
whome followed vpon the spurres, Matthew [2]Gough chasing him euen
to his castell gate, and there tooke him: for the which act he was
much praised of the erle of Salisburie (to whom he presented the said
bastard) and had not onelie the rights giuen him that belonged to the
prisoner but also was rewarded with a goodlie courser at the earles
hands.

[1] Or rather Goche.

[2] Goche.

About this season, Arthur brother to Iohn duke of Britaine, commonlie
called the earle of Richmond, hauing neither profit of the name, nor of
the countrie, notwithstanding that king Henrie the fift had created him
earle of Yurie in Normandie, and gaue him not onelie a great pension,
but also the whole profits of the same towne of Yurie; yet now, bicause
that the duke his brother was returned to the part of the Dolphin, he
likewise reuolting from the English obeisance, came to the Dolphin to
Poictiers, and there offered himselfe to serue him, whom the Dolphin
gladlie accepted, reioising more thereof, than if he had gained an
hundred thousand crownes: for the Britons within the towne of Yurie,
hearing that their maister was ioined with the Dolphin, kept both the
towne and castell against the duke of Bedford, furnishing it dailie
with new men and munition.

The lord regent aduertised hereof, raised an armie of Englishmen and
Normans, to the number of eighteene hundred men of armes, and eight
thousand archers and other. He had in his companie the earles of
Salisburie and Suffolke, the lords Scales, Willoughbie, and Poinings,
sir Reginald Graie, sir Iohn Fastolfe, sir Iohn Saluaine, sir Lancelot
Lisle, sir Philip Hall, sir Iohn Pashleie, sir Iohn Greie, sir Thomas
Blunt, sir Robert Harling, sir William Oldhall, and manie other, both
knights and esquiers, with whom he came before the towne of Yurie,
which was well defended, till they within perceiued themselues in
danger, by reason of a mine which the Englishmen made, wherevpon they
yeelded the towne. But the capteins of the castell would not presentlie
render the place, howbeit they promised to deliuer it, if the same were
not rescued at a day assigned by the Dolphin or his power.

Vpon this promise, hostages were deliuered into the possession of the
lord regent, by whose licence an herald was sent to the Dolphin, to
aduertise him of the time determined; who vnderstanding the distresse
of his freends, incontinentlie sent Iohn duke of Alanson, as his
lieutenant generall, the erle Douglas, whome at their setting foorth
he made duke of Touraine, and the earle Buchquhane as then constable
of France, the erls of Aumarle, Ventadoure, Tonnere, Maulieurier, and
Forests, the vicounts of Narbonne, and Touars, the lords of Grauile,
Gaules, Malicorne, Mannie, Ballaie, Fountains, Montfort, and manie
other noble knights and esquiers, to the number of fifteene thousand
Frenchmen and Britons, besides fiue thousand Scots, whome the earle
Dowglas had but latelie transported out of Scotland.

[Sidenote: Verneuil gotten from the Englishmen by crediting a lie.]

This roiall armie approched within two miles of Yurie. But when the
duke of Alanson understood by such as he had sent to view the conduct
of the Englishmen, that he could not get anie aduantage by assailing
them (although the Dolphin had giuen him streict commandement to fight
with the regent) he retired backe with his whole armie to the towne of
Vernueill in Perch, that belonged to the king of England; sending word
to the garrison, that he had discomfited the English armie, and that
the regent with a small number with him by swiftnesse of horsse had
saued himselfe. The inhabitants of Vernueill, giuing too light credit
herevnto receiued the duke of Alanson with all his armie into the towne.

In the meane time came the daie of the rescues of Yurie, which for
want thereof was deliuered to the duke of Bedford by the capteine
called Gerard de la Pallier, who presenting vnto the duke of Bedford
the keies of the castell, shewed him a letter also signed and sealed
with the hands and seales of eighteene great lords, who the daie before
promised by the tenour of the same letter to giue the duke battell, and
to raise the siege. "Well (said the duke) if their hearts would haue
serued, their puissance was sufficient once to haue proffered, or to
haue performed this faithfull promise: but sith they disdaine to seeke
me, God and saint George willing, I shall not desist to follow the
tract of their horsses till one part of us be by battell ouerthrowne."
And herewith he sent foorth the earle of Suffolke with six hundred
horssemen, to espie the dooings of the Frenchmen, and where they were
lodged. The earle riding foorth, passed by Dampuile, and came to
Bretueill, where he heard certeine newes where the Frenchman had gotten
Verneueill, and remained there still.

[Sidenote: The ordering of their battels.]

These newes he sent by post vnto the duke of Bedford, the which
incontinentlie vpon that aduertisement set forward in great hast
towards his enimies. The Frenchmen hearing of his comming, set their
people in arraie, and made all one maine battell without fore ward or
rere ward; and appointed foure hundred horssemen, Lombards and others
to breake the arraie of the Englishmen, either behind, or at the sides,
of the which was capteine sir Stephan de Vinoiles, called the Hire. The
duke of Bedford likewise made one entier battell, and suffered no man
to be on horssebacke, and set the archers (euerie one hauing a sharpe
stake) both on the front of the battell, and also on the sides, like
wings. And behind were all their horsses tied togither, either by the
reins or by the tailes, with the carts and cariages, to the defense
whereof were two thousand archers appointed.

Heerewith either part being come almost to the ioining, the duke
of Alanson, on the one side, exhorted his people to plaie the men,
declaring vnto them, that the conclusion of this battell should
either deliuer them out of vile seruitude, or place them in the vale
of bondage. On the other side, the duke of Bedford, to incourage his
men, willed them to remember how oft they had subdued those their
aduersaries in battell (with whome they should now cope) for the
most part, euer being the lesse number against the greater. Againe,
he declared how necessarie it was to tame the bold attempts of the
presumptuous Dolphin now in the beginning, least if the fire were
suffered further to burne, it must haue need of the more water to
quench it.

[Sidenote: The battell of Vernoile the 28 of August, 1424.]

Manie words he vttered, to put them in hope of good successe and
victorie. But scarse had he ended his exhortation, when the Englishmen
rushed foorth, and boldlie set on their enimies, crieng, Saint George,
a Bedford, a Bedford: and the Frenchmen likewise cried Montioy saint
Denis. Then began the battell right fierce on both sides, continuing
for the space of three houres in doubtfull balance, fortune shewing hir
selfe so equall, that no eie could iudge to whether part she was more
fauourable. But at length, after that those foure hundred horssemen,
which were appointed, as yee haue hard, to brake the arraie of the
Englishmen, had passed thorough on the one side vnto the place where
the cariages and horsses stood, and could not passe further, by reason
of the fierce shot of the English bowes, they falling to the spoile
made a hand, and therewith departed. Those archers then that were
appointed to keepe the cariages, being now at libertie, came forward,
and so fiercelie shot at the thickest prease of their enimies fighting
on foot, that in the end they were not able longer to indure, but were
borne downe by fine force, and so vanquished.

This battell was fought the eight and twentith of August, in the yeare
of our Lord a thousand foure hundred twentie and foure, in the which
battell were slaine of the Frenchmen the earles of Aumarle, Ventadour,
Forest, Marie, the lords Grauile, Gaules, Fountaines, Ambois, Touars,
Montenie, Combreste, Brunell, Tumble, and Poisie, beside three hundred
knights. The vicount Narbonne was hanged on a gibbet, bicause he
was one of the murtherers of the duke of Burgognie. Of Scots also
were slaine, Archembald earle Dowglas, that was made (as before is
mentioned) duke of Touraine, Iames Dowglas sonne to the said Archembald
earle of Wicton, Iohn earle of Bouqhen newlie made constable of France,
sir Alexander Meldrin, sir Henrie Balglauie, sir Iohn Sterling, William
of Homelsdon, sir James Graie, sir Robert Randen, sir Alexander
Linsaie, sir Robert Steward, sir Robert Swinton, and seauen and twentie
hundred Scots of name and armes, beside others.

[Sidenote: Fiue thous[=a]d saith _Aemilius_ but _Nicholas Giles_ saith
there died but foure thous[=a]d on both parts.]

[Sidenote: Dudley and Charleton, two of the English nobilitie, were
slaine at this battell, as _Ia. Meir_ saith.]

So that in this battell were slaine by report of Montioy king at armes
in France, and the English haralds there present, of Frenchmen & Scots
nine thousand and seauen hundred: and of Englishmen one and twentie
hundred, but no man of name, sauing fiue yoong esquiers. And there were
taken prisoners, Iohn duke of Alanson, the bastard of Alanson, the lord
of Faiect, the lord of Hormit, sir Piers Harison, sir Lois de Gaucourt,
sir Robert Brusset, sir Iohn Turnebull a Scot, and two hundred
gentlemen, beside common soldiers. The Frenchmen within Vernoill,
seeing the Dolphins armie thus ouerthrowne, deliuered the towne to the
regent, their liues saued. Then was sir Philip Hall appointed capteine
there, and the lord regent returned, and came to Rone, and after to
Paris.

The Dolphin that called himselfe king of France, was sore appalled with
the ouerthrow of his armie: for he was driuen out of all the countries
in maner, that apperteined to the crowne of France, & might resort
to none except to Bourbonois, Aluergne, Berrie, Poictow, Touraine, a
part of Aniow, and Languedoc: yet to shew himselfe as king, he erected
his court of parlement, his chancerie, & all other courts in the
citie of Poictiers, and there established his great seale, with all
due circumstances thereto apperteining: where he continued foureteene
yeares togither, and then was remooued to Paris, after he had got that
citie, and expelled the Englishmen, as after shall appeare.

[Sidenote: The lord Scales sent to conquer Aniow and Maine.]

The duke of Bedford lieng at Paris, sent the lord Scales, sir Iohn
Montgomerie, sir Iohn Fastolfe, with two thousand men to winne the
countries of Aniow, and Maine, vnto whom were rendred without assault,
the strong castels of Beaumont le Vicount, Teune, Sillie, Osce,
Courceriers, Roussie, Vasse, Couetemenant, and twentie other, which
I doo heere passe ouer. Such was then the opinion conceiued of the
English puissance, so oft tried, prooued, and preuailing, that the
Frenchmen thought the Englishmen would haue all which they wished for
or wrought for.

[Sidenote: Mans deliuered to the Englishmen.]

The earle of Salisburie, with the said lord Scales, and the other
capteins before named, were appointed with an armie of ten thousand
men, to besiege the rich and strong citie of Mans, the cheefe citie
of all the countrie of Maine; whither when they came, they made their
approches, and planted their batterie to the wals, so that with the
shot of their great peeces (which kind of engins before that time had
not beene much seene nor heard of in France) the citie was within a few
daies despoiled of all hir towers and outward defenses. The citizens
and soldiers, perceiuing in what danger they stood, & knowing not how
to remedie the matter, offered the towne vpon this condition, that all
persons which would tarrie within the towne, might abide; and all that
would depart with horsse and harnesse onelie, should be permitted:
which offers were accepted, and the towne rendered, whereof the earle
made capteine the earle of Suffolke, and his lieutenant sir Iohn
Fastolfe.

After this, the earle of Salisburie besieged the faire towne of saint
Susan, whereof was capteine one Ambrose de Lore, a right valiant
cheefteine. The earle caused the towne to be assaulted at his first
commmg to it; but he lost more than he gained, and therefore left off
his assaults, and caused a trench to be cast about the towne, and so
planted his batterie, by force whereof he ouerthrew the walles, in such
sort that the capteine offered for himselfe and his soldiers 200000
crownes, so that they might depart in their doublets onelie, which
summe (bicause winter approched) was accepted, and the towne yeelded.
Of this towne sir Iohn Popham was made capteine. Then the erle went to
Maine la Iuhez, which towne after fiue weekes siege was yeelded, and
appointed to the keeping of sir Iohn Montgomerie, knight.

After the feast of the Purification of our ladie, the earle of
Salisburie besieged the castell de la Fert Barnard; during which siege
a sale was made of the towne of Alanson being in the Englishmens
possession, by a Gascoigne that was one of the garrison there. But
this sale being opened to the erle of Salisburie by the same Gascoigne
at the daie appointed, the lord Willoughbie and sir Iohn Fastolfe,
with two thousand men were sent to incounter with the buiers of that
towne; so that when Charles de Villiers cheefe merchant of this ware,
came earlie in a morning with two hundred horsemen, and three hundred
footmen, and approached the towne, abiding for the Gascoigne, yer he
was aware, the Englishmen had compassed him and his companie round
about, and setting vpon the Frenchmen, slue and tooke all the whole
number of them, saue Peter Danthenazie and fiue and twentie other,
which by the swiftnesse of their horsses saued themselues.

[Sidenote: Generall processions after victorie.]

After this conflict, the lord Willoughbie returned to the earle of
Salisburie, lieng still at siege before the towne de la Fert Barnard,
which shortlie after was rendered vp into the erle of Salisburies
hands, to whome the lord regent gaue it, to inioie to him and his
heires for euer. Beside this, the said earle partlie by assalt, &
partlie by composition tooke diuers other, as saint Kales; where he
made capteine Richard Gethin esquier; Thanceaux Lermitage, where he
made gouernour Matthew [3]Gough; Guerland of the which he assigned
ruler Iohn Banaster; Malicorne, whereof he made capteine William
Glasdale esquier; Lisle Soubz Boulton, whereof was made capteine sir
Lancelot Lisle knight; Loupelland, whereof was made capteine Henrie
Branch; Montseur, of the which was made capteine sir William Oldhall
knight: la Suze was assigned to the keeping of Iohn Suffolke, esquier.
And besides this, aboue fortie castels and piles were ouerthrowne and
destroied. The newes hereof reported in England, caused great reioising
among the people, not onelie for the conquest of so manie townes &
fortresses, but also for that it had pleased God to giue them victorie
in a pitched field: whereof generall processions were appointed, to
render vnto God humble thanks for his fauour so bestowed vpon them.

[3] Or rather Goche.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 3.]

[Sidenote: A subsidie of tunnage and poundage.]

This yeare after Easter, the king called a parlement at Westminster,
by aduise of the peeres; and comming to the parlement house himselfe,
he was conueied through the citie vpon a great courser, with great
triumph, the people flocking into the streets to behold the child,
whome they iudged to haue the liuelie image and countenance of his
father, and like to succeed him, and be his heire in all princelie
qualities, martiall policies, and morall vertues, aswell as in his
realmes, seigniories and dominions. In this parlement was granted to
the king a subsidie of twelue pence the pound, towards the maintenance
of his warres, of all merchandize, comming in or going out of the
realme, as well of Englishmen as strangers.

[Sidenote: The prince of Portingale commeth to London.]

During which parlement, came to London Peter duke of Quimbre, sonne to
the king of Portingale, cousine germane remooued to the king; which
of the duke of Excester and the bishop of Winchester his vncles was
highlie feasted, he was also elected into the order of the garter.
During the same season, Edmund Mortimer, the last earle of March, of
that name (which long time had beene restreined from his libertie,
and finallie waxed lame) deceassed without issue, whose inheritance
descended to the lord Richard Plantagenet, sonne and heire to Richard
earle of Cambridge, beheaded (as before yee haue heard) at the towne of
Southampton. [pilcrow] In the time of this parlement also was sir Iohn Mortimer
cousine to the same earle, either for desert or malice, atteinted of
treason, and put to execution, of whose death no small slander arose
amongst the common people.

After all these things doone in England and in France, Humfreie duke of
Glocester, who had married the ladie Iaquet, or Iaqueline of Bauier,
countesse of Heinault, Holland, and Zeland (notwithstanding she was
coupled in marriage afore to Iohn duke of Brabant, as yet liuing, and
had continued with him a long space) passed now the sea with the said
ladie, and went to Mons or Bergen in Heinault, where the more part of
the people of that countrie came and submitted themselues vnto him, as
to their souereigne lord, in right of his said wife, the ladie Iaquet
or Iaqueline: with which dooing hir former husband was greatlie mooued.
And likewise the duke of Burgognie, being great friend to the same duke
of Brabant, was much offended: who of old familiaritie wrote louinglie
to the duke of Glocester, requiring him to reforme himselfe according
to reason, and to forsake his vngodlie life, both in keeping of an
other mans wife, and also in seeking to vsurpe other mens rights and
titles.

Herevpon went letters betwixt them for a time, but at length when
the duke of Burgognie perceiued that the duke of Glocester meant to
mainteine his interest, & to make warre against the duke of Brabant; he
tooke part with the duke of Brabant so earnestlie, that he consented to
fight with the duke of Glocester bodie to bodie within lists in defence
of the duke of Brabants quarell, and further aided the duke of Brabant
in his warres against the duke of Glocester, with all his puissance,
insomuch that in the end (after the duke of Glocesters returne into
England) the duke of Brabant recouered all the towns in Heinault, which
the ladie Iaquet or Iaqueline held against him. And further the same
ladie was by composition deliuered by them of the towne of Mons vnto
the duke of Burgognie; who caused hir to be conueied vnto Gant, from
whence she made shift to escape into Holland, where she was obeied as
countesse of the countrie.

Then made she warre in hir owne defense against the dukes of Burgognie
and Brabant, who sought to spoile hir of all hir towns and lands: but
they procured pope Martin the fift (before whome the matter was) to
giue sentence that the first matrimonie with the duke of Brabant was
good, and the second with the duke of Glocester to be vnlawfull. But
in the meane time, the lord Fitz Walter was sent ouer to the aid of
the ladie Iaquet or Iaquelin, with a power of Englishmen, landed in
Zeland, neere vnto the towne of Zerixe, aginst whome came the duke of
Burgognie, and incountering with them and other such Hollanders and
Zelanders, as were ioined with them, neere to a place called Brewers
hauen, there discomfited them; so that of English, Hollanders, and
Zelanders, with the said lord Fitz Walter, were slaine seauen or eight
hundred, and the residue chased to the water. At length, when the duke
of Glocester vnderstood the sentence pronounced against him by the
pope, he began to wax wearie of his wife the said ladie Iaquet, by
whome he neuer had profit, but losse, and tooke in a second marriage
Eleanor Cobham, daughter to the lord Cobham of Sterberow, which before
(as the fame went) was his souereigne paramour, to his slander and
dishonour.

[Sidenote: Alias Bowron.]

[Sidenote: Twentie thousand hath _Nicholas Giles_. ]

[Sidenote: S. Iames de Beuuron besieged.]

A little before this time, sir Thomas Rampston, sir Philip Branch, sir
Nicholas Burdet, and other Englishmen, to the number of fiue hundred
men of warre, repared and fortified the towne of S. Iames de Beuuron,
situate on the frontiers of Normandie towards Britaine, within halfe a
league of the duke of Britains ground, with whome as then they had open
warre; and so began to doo manie displeasures to his people. Wherevpon
Arthur earle of Richmont and Yurie, brother to the said duke, and
latelie before created constable of France, assembled an huge power of
men to the number of fortie thousand (as some haue written) and with
the same came before the said towne of S. Iames de Beuuron, and planted
his siege verie stronglie about it, inforcing with his great ordinance
to ouerthrow the wals. And one day amongst other, he determined to giue
the assault, and so did, the which continued a long space verie hot and
earnest.

[Sidenote: Sir Nicholas Burdet.]

[Sidenote: _Enguerant de Monstreller._]

The Britons Britonants were come downe into a low bottome, where there
was a little pond or fish poole, and they must needs passe by a streict
waie to come to the walles in great danger. On that side of the towne
was a little bulworke, which sir Nicholas Burdet kept, hauing with him
a fortie or eightie fighting men: and ouer against the same bulworke
there was a gate well furnished also with English souldiers; so that
the Britons which came downe into the ditches in great number to giue
the assault, heard on either side them the Englishmen (within the
said bulworke and gate) make a great noise, in crieng Salisburie and
Suffolke; with the which crie the Britons being maruelouslie astonied,
began to recoile in great disorder. And therewith the said sir Nicholas
Burdet issued foorth vpon them, and pursuing them right valiantlie,
slue them downe, so that there died of them what by the sword, and what
by drowning in the said poole, about seauen thousand or eight hundred,
and to the number of fiftie were taken prisoners. And beside this,
those Englishmen gained eighteene standards and one baner.

Incontinentlie the newes hereof were reported to the constable of
France, who was busie at the assault on the other side of the towne,
whereof he was sore displeased, and no lesse amazed; so that he caused
the retreit to be sounded, for all the siege on that side toward the
poole was alreadie raised. After this, vpon counsell taken amongst the
Frenchmen, it was determined that they should dislodge: and so about
the middest of the next night, the constable and all the residue of
his people departed toward Fougiers, leauing behind them great plentie
of artillerie both great and small, with victuals, and all their other
prouisions: as fourteene great guns and fortie barrels of powder,
three hundred pipes of wine, two hundred pipes of bisket and flower,
two hundred frailes of figs and reisins, and fiue hundred barrels of
herrings.

[Sidenote: Dissention betwixt the duke of Glocester and the bishop of
Winchester.]

Somewhat before this season fell a great diuision in the realme of
England, which of a sparkle was like to haue grown to a great flame.
For whether the bishop of Winchester called Henrie Beaufort, sonne to
Iohn duke of Lancaster by his third wife, enuied the authoritie of
Humfrie duke of Glocester, protectour of the realme; or whether the
duke disdained at the riches and pompous estate of the bishop: sure it
is that the whole realme was troubled with them and their partakers:
so that the citizens of London were faine to keepe dailie and nightlie
watches, and to shut vp their shops for feare of that which was
doubted to haue insued of their assembling of people about them. The
archbishop of Canturburie and the duke of Quimbre, called the prince of
Portingale, rode eight times in one daie betweene the two parties, and
so the matter was staied for a time. But the bishop of Winchester, to
cleere himselfe of blame so farre as he might, and to charge his nephue
the lord protectour with all the fault, wrote a letter to the regent of
France, the tenor whereof insueth.




The bishop of Winchesters letter excusatorie.


Right high and mightie prince, and my right noble, and after one,
lieuest lord, I recommend me vnto you with all my hart. And as you
desire the welfare of the king our souereigne lord, and of his realmes
of England and France, your owne health, and ours also: so hast you
hither. For by my truth, if you tarie, we shall put this land in
aduenture with a field; such a brother you haue here, God make him a
good man. For your wisedome knoweth, that the profit of France standeth
in the welfare of England, &c. Written in great hast on All hallowen
euen. By your true seruant to my liues end, Henrie Winchester.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: A parlement holden at Leicester.]

The duke of Bedford being sore greeued and disquieted with these newes,
constituted the earle of Warwike, which was latelie come into France
with six thousand men, his lieutenant in the French dominions, and in
the duchie of Normandie; and so with a small companie, he with the
duchesse his wife returned againe ouer the seas into England, and the
tenth daie of Ianuarie he was with all solemnitie receiued into London,
to whome the citizens gaue a paire of basins of siluer and gilt, and
a thousand markes in monie. Then from London he rode to Westminster,
and was lodged in the kings palace. The fiue and twentith daie of
March after his comming to London, a parlement began at the towne of
Leicester; where the duke of Bedford openlie rebuked the lords in
generall, bicause that they in the time of warre, thorough their priuie
malice and inward grudge, had almost mooued the people to warre and
commotion, in which time all men ought or should be of one mind, hart,
and consent: requiring them to defend, serue, & dread their souereigne
lord king Henrie, in performing his conquest in France, which was in
manner brought to conclusion. In this parlement the duke of Glocester
laid certeine articles to the bishop of Winchester his charge, the
which with the answers hereafter doo insue; as followeth.




The articles of accusation and accord betweene the lord of Glocester,
and the lord of Winchester.


[Sidenote: Articles set foorth by the duke of Glocester, against Henrie
bishop of Winchester.]

Here insueth the articles, as the kings councell hath concerned, the
which the high and mightie prince my lord of Glocester hath surmised
vpon my lord of Winchester chancellor of England, with the answer to
the same.

1 First, whereas he being protectour, and defendour of this land,
desired the Tower to be opened to him, and to lodge him therein;
Richard Wooduile esquier (hauing at that time the charge of the keeping
of the Tower) refused his desire and kept the same Tower against
him vndulie and against reason, by the commandement of my said lord
of Winchester; and afterward in approouing of the said refusall, he
receiued the said Wooduile, and cherished him against the state and
worship of the king, and of my said lord of Glocester.

2 Item, my said lord of Winchester, without the aduise and assent of my
said lord of Glocester, or of the kings councell, purposed and disposed
him to set hand on the kings person, and to haue remooued him from
Eltham, the place that he was in, to Windsor, to the intent to put him
in gouernance as him list.

3 Item, that were my said lord of Glocester (to whome of all persons
that should be in the land, by the waie of nature and birth, it
belongeth to see the gouernance of the kings person) informed of the
said vndue purpose of my said lord of Winchester declared in the
article next abouesaid, and in letting thereof, determining to haue
gone to Eltham vnto the king to haue prouided as the cause required;
my said lord of Winchester vntrulie, and against the kings peace, to
the intent to trouble my said lord of Glocester going to the king,
purposing his death, in case that he had gone that waie, set men of
armes and archers at the end of London bridge next Suthworke: and in
forebarring of the kings high waie, let draw the chaine of the stoupes
there, and set vp pipes and hurdles in manner and forme of bulworks:
and set men in chambers, cellars & windowes, with bowes and arrowes and
other weapons, to the intent to bring finall destruction to my said
lord of Glocesters person, as well as of those that then should come
with him.

4 Item, my said lord of Glocester saith and affirmeth, that our
souereigne lord his brother that was king Henrie the fift, told him on
a time, when our souereigne lord being prince was lodged in the palace
of Westminster in the great chamber, by the noise of a spaniell, there
was on a night a man spied and taken behind a [4]tapet of the said
chamber, the which man was deliuered to the earle of Arundell to be
examined vpon the cause of his being there at that time; the which so
examined, at that time confessed that he was there by the stirring and
procuring of my said lord of Winchester, ordeined to haue slaine the
said prince therein his bed: wherefore the said earle of Arundell let
sacke him foorthwith, and drowned him in the Thames.

[4] Or hanging.

5 Item, our souereigne lord that was, king Henrie the fift, said vnto
my said lord of Glocester, that his father king Henrie the fourth
liuing, and visited then greatlie with sickenesse by the hand of God,
my said lord of Winchester said vnto the king (Henrie the fift then
being prince) that the king his father so visited with sicknesse was
not personable, & therfore not disposed to come in conuersation and
gouernance of the people; and for so much, counselled him to take the
gouernance and crowne of this land vpon him.




The answer of the bishop.


Here insue the answers to the accusations made by my lord of Winchester
chancellour of England, vnto the causes and matters of heauinesse,
declared in the articles against him by my lord of Glocester.

1 First, as of the refusall made vnto my lord of Glocester, of opening
the Tower to him, of his lodging therein, by the commandement of my
said lord of Winchester; he answereth, that in the presence of my said
lord of Glocester before his comming out of his countrie of Heinault,
for causes such as were thought resonable, it seemeth lawfull that
the Tower should haue beene notablie stored and kept with vittels:
howbeit it was not foorthwith executed, and that in likewise after
that my said lord of Glocester, was gone into his said countrie of
Heinault, for seditious and odious billes and languages, cast and vsed
in the citie of London, sounding of insurrection and rebellion against
the kings peace, and destruction aswell of diuerse estates of this
land, as strangers being vnder the defense, in so much that in doubt
thereof, strangers in great number fled the land. And for the more sure
keeping of the said Tower, Richard Wooduile esquier so trusted with
our souereigne lord the king that dead is (as well ye know) & also
chamberlaine and councellor vnto my lord of Bedford, with a certeine
number of defensible persons assigned vnto him, was made deputie there
by the assent of the kings councell, being that time at London, for
to abide therein, for the safegard thereof; and streictlie charged by
the said councell, that during that time of his said charge, he should
not suffer any man to be in the Tower stronger than himselfe, without
speciall charge or commandement of the king by the aduise of his
councell.

2 Item, that soone after (vpon the comming of my said lord of Glocester
into this land from his countrie of Heinault) the said lords of the
kings councell were informed, that my said lord of Glocester grudged
with the said maner of inforcing the Tower, and let saie to them of
London, that he had well vnderstand that they had beene heauilie
threatened for the time of his absence, and other wise than they should
haue beene, if he had beene in this land. Wherefore he was right euill
contented, and especiallie of the said forcing of the Tower, set vpon
them in manner of a chased villain, considering the good equitie and
truth that they had alwaies kept vnto the king, offering them there
vpon remedie if they would.

[Sidenote: Frier Randolph.]

3 Item, that after this, Richard Scot lieutenant of the Tower, by the
commandement of my said lord of Glocester, brought vnto him frier
Randolph, the which had long before confessed treason doone by him
against the kings person that dead is, for the which knowlege he was
put to be kept in the said Tower, & streictlie commanded vnder great
paine giuen vnto the said Scot, to keepe him streictlie & suerlie, &
not to let him out of the said Tower without c[=o]mandment of the king
by aduise of his councell. The which frier Randolph, my said lord of
Glocester kept then with himselfe (not witting to the said Scot) as he
declared to my said lord of Winchester, soone after that he had brought
the said frier Randolph to my lord of Glocester; saieng to my lord of
Winchester, that he was vndoone but he helped him, & expressed, as for
cause of the withholding of frier Randolph: and saieng moreouer, that
when he desired of my said lord of Glocester, the deliuerance of the
said frier Randolph, to lead him againe vnto the Tower, or sufficient
warrant for his discharge: my said lord of Glocester answered him, that
his commandement was sufficient warrant and discharge for him. In the
which thing abouesaid, it was thought to my lord of Winchester, that
my said lord of Glocester tooke vpon him further than his authoritie
stretched vnto, and caused him to doubt and dread, least that he would
haue proceeded further. And at such time as the said Wooduile came
vnto him, to aske his aduice and counsell, of lodging my said lord of
Glocester in the Tower; he aduised and charged him, that before he
suffered my said lord of Glocester, or any person to lodge therein
stronger than himselfe, he should purueie him a sufficient warrant
therof, of the king, by the aduise of his councell.

4 Item, as to the said article of the foresaid causes of heauinesse,
my said lord chancellor answereth, that he neuer purposed to set hand
on the kings person, nor to remoue him, or that he should be remoued,
or put in any manner of gouernance, but by the aduice of the kings
councell. For he could not perceiue any manner of goodnesse or of
aduantage that might haue growne to him thereof, but rather great
perill and charge; and hereof my said lord of Winchester is readie to
make proofe, in time and place conuenient.

5 Item, as to the third article of the foresaid causes and heauines, my
lord chancellor answereth, that he was oft and diuerse times warned,
by diuerse credible persons, aswell at the time of the kings last
parlement, holden at Westminster, as before and since, that my said
lord of Glocester purposed him bodilie harme, & was warned therof and
counselled by the said persons, and that diuerse times, to absteine him
from comming to Westminster as my said lord of Winchester declared vnto
my said lord of Glocester.

6 Item, that in the time of the said parlement, diuerse persons of low
estate of the citie of London, in great number assembled on a day vpon
the wharfe, at the crane of the vinetree, and wished and desired that
they had there the person of my lord of Winchester, saieng that they
would haue throwen him into the Thames, to haue taught him to swim
with wings. Whereof billes and language of slander and threatnings
were cast and spoken in the said citie by my said lord the chancellor,
which caused him to suppose that they that so said and did, willed and
desired his destruction, although they had no cause.

7 Item, that after the comming to London of sir Rafe Botiller, and
maister Lewes, sent from my lord of Bedford, to the rest of the lords
of the councell, they being informed, that my said lord of Glocester
did beare displeasure to my said lord of Winchester, they came to the
said lord of Glocester to his In, the second sundaie next before All
hallowdaie, and there opened vnto him, that they had knowledge and
vnderstanding of the said displeasure, praieng him to let them know if
he bare such displeasure against my said lord of Winchester, and also
the causes thereof. At the which time (as my said lord of Winchester
was afterwards informed) my said lord of Glocester affirmed that he was
heauie toward him, and not without causes that peraduenture he would
put in writing.

8 Item, that after the mondaie next before Allhallondaie last past in
the night, the people of the said citie of London, by the commandement
of my said lord of Glocester, as it was said (for what cause my lord
the chancellor wist not) assembled in the citie, armed and arraied,
and so continued all the night. Amongst diuerse of the which (the
same night by what excitation, my said lord the chancellor wist not)
seditious and heauie language was vsed, and in especiall against the
person of my lord the chancellor. And so the same mondaie at night, my
said lord of Glocester sent vnto the Ins of court at London, charging
them of the court dwelling in the same, to be with him vpon the morrow
at eight of the clocke in their best arraie.

9 Item, that on the morrow being tuesdaie next following, my said lord
of Glocester sent earlie vnto the maior and aldermen of the said citie
of London, to ordeine him to the number of three hundred persons on
horsse backe, to accompanie him vnto such a place as he disposed him to
ride, which (as it was said) was vnto the king, to the intent to haue
his person, and to remoue him from the place that he was in, without
assent or aduise of the kings councell. The which thing was thought
vnto my said lord the chancellor, that he ought in no wise to haue
doone, nor had not beene seene so before.

10 Item, that my said lord the chancellor, considering the things aboue
said, and doubting therefore of perils that might haue insued thereof,
intending to purueie there against, and namelie for his owne suertie
and defense, according to the law of nature, ordeined to let, that no
force of people should come on the bridge of London towards him, by the
which he or his might haue beene indangered or noied, not intending in
any wise bodilie harme vnto my said lord of Glocester, nor to any other
person, but onelie his owne defense, in eschewing the perill abouesaid.

11 Item, as toward the fourth and fift of the said articles, my lord
the chancellor answereth, that he was euer true to all those that were
his souereigne lords and reigned vpon him, and that he neuer purposed
treason or vntruth against any of their persons, and in especiall
against the person of our said souereigne lord Henrie the fift. The
which considering the great wisdome, truth, and manhood that all men
knew in him, he would not for the time that he was king, haue set on
my said lord the chancellor so great trust as he did, if he had found
or thought in him such vntruth. The which thing my said lord the
chancellor offered to declare and shew, as it belongeth to a man of his
estate to doo, requiring therevpon my lord of Bedford and all the lords
spirituall and temporall in this parlement, that it might be seene that
there were iudges conuenient in this case, that they would doo him
right, or else that he might haue leaue of the king by their aduise to
go sue his right, before him that ought to be his iudge.

12 And as toward the letter sent by my lord of Winchester vnto my lord
of Bedford, of the which the tenor is before rehearsed, of the which my
lord of Glocester complained him of the malicious and vntrue purpose
of my said lord of Winchester, as toward the assembling of the people,
and gathering of a field in the kings land, in troubling thereof, and
against the kings peace: my said lord of Winchester answereth, that if
his said letters duelie vnderstand, and in such wise as he vnderstood
and meant in the writing of them, it maie not reasonable be gathered
and taken, that my said lord of Winchester intended to gather any
field, or assemble people in troubling of the kings land, and against
the kings peace, but rather purposed to acquite him to the king in
his truth, and to keepe the rest and peace in the kings land, and to
eschew rebellion, disobedience and all trouble. For by that that in the
beginning of the said letter, he calleth my said lord of Bedford his
lieuest lord after one, that is the king, whome he ought to accept of
dutie of his truth, the which he hath euer kept, and will keepe.

13 Moreouer, in the said letter he desireth the comming home of my lord
of Bedford, for the welfare of the king and of his realmes of England
and of France, which stand principallie in keeping of his rest and
peace, and praieth my said lord of Bedford to speed his c[=o]ming into
England, in eschewing of ieopardie of the land, and of a field, which
he dread him might haue followed if he had long taried. As toward those
words; "If ye tarie, we shall put this land in aduenture with a field,
such a brother ye haue here, &c." My said lord of Winchester saith,
the sooth is: before or he wrote the said letter, by the occasion of
certeine ordinances made by the maior and aldermen of London against
the excessiue taking of masons, carpentars, tilers, plasterers, and
other labourers for their dailie iournies, and approued by the kings
deuise and councell, there were cast manie heauinesses and seditious
billes vnder the names of such labourers, threatning rising with manie
thousands, and menacing of estates of the land, and likewise seditious
and euill language sowen and so continued and likelie to haue insued,
of purpose and intent of disobedience and rebellion. To the redressing
of which, it seemed to my lord the chancellor, that my said lord of
Glocester did not his indeuour diligence that he might haue shewed. For
lacke of which diligence, they that were disposed to doo disobeisance
were incouraged & imboldned, so that it was like, that they should haue
made a gathering, and that the king and his true subiects should haue
beene compelled to haue made a field to haue withstand them; the which
field making, had beene aduenturing of this land, and in tokening that
it was neuer my said lord chancellors intent, to gather no field, but
as truth most stirred him against such as riotouslie would make such
assemblie against our souereigne lord, and the weale of this land, he
desired so hastilie the comming of my said lord of Bedford: the which
he would in no wise haue so greatlie desired, if he would haue purposed
him vnto any vnlawful making of a field; for he wist well, that my said
lord of Bedford would most sharplie haue chastised and punished all
those, that so would make any riotous assemblie.




When this answer was made, the duke caused this writing following
openlie to be proclamed.


Be it knowne to all folkes, that it is the intent of my lord of
Bedford, and all the lords spirituall & temporall, assembled in this
present parlement, to acquite him and them, and to proceed truelie,
iustlie, and indifferentlie, without any parcialitie in any maner or
matter or quarels, moued or to be moued betweene my lord of Glocester
on that one partie, & my lord of Winchester chancellor of England
on that other partie. And for suer keeping of the kings peace it is
accorded by my said lord of Bedford, & by my said lords spirituall and
temporall, an oth to be made in forme as followeth, that is to saie.




The oth of the lords.


That my said lord of Bedford, and my said lords, spirituall and
temporall, and ech of them shall (as far forth as their cunnings and
discretions suffice) trulie, iustlie, and indifferentlie counsell and
aduise the king, and also proceed and acquit themselues in all the said
matters, and quarels, without that they or any of them shall priuilie
and apertlie make or shew himselfe to be partie or parciall therein,
not leauing or eschewing so to doo for affection, loue, meed, doubt, or
dread of any person or persons. And that they shall in all wise keepe
secret all that shall be commoned by waie of councell, in the matters
and quarrels abouesaid, in the said parlement, without that they or
any of them shall by word, writing of the king, or in any wise open or
discouer it to any of the said parties, or to any other person that is
not of the said councell: but if he haue a speciall commandement or
leaue therevnto of the king or my said lord of Bedford. And that ech of
them shall with all his might and power, assist by waie of counsell,
or else shew it vnto the king, my lord of Bedford, and to the rest of
my said lords to put the said parties to reason; and not to suffer
that any of the said parties by them, or by their assistance, proceed
or attempt by way of fight against the kings peace; nor helpe, assist,
or comfort any of them thereto: but let them with all their might and
power withstand them, and assist vnto the king, and my said lord of
Bedford, in keeping of the kings peace, and redressing all such manner
of proceeding by waie of fight or force.

Dukes: the duke of Bedford, the duke of Norffolke, the duke of
Excester. Bishops: the archbishop of Ca[=n]turburie, the bishop of
Carleill, the bishop of Bath, the bishop of Landaffe, the bishop of
Rochester, the bishop of Chichester, the bishop of Worcester, the
bishop of saint Dauids, the bishop of London, the bishop of Duresme.
Earles: the earle of Northumberland, the earle of Stafford, the earle
of Oxford. Lords: the lord Hungerford, the lord Tiptost, the lord
Poinings, the lord Cromwell, the lord Borough, the lord Louell, the
lord Botreux, the lord Clinton, the lord Zouch, the lord Audeleie,
the lord Ferreis of Groubie, the lord Talbot, the lord Roos, the
lord Greie, the lord Greie of Ruthen, the lord Fitz Walter, the lord
Barkeleie. Abbats: the abbat of Waltham, the abbat of Glastenburie, the
abbat of S. Augustines in Canturburie, the abbat of Westminster, the
abbat of S. Maries in Yorke, the abbat of S. Albons not sworne bicause
he was not present. [pilcrow] Which oth in manner and forme aboue rehearsed,
all the lords aswell spirituall as temporall, being in this parlement
at Leicester assembled, the fourth day of March, promised vpon their
faith, dutie, and allegiance, which they owe to the king their
souereigne lord, truelie to obserue and keepe, according to the true
meaning and purport of the same.




The Arbitrement.


In the name of God Amen. We Henrie archbishop of Canturburie, Thomas
duke of Excester, Iohn duke of Norffolke, Thomas bishop of Duresme,
Philip bishop of Worcester, Iohn bishop of Bath, Humfrie earle of
Stafford, William Alnwicke keeper of the kings priuie seale, Rafe lord
Cromwell, arbitrators in all maner of causes, matters and quarrels
of heauinesses & greeuances, with all incidents, circumstances,
dependents, or connexes being and hanging betweene the high & worthie
prince Humfrie duke of Glocester on the one partie, and the worshipful
father in God Henrie bishop of Winchester and chancellor of England
on the other partie, by either of them, for the pleasing of the said
quarrels and debates taken and chosen in maner and forme as it is
conteined more plainelie in a compromise made therevpon, of the which
the tenor insueth in this forme.

[Sidenote: 1424]

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 4.]

Memorandum, the seauenth daie of March in the fourth yeare of our
souereigne lord the king, Henrie the sixt, the high and mightie
prince Humfrie duke of Glocester at the reuerence of God, and for the
good of the king our souereigne lord in this land, & namelie at the
reuerence, and especiallie at the request and praier of the mightie
and high prince my lord of Bedford his brother, agreed him to put, and
putteth all maner matters and quarels indeed, with all their incidents,
circumstances, dependents and connexes that touchen him and his person,
that he hath in anie wise doo, or feeleth himselfe greeued or heauie
against my lord his vncle, my lord of Winchester: or else that my lord
of Winchester findeth him agreeued against him, in as much as they
touch him or his person from the beginning of the world vnto this daie,
in the aduise, ordinance and arbitrement of the worthie father in God,
Henrie archbishop of Canturburie, the high and noble prince Thomas duke
of Excester, and Iohn duke of Norffolke, the worshipful father in God
Thomas bishop of Duresme, Philip bishop of Worcester, Iohn bishop of
Bath, the noble lord Humfrie earle of Stafford, the worshipfull persons
maister William Alnewicke keeper of the kings priuie seale, and Rafe
lord Cromwell, promising and behighting by the faith of his bodie, &
word of his princehood and kings sonne, to doo, keepe, obserue, and
fulfill for him and his behalfe, all that shall be declared, ordeined,
and arbitrated, by the foresaid archbishop, dukes, bishops, earle,
keeper of the priuie seale, and lord Cromwell in all matters and
quarels abouesaid.

Granting also and promising ouer that, to be comprehended in the
foresaid arbitrement, as toward putting awaie all heauinesses and
displeasures, in anie wise conteined, by my lord of Glocester against
all those that haue in anie wise assisted, counselled, or fauoured
vnto his said vncle of Winchester, and as toward anie matters that
be touching my lord of Glocester, remitteth it, and the gouernance
thereof vnto the king & his councell, they to deeme it by the aduise
of his councell, as him thinketh it to be doone. In witnesse of the
which thing to this present compromise my said lord of Glocester hath
subscribed his name with his owne hand: Humfreie Glocester. And in like
forme my lord of Winchester in another compromise hath subscribed with
his owne hand vnder the word of his priesthood, to stand at the aduise,
ordinance, & arbitrement of the persons abouesaid, Mutatis mutandis.

       *       *       *       *       *

A decree or order taken by the kings councell for the pacifieng
  of the quarels and variances that were betweene the duke of
  Glocester, and the bishop of Winchester.

The causes aforesaid and quarels by vs seene, heard, and diligentlie
examined and decreed, by the assent of the said parties, ordeine and
award, that my lords of Glocester and of Winchester, for any thing
doone or spoken, by that one partie against that other, or by anie of
theirs, or anie other person or persons, afore the seuenth daie of
this present moneth of March, neuer hereafter take causes, quarels,
displeasures, or heauinesses, that one against the other, ne neither
against the counsellers, adherents, or fauourers of that other for
anie thing or things that are past. And that my said lord of Glocester
be good lord to my said lord of Winchester, & haue him in loue and
affection as his kinsman & vncle. And that my said lord of Winchester
haue to my said lord of Glocester true and sad loue and affection, doo
and be readie to doo him such seruice as apperteineth of honestie to my
said lord of Winchester and his estate to doo. And that each of them be
good lord vnto all those adherents, counsellers, and fauourers of that
other, and shew them at all times fauourable loue and affection, as for
anie thing by them doone or said, before the seauenth daie of March.

And we decree, ordeine, and award, that my said lord of Winchester,
in the presence of the king our souereigne lord, my lord of Bedford,
and my lord of Glocester, and the residue of the lords spirituall and
temporall, and commons being in this this present parlement, saie and
declare in maner and forme that followeth: My souereigne lord, I haue
well vnderstand, that I am noised among the states of your land, how
that the king our souereigne lord that was, at that time being prince,
and lodged in the great chamber at Westminster, by the baieng of a
spaniell, there was on a night taken behind a [5]tapet in the same
chamber, a man, that should haue confessed, that he was there by mine
excitation and procuring, to haue slaine the foresaid prince there in
his bed; wherevpon he was sacked, and foorthwith also drowned in the
Thames.

[5] Or hanging.

Furthermore, I am accused, how that I should haue stirred the king
that last died, the time also that he was prince, to haue taken the
gouernance of this realme, and the crowne vpon him, his father liuing
the same time, being king. Through which language and noising, I
feele my name and fame greatlie enblemished in diuerse mens opinions.
Wherevpon, I take first God to my witnes, and after all the world, that
I haue beene at all times, and am true louer, and true man, to you my
souereigne lord, and shall be all my life. And also, I haue beene to my
souereigne lord that was your father, all the time of his reigne, true
man, and for such he tooke me, trusted me and cherished me to his liues
end; and as I trust, no man will affirme the contrarie, nor neuer in my
life procuring nor imagining death nor destruction of his person, ne
assenting to any such thing, or like thereto, the time that he was king
or prince, or else in other state.

I was likewise true man to king Henrie the fourth; all the time that he
was my souereigne lord, and reigned vpon me. In which matters, in all
maner of wise that it liketh to you my souereigne lord for to command
me, I am readie for to declare me: and furthermore, where, how, and
when it shall like you, by the aduise of your councell, to assigne
me. Wherefore I beseech you my souereigne lord, as humblie as I can,
considering that there is no grounded processe, by the which I might
lawfullie in these matters abouesaid, be conuict (blessed be God) to
hold me, and declare me, by the aduise of all the lords, spirituall
and temporall, being in this present parlement, true man to you my
souereigne lord, and so to haue beene vnto my souereigne lords that
were your father and grandfather, and true man also to haue beene at
all times to your said father whilest he was prince, or else in anie
other estate, the said slander and noise notwithstanding, and this same
declaration to be inacted in this your said present parlement.

The which words declared in maner as it is abouesaid, it seemeth to
my said lords the arbitrators, that it is meet, that my said lord of
Winchester draw him apart, and in the meane time, the lords being
present, be singularlie examined therevpon, and saie their aduise.
And if it be assented by them, in maner as my said lord of Winchester
desireth, let him be called againe, and that then my lord of Bedford
haue these words in effect that follow: Faire vncle, the king my lord
by the aduise of his councell, hath commanded me to saie to you, that
he hath well vnderstand and considered all the matters which yee haue
heere openlie declared in his presence, and therevpon yee desire a
petition, that he will declare you, and by the aduise and assent of
the lords spirituall and temporall, being in this present parlement,
he declareth you a true man to him, and that yee haue so beene to my
lord his father, and grandfather, also true man to my lord his father
while he was prince, or else in anie other estate, the said dislander
and noising notwithstanding, and will that the said declaration be so
inacted in this present parlement.

After the which words thus said (as before is declared) it was decreed
also by the said lords arbitrators, that the said lord of Winchester
should haue these words that follow vnto my said lord of Glocester: My
lord of Glocester, I haue conceiued to my great heauinesse, that yee
should haue receiued by diuerse reports, that I should haue purposed
and imagined against your person, honor, and estate, in diuerse maners,
for the which, yee haue taken against me great displeasure: Sir, I
take God to my witnesse, that what reports so euer haue beene to you
of me, peraduenture of such as haue had no great affection to me, God
forgiue it them, I neuer imagined, ne purposed anie thing that might be
hindering or preiudice to your person, honor, or estate: and therefore
I praie you, that yee be vnto me good lord from this time foorth;
for by my will, I gaue neuer other occasion, nor purpose not to doo
hereafter by the grace of God. The which words so by him said, it was
decreed by the same arbitrators, that my lord of Glocester, should
answer and saie: Faire vncle, sith yee declare you such a man, as yee
saie, I am right glad that it is so, and for such a man I take you.
And when this was doone, it was decreed by the same arbitrators, that
euerie each of my lord of Glocester, and Winchester, should take either
other by the hand, in the presence of the king and all the parlement,
in signe and token of good loue & accord, the which was doone, and the
parlement adiorned till after Easter.

       *       *       *       *       *

At this reconciliation, such as loued peace reioised (sith it is a
fowle & pernicious thing for priuat men, much more for noblemen to
be at variance, sith vpon them depend manie in affections diuerse,
whereby factions might grow to the shedding of bloud) though others, to
whom contention & hartgrudge is delight, wished to see the vttermost
mischeefe that might therof insue, which is the vtter ouerthrow and
desolation of populous tribes, euen as with a litle sparkle whole
houses are manie times consumed to ashes; as the old prouerbe saith,
and that verie well and aptlie;

    Sola scintilla perit haec domus aut domus illa

But when the great fier of this dissention, betweene these two noble
personages, was thus by the arbitrators (to their knowledge and
iudgement) vtterlie quenched out, and laid vnder boord; all other
controuersies betweene other lords, taking part with the one partie or
the other, were appeased, and brought to concord, so that for ioy the
king caused a solemne fest to be kept on Whitsundaie; on which daie he
created Richard Plantagenet, sonne and heire to the erle of Cambridge,
(whome his father at Southampton had put to death, as before yee haue
heard) duke of Yorke, not foreseeing that this preferment should be
his destruction, nor that his seed should of his generation be the
extreame end and finall conclusion. He the same daie also promoted Iohn
lord Mowbraie, and earle marshall, sonne and heire to Thomas duke of
Norffolke (by king Richard the second exiled this realme) to the title,
name, and stile of duke of Norffolke.

During this feast, the duke of Bedford adorned the king with the
high order of knighthood, who on the same daie dubbed with the sword
these knights, whose names insue: Richard duke of Yorke, Iohn duke
of Norffolke; the earle of Westmerland, Henrie lord Persie, Iohn
lord Butler, sonne to the earle of Ormond, the lord Rosse, the lord
Matrauers, the lord Welles, the lord Barkelie; sir Iames Butler, sir
Henrie Greie of Tankaruile, sir Iohn Talbot, sir Rafe Greie of Warke,
sir Robert Veere, sir Richard Greie, sir Edmund Hungerford, sir Walter
Wingfield, sir Iohn Butler, sir Reginald Cobham, sir Iohn Passheleu,
sir Thomas Tunstall, sir Iohn Chedocke, sir Rafe Langstre, sir William
Drurie, sir William ap Thomas, sir Richard Carnonell, sir Richard
Wooduile, sir Iohn Shirdlow, sir Nicholas Blunket, sir William Cheinie
iustice, sir William Babington, sir Rafe Butler, sir Robert Beauchampe,
sir Edmund Trafford, sir Iohn Iune cheefe baron, and diuerse others.

[Sidenote: The duke of Excester dieth.]

After this solemne feast ended, a great aid and subsidie was granted
for the continuance of the conquest in France, and so therevpon monie
was gathered, and men were prepared in euerie citie, towne, and
countrie. During which businesse, Thomas duke of Excester, great vncle
to the king, a right sage and discreet councellor, departed out of this
mortall life, at his manor of Greenewich, and with all funerall pompe
was conueied through London to Berrie, and there buried. [pilcrow] In the same
yeare also died the ladie Elizabeth, halfe sister to the same duke, and
of the whole bloud with king Henrie the fourth, maried first to the
lord Iohn Holland, duke of Excester, and after to the lord Fanhope,
buried at the blacke friers of London.

[Sidenote: _Fr. Thin._]

[Sidenote: 1425]

[Philip Morgan after the death of Iohn Fortham (sometime treasuror of
England, bishop of Elie and Durham, both which bishopriks, for anie
thing that I can yet see, he inioied both at one time) was made bishop
of Elie in the yeare of our redemption 1425, in this sort. Henrie the
sixt and manie of the nobilitie had written to the conuent of the
church of Elie, to choose William Alnewicke (doctor of both lawes
confessor to the king and keeper of the priuie seale) to be their
bishop. Notwithstanding which (they hauing more regard to their owne
priuileges and benefit) chose Peter the prior of Elie to succeed in
the place of Iohn Fortham. But none of both these inioied that roome;
for Martin bishop of Rome (stepping into the matter to make the third
part, neither fauouring the kings motion nor approouing the monks
election) remooued this William Morgan from the see of Worcester vnto
Elie, sometime called Helix: as I haue seene it set downe in Saxon
characters in an ancient booke of the liues of saints written in the
Saxon toong, about the yeare of Christ 1010, before the time of Edward
the confessor, and much about the time of Albo Floriacensis. This
Morgan sat at Elie nine yeares, twentie and six weeks, and foure daies,
departing this life in his manour of Hatfield, in the yeare 1434, and
was buried at the Charterhouse of London; being the twentie and fourth
bishop that was installed in that place.]

[Sidenote: 1426]

While these things were thus a dooing in England, the earle of Warwike,
lieutenant for the regent in France, entered into the countrie of
Maine, & besieged the towne of Chateau de loire, the which shortlie to
him was rendered, whereof he made capteine Matthew [6]Gough, esquier.
After this, he tooke by assault the castell of Maiet, and gaue it for
his valiantnesse to Iohn Winter esquier, and after that he conquered
the castell of Lude, and made there capteine William Gladesdale
gentleman. Here he was informed, that the Frenchmen were assembled in
the countrie of Beausse, wherevpon he hasted thitherwards to haue giuen
them battell, but they hauing knowledge of his approch, durst not abide
to trie the matter with him by a pight field, but fled before he came
neere them.

[6] Or rather Goche. Iohn Winter.

[Sidenote: The earle of Warwike made gouernour of the yoong king.]

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 5.]

The earle in his returne wan the castell of Montdublean by surrender;
where he left the valiant lord Willoughbie, and then returned to Paris.
During which season, he was ordeined by the three estates of the realme
of England, to be gouernour of the yoong king in the place of the duke
of Excester deceassed; howbeit, he did not as yet returne into England,
but remained in France for a season, and atchiued manie worthie
enterprises. Whilest the lord regent of France was thus in England,
meanes was made by the duke of Burgognie, for the deliuerie of the duke
of Alanson, taken at the battell of Vernoile, and now for the summe
of two hundred thousand crownes he was set at libertie; but he would
not by anie meanes acknowlege the king of England to be his liege and
souereigne lord.

[Sidenote: 1427.]

[Sidenote: The bishop of Winchester made a cardinall.]

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

After that the duke of Bedford had set all things in good order in
England, he tooke leaue of the king, and togither with his wife
returned into France, first landing at Calis, where the bishop
of Winchester (that also passed the seas with him) receiued the
habit, hat, and dignitie of a cardinall, with all ceremonies to it
apperteining: which promotion, the late K. right deeplie persing into
the vnrestrainable ambitious mind of the man, that euen from his youth
was euer to checke at the highest; and also right well ascerteined
with what intollerable pride his head should soone be swollen vnder
such a hat: did therefore all his life long keepe this prelat backe
from that presumptuous estate. But now the king being yoong and the
regent his freend, he obteined his purpose, to his great profit, and
the impouerishing of the spiritualtie of this realme. For by a bull
legantin, which he purchased from Rome, he gathered so much treasure,
that no man in maner had monie but he: so that he was called the rich
cardinall of Winchester.

[Sidenote: The lord of Rustinian taken and his people slaine and
discomfited.]

After that the lord regent was arriued in France, the lord of
Rustinian, marshall of Britaine, assembled a great companie of the
British nation, which fortified and repared the towne of Pontorson:
and after the said marshall, with a thousand men, entered into the
countrie of Constantine, and comming before the towne of Auranches, was
incountered by the Englishmen of that garrison; & after long fight, his
people were put to the worse, chased, and discomfited, and he himselfe
taken prisoner in the field. The duke of Bedford, hearing that the
towne of Pontorson, situate within leagues of Mont Saint Michaell, was
newlie fortified, and stronglie defended, sent thither the earle of
Warwike, accompanied with the lord Scales, and other valiant capteins
and souldiers, to the number of seauen thousand men, to besiege the
towne; who so inuironed it on euerie side, that no man could steale
neither in nor out.

The siege thus long continuing, vittels began to wax scant in the
English armie: wherefore the lord Scales, hauing in his companie sir
Iohn Harpeleie bailiffe of Constantine, sir William Brearton bailiffe
of Caen, sir Rafe Tesson, sir Iohn Carbonell, and three thousand good
men of warre, departed from the siege to get vittels, powder, and other
things necessarie for their purpose. And as they were returning with
their cariages by the sea coast, neere to Saint Michaels Mount, they
suddenlie were incountered by their enimies, whereof were cheefe, the
baron of Coloses, the lord Dausebost, capteine of the said Mount, the
lord Mountabon, the lord Montburchier, the lord of Chateaugiron, the
lord of Tintignat, the lord of Chateaubrian, with six thousand men of
warre.

[Sidenote: A hot skirmish.]

[Sidenote: On the cene thursdaie.]

[Sidenote: _Enguerant._]

The lord Scales and his companie, perceiuing themselues beset on the
one side with the sea, & on the other with their enimies, alighted from
their horsses, and like couragious persons, there in an vnspeakeable
furie, set on their enimies. The fight was fierce & cruell. The
Englishmen kept themselues close togither; so that their enimies
could get no aduantage of them. At the last, the lord Scales cried S.
George they flee. Wherevpon, the Englishmen tooke such courage, and
the Frenchmen that fought before, were so dismaied, that they began to
flee in deed. The Englishmen leaped on horssebacke, and followed them
so, that they slue and tooke aboue eleuen hundred persons, among the
which were taken the baron of Coloses, the vicount of Rone, and others.
The lord of Chateaugiron, with a Scotish capteine, & diuerse other men
of name were slaine. After this victorie, the lord Scales with his
vittels, prouision, and prisoners, returned to the siege, where he was
of the earle and other noble men ioiouslie receiued.

Whilest the siege continued thus before Pontorson, Christopher Hanson,
and other souldiers of the garrison of Saint Susan, made a rode into
the countrie of Aniou, and came to a castell called Ramfort, which
castell was so priuilie scaled, that the capteine within, and his
companie, were taken or slaine, before they knew of their enimies
approching. When knowledge hereof was giuen vnto the Frenchmen which
were assembled, to the number of twentie thousand, to raise the siege
that laie before Pontorson, they left that enterprise, and went to
recouer the said castell of Ramfort, and so comming before it, planted
their siege so on ech side of it, that at length by composition the
Englishmen within, doubting to be taken by force, rendered vp the
castell, hauing libertie to depart with bag and baggage.

[Sidenote: Pontorson rendered to the Englishmen.]

Shortlie after, the lord of Raix, calling himselfe lieutenant generall
for the Dolphin, entred into Maine with an armie of three thousand
men, and by force tooke the castell of Malicorne, wherof was capteine
an Englishman, one Oliuer Osbatersbie. In like maner, they tooke the
little castell of Lude, and therein William Blackborne, lieutenant
for William Glasdale esquier. After this, the Frenchmen returned
backe to the Dolphin, and kept not on their iourneie to Pontorson,
for that they vnderstood by espials, that the earle of Warwike, and
the Englishmen there, determined to giue them battell, if they once
attempted to raise the siege. They within the towne, being streictlie
besieged, perceiuing no likelihood of succours, and seeing the English
armie dailie increase, fell to treatie for doubt to be taken by force,
and so rendered the towne vpon condition, that they might depart with
horsse and harnesse onelie. Which being granted to them, the erle
like a valiant capteine entred into the towne, and there appointed
for gouernors, the lord Ros, and the lord Talbot, and leauing there a
conuenient garrison, returned to the lord regent.

After the taking of this towne of Pontorson, there was a league and
treatie concluded betweene the regent and the duke of Britaine; by
the articles of which agreement, the townes of Pontorson and saint
Iames de Beuuron were beaten downe to the ground and raced. When the
lord of Raix was departed out of Maine (as ye haue heard) Christopher
Hanson, Philip [7]Gough, Martin Godfrie, called the Scaler, tooke by
stealth the castell of saint Laurence de Mortiers. At the same time,
when the capteine and the most part of his companie were gone foorth
to heare masse, in a church ouer against the same castell, and keeping
themselues close, till the capteine returned, they tooke him as he
was entered within the first gate, & so was this castell stuffed with
Englishmen, and capteine thereof was appointed sir William Oldhall.

[7] Or rather Goche.

The same season, sir Iohn Fastolfe, gouernour of the countries of Aniou
and Maine, assembled a great puissance of men of warre, and laid siege
before the castell of saint Owen Distais, beside the towne of Lauall;
and after he had laine there ten daies, the castell was deliuered, they
within departing with their liues and armour onelie to them granted, by
the tenor of the composition, which they tooke with the same sir Iohn
Fastolfe. After the winning of this castell, the Englishmen remooued
to the strong castell of Grauile, and after twelue daies, they within
offered to yeeld the castell by a daie, if they were not succoured by
the Dolphin or his power: the offer was taken and pledges deliuered.

[Sidenote: Hostages executed for promise broken.]

Then sir Iohn Fastolfe returned in post to the regent, aduertising him
of this composition and agreement; wherefore, the said regent raised
a great power to fight with the Frenchmen at the daie appointed,
and in his companie were the earles of Mortaigne and Warwike, the
lord Ros and Talbot, sir Iohn Fastolfe, sir Iohn Aubemond, sir Iohn
Ratcliffe, and diuerse other, to the number of twentie thousand men;
and so marched forwards, in hope to meet and ioine battell with their
aduersaries. But the French power, being not far off from the place,
durst not approch. Wherefore, the regent sent to sir Iohn Fastolfe
incontinentlie, to receiue the castell; but they within (contrarie to
promise and appointment) had newlie vitteled & manned the place, and so
forsaking the pledges, and their fellowes in armes, refused to render
the fortresse; wherefore, the pledges were brought before their sight,
and there before the castell openlie put to death.

[Sidenote: The lord Talbot, a valient capteine.]

After this the lord Talbot was made gouernour of Aniou and Maine, and
sir Iohn Fastolfe was assigned to an other place, which lord Talbot,
being both of noble birth, and of haultie courage, after his comming
into France, obteined so manie glorious victories of his enimies,
that his onelie name was & yet is dreadfull to the French nation, and
much renowmed amongst all other people. This lustie and most valiant
capteine entered into Maine, where he slue men, destroied castels,
burnt townes, and in conclusion suddenlie tooke the towne of Lauall.
The lord Loehac, and diuerse other, withdrew into the castell, in the
which they were so streictlie besieged, that in the end they agreed
to paie the lord Talbot an hundred thousand crownes, for licence to
depart, with all their bag and baggage.

Then was this castell deliuered to the keeping of Gilbert Halsall,
which after was slaine at the siege of Orleance, in whose place
Matthew [8]Gough was made capteine there: who being at the iournie
of Senlis, by treason of a miller that kept a mill adioining to the
wall, the Frenchmen entered into the towne, and brought it againe into
their subiection. Now the duke of Bedford hearing that the towne of
Montargis, in the territorie of Orleance, was but slenderlie kept, and
not thoroughlie furnished, sent the erle of Suffolke, with his brother
sir Iohn Poole, and sir Henrie Bisset, hauing in their companie a six
thousand men, to assalt that towne; but when they came thither and
found the towne both well manned and stronglie fortified, contrarie to
their expectation, they surceassed from giuing the assault, and onelie
laid their siege round about it.

[8] Or rather Goche.

The earle of Warwike was appointed to lie with a great number of men
of warre, at S. Mathelines de Archempe, to incounter the Frenchmen,
if they would attempt to aid or vittell those within the towne.
The situation of this towne was such, that by reason of waters and
marishes, the English armie must needs seuer it selfe into three
parts, so that the one could not easilie helpe the other, but either
by boats or bridges. This siege continued aboue two moneths, so that
in the meane time the Frenchmen had leasure to prouide for the succour
thereof; and so it came to passe, that the constable of France Arthur
of Britaine, the lord Boisac one of the marshals, Stephan la Hire,
Pothon de Saintreiles, the lord Grauile, and diuerse others, to the
number of three thousand horssemen, were sent foorth by the Dolphin.

[Sidenote: A great slaughter by negligence of the watch at Montargis.]

These priuilie in the night season came on that side, where sir Iohn de
la Poole and sir Henrie Bisset laie, whome they found so out of order,
and without good watch, that the Frenchmen entered into their lodgings,
slue manie in their beds, and spared none, for their resistance was but
small. Sir Iohn de la Poole with his horsse saued himselfe, and sir
Henrie Bisset escaped by a boat, and eight other with him. The residue
fleeing in plumpes, and striuing to passe by a bridge of timber, the
which was pestered with preasse of the multitude, brake, and so there
were a great number drowned: insomuch that there were slaine by the
enimies swoord, and drowned in the water, fifteene hundred men.

[Sidenote: Sir Nicholas Burdet.]

[Sidenote: _Polydor._]

The earle of Warwike hearing of this misfortune, departed from saint
Mathelines with all speed, and comming before Montargis, offered
battell to the French capteins, which answered, that they had manned
and vittelled the towne, and intended to doo no more at that time. The
Englishmen heerevpon came softlie backe againe with all their ordinance
to the duke of Bedford. Yet had not the French so great cause to
vaunt of their successe: for at this verie time, sir Nicholas Burdet,
appointed by the duke of Summerset to indamage his enimies in the
coasts of Britaine, sent horssemen into euerie part, woorking all the
displeasure to the people that might be deuised. The countrie, through
which he passed, was wasted, the townes were burnt, the houses spoiled,
and great number of prisoners taken, the small villages were destroied,
and the walled townes ransomed, and so without hurt or damage the said
sir Nicholas Burdet returned into Normandie.

These newes being signified to the constable, and other the French
capteins, asswaged their great mirth and triumphant ioy, concerned for
the victorie of Montargis, that loth they were to attempt anie further
enterprises against the English nation. But the duke of Alanson, who
(as ye haue heard) was latelie deliuered out of captiuitie, reuiued
againe the dulled spirits of the Dolphin, and somewhat aduanced, in
hope of good speed, the fainting harts of his capteins; so that (some
occasion offered) they determined to atchiue a notable feat (as they
tooke it) against the Englishmen, which was the recouerie of the city
of Mans out of their hands: for so it happened, that diuers of the
cheefe rulers in that citie, and namelie diuerse spirituall persons,
meaning to reuolt to the Dolphins side, aduertised him by letters of
their whole minds, which letters were conueied vnto him by certeine
friers.

The Dolphin glad of those newes, appointed the lords de la Breth
and Faiet, marshals of France, accompanied with the lords of Mount
Iehan, of Buell, Doruall, Torsie, Beaumanor, the Hire, and his brother
Guilliam, with fiue hundred other valiant capteins and souldiers, to
the accomplishing of this enterprise; who comming thither at the daie
assigned, in the night season approched towards the walles, making
a little fire on an hill, in sight of the towne, to signifie their
comming, which perceiued by the citizens that neere to the great church
were watching for the same, a burning cresset was shewed out of the
steeple, which suddenlie was put out and quenched. What needeth manie
words?

[Sidenote: Mans lost by treason of the citizens.]

The capteins on horsseback came to the gate, the traitors within slue
the porters and watchmen, and let in their freends, whereby the footmen
entered first, and the men of armes waited at the barriers, to the
intent that if need required, they might fight it out in open field.
Hereby manie Englishmen were slaine, and a great crie and garboile
raised through the towne, as in such surprises is woont. The cause of
this mischeefe was not knowen to any, but onelie to the conspirators;
for the remnant of the citizens being no partakers, imagined, that the
Englishmen had made hauocke in the towne, and put all to the sword. The
Englishmen on the other side iudged, that the citizens had begun some
new rebellion against them, or else had striuen amongst themselues.

The earle of Suffolke, which was gouernour of the towne, hauing perfect
knowledge by such as scaped from the wals, how the matter went,
withdrew without any tarriance into the castell, which standeth at the
gate of saint Vincent, whereof was constable Thomas Gower esquier,
whither also fled manie Englishmen; so as for vrging the enimie, prease
of the number, and lacke of vittels, they could not haue indured long;
wherefore they priuilie sent a messenger to the lord Talbot, which
then laie at Alanson, certifieng him in how hard a case they were. The
lord Talbot hearing these newes, like a carefull capteine in all hast
assembled togither about seuen hundred men, & in the euening departed
from Alanson, so as in the morning he came to a castell called Guierch,
two miles from Mans, and there staied a while, till he had sent out
Matthew [9]Gough, as an espiall, to vnderstand how the Frenchmen
demeaned themselues.

[9] Or rather Goche.

Mathew [10]Gough so well sped his businesse, that priuilie in the night
he came into the castell, where he learned that the Frenchmen verie
negligentlie vsed themselues, without taking heed to their watch, as
though they had beene out of all danger: which well vnderstood, he
returned againe, and within a mile of the citie met the lord Talbot,
and the lord Scales, and opened vnto them all things, according to
his credence. The lords then, to make hast in the matter, bicause the
daie approched, with all speed possible came to the posterne gate, and
alighting from their horsses, about six of the clocke in the morning,
they issued out of the castell, crieng, saint George, Talbot.

[10] Goche.

[Sidenote: Mans recouered.]

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl._]

[Sidenote: Traitors executed.]

The Frenchmen being thus suddenlie taken, were sore amazed, in so much
that some of them, being not out of their beds, got vp in their shirts,
and lept ouer the walles. Other ran naked out of the gates to saue
their liues, leauing all their apparell, horsses, armour, and riches
behind them, none was hurt but such as resisted. [pilcrow] Hard shift was made
on all hands for safetie of life, and happie was he that could find a
place of refuge where to lurke vnspide and vnhurt of the enimie; who
in the execution of their vengeance were so peremptorie, that it was a
matter of great difficultie or rather impossibilitie to escape their
force. To be short, there were slaine and taken, to the number of foure
hundred gentlemen, the priuat souldiers were frankelie let go. After
this, inquisition was made of the authors of the treason, and there
were found & condemned thirtie citizens, twentie priests, and fifteene
friers, who according to their demerits were all hanged.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 6.]

[Sidenote: Duke of Execester deceased.]

[Sidenote: 1428.]

The citie of Mans being thus recouered, the lord Talbot returned to
Alanson, and shortlie after the earle of Warwike departed into England,
to be gouernour of the yoong king, in steed of Thomas duke of Excester,
latelie departed to God, and then was the lord Thomas Montacute earle
of Salisburie sent into France, to supplie the roome of the said earle
of Warwike, who landed at Calis with fiue thousand men, and so came to
the duke of Bedford as then lieng in Paris, where they fell in councell
togither concerning the affaires of France, and namelie the earle of
Salisburie began maruellouslie to phantasie the gaining of the citie &
countrie of Orleance.

[Sidenote: Montacute earle of Salisburie a politike and valiant man.]

This earle was the man at that time, by whose wit, strength, and
policie, the English name was much fearefull and terrible to the
French nation, which of himselfe might both appoint, command, and doo
all things in manner at his pleasure, in whose power (as it appeared
after his death) a great part of the conquest consisted: for suerlie,
he was a man both painefull, diligent, and readie to withstand all
dangerous chances that were at hand, prompt in counsell, and of courage
inuincible, so that in no one man, men put more trust; nor any singular
person wan the harts so much of all men.

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

[Sidenote: _Les grandes chroniques de Britagne._]

Herevpon, after this great enterprise had long beene debated in the
priuie councell, the earle of Salisburies deuise therein was of them
all granted and allowed, so that he being replenished with good hope of
victorie, and furnished with artillerie & munition apperteining to so
great an enterprise, accompanied with the earle of Suffolke, and the
lord Talbot, and with a valiant armie, to the number of ten thousand
men, departed from Paris, and passed through the countrie of Beausse.
There he tooke by assault the towne of Genuille, and within fiue daies
after had the castell deliuered vnto him, by them that were fled into
it for their safegard. He also tooke the towne of Baugencie, suffering
euerie man which would become subiect to the king of England, to inioie
their lands and goods. The townes of Meun vpon Loire, and Iargeaulx,
hearing of these dooings, presented to them the keies of their townes
vpon like agreement. [About Maie in this 1428, the towne of Naunts
and territories there with a fearefull earthquake were shaken, houses
castels and strong buildings in such terrour, as it was thought the end
of the world had beene come.]

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 7.]

[Sidenote: Orleance besieged.]

[Sidenote: Bastard of Orleance.]

After this, in the moneth of September the earle came before the citie
of Orleance, and planted his siege on the one side of the riuer of
Loire; but before his comming, the bastard of Orleance, the bishop
of the citie, and a great number of Scots, hearing of the earles
intent, made diuerse fortifications about the towne, and destroied the
suburbes, in which were twelue parish churches, and foure orders of
friers. They cut also downe all the vines, trees, and bushes, within
fiue leagues of the citie, so that the Englishmen should haue neither
refuge nor succour.

[Sidenote: A bulwarke at Orleance taken.]

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl._]

After the siege had continued full three weekes, the bastard of
Orleance issued out of the gate of the bridge, and fought with the
Englishmen; but they receiued him with so fierce and terrible strokes,
that he was with all his companie compelled to retire and flee backe
into the citie. But the Englishmen followed so fast, in killing and
taking of their enimies, that they entered with them. [pilcrow] The bulworke
of the bridge, with a great tower standing at the end of the same, was
taken incontinentlie by the Englishmen, who behaued themselues right
valiantlie vnder the conduct of their couragious capteine, as at this
assault, so in diuerse skirmishes against the French; partlie to keepe
possession of that which Henrie the fift had by his magnanimitie &
puissance atchiued, as also to inlarge the same. But all helped not.
For who can hold that which will awaie: In so much that some cities by
fraudulent practises, othersome by martiall prowesse were recouered
by the French, to the great discouragement of the English and the
appalling of their spirits; whose hope was now dashed partlie by their
great losses and discomfitures (as after you shall heare) but cheeflie
by the death of the late deceassed Henrie their victorious king; as
Chr. Okland verie trulie and agreeablie to the storie noteth:

    Delphinus comitesque eius fera praelia tentant,
    Fraude domi capiunt alias, virtute receptae
    Sunt vrbes aliae quaedam sublapsa refertur
    Anglum spes retro languescere pectora dicas,
    Quippe erat Henricus quintus, dux strenuus olim,
    Mortuus: hinc damni grauior causa atque doloris.

In this conflict, manie Frenchmen were taken, but more were slaine, and
the keeping of the tower and bulworke was committed to William Glasdale
esquier. By the taking of this bridge the passage was stopped, that
neither men nor vittels could go or come by that waie. After this,
the earle caused certeine bulworkes to be made round about the towne,
casting trenches betweene the one and the other, laieng ordinance in
euerie place where he saw that any batterie might be deuised. When they
within saw that they were enuironed with fortresses and ordinance,
they laid gun against gun, and fortified towers against bulworkes, and
within cast new rampiers, and fortified themselues as stronglie as
might be deuised.

The bastard of Orleance and the Hire were appointed to see the walles
and watches kept, and the bishop saw that the inhabitants within the
citie were put in good order, and that vittels were not vainelie
spent. In the tower that was taken at the bridge end (as before you
haue heard) there was an high chamber, hauing a grate full of barres
of iron, by the which a man might looke all the length of the bridge
into the citie; at which grate manie of the cheefe capteins stood manie
times, viewing the citie, and deuising in what place it was best to
giue the assault. They within the citie well perceiued this tooting
hole, and laid a peece of ordinance directlie against the window.

[Sidenote: The earle of Salisburie slaine.]

It so chanced, that the nine and fiftith daie after the siege was laid,
the earle of Salisburie, sir Thomas Gargraue, and William Glasdale,
with diuerse other went into the said tower, and so into the high
chamber, and looked out at the grate, and within a short space, the
sonne of the maister-gunner, perceiuing men looking out at the window,
tooke his match (as his father had taught him who was gone downe to
dinner), and fired the gun; the shot whereof brake, and shiuered the
iron barres of the grate, so that one of the same bars strake the earle
so violentlie on the head, that it stroke awaie one of his eies, and
the side of his cheeke. Sir Thomas Gargraue was likewise striken, and
died within two daies.

The earle was conueied to Meun on Loire, where after eight daies he
likewise departed this world, whose bodie was conueied into England
with all funerall appointment, and buried at Bissam by his progenitors,
leauing behind him an onelie daughter named Alice, married to Richard
Neuill, sonne to Rafe earle of Westmerland, of whome more shall be said
heereafter. The damage that the realme of England receiued by the losse
of this noble man, manifestlie appeared; in that immediatlie after
his death, the prosperous good lucke, which had followed the English
nation, began to decline, and the glorie of their victories gotten in
the parties beyond the sea fell in decaie.

Though all men were sorowfull for his death, yet the duke of Bedford
was most striken with heauinesse, as he that had lost his onelie right
hand, and cheefe aid in time of necessitie. But sith that dead men
cannot helpe the chances of men that be liuing, he like a prudent
gouernour appointed the earle of Suffolke to be his lieutenant and
capteine of the siege, and ioined with him the lord Scales, the lord
Talbot, sir Iohn Fastolfe, and diuerse other right valiant capteins.
These persons caused bastilles to be made round about the citie, and
left nothing vnattempted, that might aduance their purpose, which to
bring to wished effect there was not anie want, as of no cautelous
policie, so of no valiant enterprise, tending to the enimies ouerthrow.

[Sidenote: 1429.]

[Sidenote: _Enguerant._]

In the Lent season, vittels and artillerie began to waxe scant in
the English campe, wherefore the earle of Suffolke appointed sir
Iohn Fastolfe, sir Thomas Rampston, and sir Philip Hall, with their
retinues, to ride to Paris, to the lord regent, to informe him of their
lacke, who incontinentlie vpon that information prouided vittels,
artillerie, and munitions necessarie, and loded therewith manie
chariots, carts, and horsses: and for the sure conueieng of the same,
he appointed sir Simon Morhier, prouost of Paris, with the gard of the
citie, and diuerse of his owne houshold-seruants to accompanie sir
Iohn Fastolfe and his complices, to the armie lieng at the siege of
Orleance. They were in all to the number of fifteene hundred men, of
the which there were not past fiue or six hundred Englishmen.

These departing in good order of battell out of Paris, came to Genuille
in Beausse, and in a morning earlie, in a great frost, they departed
from thence toward the siege; and when they came to a towne called
Rowraie, in the lands of Beausse, they perceiued their enimies comming
towards them, being to the number of nine or ten thousand of Frenchmen
and Scots, of whome were capteins Charles of Cleremont, sonne to the
duke of Bourbon then being prisoner in England; sir William Steward
constable of Scotland, a little before deliuered out of captiuitie,
the earle of Perdriake the lord Iohn Vandosme, the Vidame of Chartres,
the lord of Toures, the lord of Lohar, the lord of Eglere, the lord of
Beauiew, the bastard Tremoile, and manie other valiant capteins.

[Sidenote: 1500 English did slaie and vaequish 10000 French.]

Wherefore sir Iohn Fastolfe set all his companie in good order of
battell, and pitched stakes before euerie archer, to breake the
force of the horssemen. At their backes they set all the wagons and
carriages, and within them they tied all their horsses. In this maner
stood they still, abiding the assault of their enimies. The Frenchmen
by reason of their great number, thinking themselues sure of the
victorie, egerlie set on the Englishmen, which with great force them
receiued, and themselues manfullie defended. At length, after long
and cruell fight, the Englishmen droue backe and vanquished the proud
Frenchmen, & compelled them to flee. In this conflict were slaine the
lord William Steward constable of Scotland, and his brother the lord
Dorualle, the lord Chateaubriam, sir Iohn Basgot, and other Frenchmen
and Scots, to the number of fiue and twentie hundred, and aboue eleuen
hundred taken prisoners, although the French writers affirme the number
lesse.

[Sidenote: The battell of herrings.]

After this fortunate victorie, sir Iohn Fastolfe and his companie
(hauing lost no one man of anie reputation) with all their cariages,
vittels, and prisoners, marched foorth and came to the English campe
before Orleance, where they were ioifullie receiued, and highlie
commended for their valiancie and worthie prowesse shewed in the
battell; the which bicause most part of the cariage was herring and
lenton stuffe, the Frenchmen called it the battell of herrings. The
earle of Suffolke being thus vittelled, continued the siege, and euerie
daie almost skirmished with the Frenchmen within, who (at length being
in despaire of all succours) offered to treat, and in conclusion, to
saue themselues and the citie from captiuitie of their enimies, they
deuised to submit the citie, themselues, and all theirs vnder the
obeisance of Philip duke of Burgognie, bicause he was extract out of
the stocke and bloud roiall of the ancient kings of France, thinking by
this means (as they did in deed) to breake or diminish the great amitie
betweene the Englishmen and him.

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

This offer was signified by them vnto the duke of Burgognie, who with
thanks certified them againe, that he would gladlie receiue them, if
the lord regent would therewith be contented. Herevpon he dispatched
messengers to the duke of Bedford, who though some counselled that it
should be verie good and necessarie for him to agree to that maner
of yeelding; yet he and other thought it neither conuenient nor
honourable, that a citie so long besieged by the king of England,
should be deliuered vnto anie other prince, than to him, or to his
regent, for that might be a verie bad president to other townes in anie
like case. Herevpon the regent answered the Burgognian ambassadors:
that after so long a siege on his part, and obstinat a resistance
of theirs, he might not receiue rendring and conditions at their
appointment. At this answer the duke hoong the groine, as concerning
that our side should enuie his glorie, or not to be so forward in
aduancing his honour as he would haue it.

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

[Sidenote: _Ieha de Tillet._]

[Sidenote: _Les chronic. de Bretagne_: _Le Rosier_ calleth him Robert.]

[Sidenote: _Ione de Arc Pusell de dieu._]

[Sidenote: _In vita Bundvicae._]

[Sidenote: _Grand Chro._ 4.]

In time of this siege at Orleance (French stories saie) the first weeke
of March 1428, vnto Charles the Dolphin, at Chinon as he was in verie
great care and studie how to wrestle against the English nation, by one
Peter Badricourt capteine of Vacouleur, (made after marshall of France
by the Dolphins creation) was caried a yoong wench of an eighteene
yeeres old, called Ione Arc, by name of hir father (a sorie sheepheard)
Iames of Arc, and Isabell hir mother, brought vp poorelie in their
trade of keeping cattell, borne at Domprin (therefore reported by Bale,
Ione Domprin) vpon Meuse in Loraine within the diocesse of Thoule.
Of fauour was she counted likesome, of person stronglie made and
manlie, of courage great, hardie, and stout withall, an vnderstander
of counsels though she were not at them, great semblance of chastitie
both of bodie and behauiour, the name of Iesus in hir mouth about all
hir businesses, humble, obedient, and fasting diuerse daies in the
weeke. A person (as their bookes make hir) raised vp by power diuine,
onelie for succour to the French estate then deepelie in distresse,
in whome, for planting a credit the rather, first the companie that
toward the Dolphin did conduct hir, through places all dangerous, as
holden by the English, where she neuer was afore, all the waie and by
nightertale safelie did she lead; then at the Dolphins sending by hir
assignement, from saint Katharins church of Fierbois in Touraine (where
she neuer had beene and knew not) in a secret place there among old
iron, appointed she hir sword to be sought out and brought hir, that
with fiue floure delices was grauen on both sides, wherewith she fought
& did manie slaughters by hir owne hands. On warfar rode she in armour
[11] cap a pie & mustered as a man, before hir an ensigne all white,
wherin was Iesus Christ painted with a floure delice in his hand.

[11] From head to foot.

[Sidenote: This salutation appeareth after heere.]

[Sidenote: _Les grand chronic._]

Vnto the Dolphin into his gallerie when first she was brought, and
he shadowing himselfe behind, setting other gaie lords before him to
trie hir cunning from all the companie, with a salutation (that indeed
marz all the matter) she pickt him out alone, who therevpon had hir
to the end of the gallerie, where she held him an houre in secret and
priuate talke, that of his priuie chamber was thought verie long, and
therefore would haue broken it off; but he made them a sign to let hir
saie on. In which (among other) as likelie it was, she set out vnto him
the singular feats (forsooth) giuen her to vnderstand by reuelation
diuine, that in vertue of that sword shee should atchiue, which were,
how with honor and victorie shee would raise the siege at Orleance,
set him in state of the crowne of France, and driue the English out of
the countrie, thereby he to inioie the kingdome alone. Heerevpon he
hartened at full, appointed hir a sufficient armie with absolute power
to lead them, and they obedientlie to doo as she bad them. Then fell
she to worke, and first defeated indeed the siege at Orleance, by and
by incouraged him to crowne himselfe king of France at Reims, that a
little before from the English she had woone. Thus after pursued she
manie bold enterprises to our great displeasure a two yeare togither,
for the time she kept in state vntill she were taken and for heresie
and witcherie burned: as in particularities hereafter followeth. But in
hir prime time she armed at all points (like a iolie capteine) roade
from Poictiers to Blois, and there found men of warre, vittels, and
munition, ready to be conueied to Orleance.

Heere was it knowne that the Englishmen kept not so diligent watch
as they had beene accustomed to doo, and therefore this maid (with
other French capteins) comming forward in the dead time of the night,
and in a great raine and thunder entred into the citie with all their
vittels, artillerie, and other necessarie prouisions. The next daie
the Englishmen boldlie assaulted the towne, but the Frenchmen defended
the walles so, as no great feat worthie of memorie chanced that daie
betwixt them, though the Frenchmen were amazed at the valiant attempt
of the Englishmen, whervpon the bastard of Orleance gaue knowledge to
the duke of Alanson, in what danger the towne stood without his present
helpe, who comming within two leagues of the citie, gaue knowledge to
them within, that they should be readie the next daie to receiue him.

This accordinglie was accomplished: for the Englishmen willinglie
suffered him and his armie also to enter, supposing that it should
be for their aduantage to haue so great a multitude to enter the
citie, whereby their vittels (whereof they within had great scarsitie)
might the sooner be consumed. On the next daie in the morning, the
Frenchmen altogither issued out of the towne, woone by assault the
bastile of saint Lou, and set it on fire. And after they likewise
assaulted the tower at the bridge foot, which was manfullie defended.
But the Frenchmen (more in number) at length tooke it, yer the lord
Talbot could come to the succours, in the which William Gladesdale the
capteine was slaine, with the lord Moolins, and lord Poinings also.

The Frenchmen puffed vp with this good lucke, fetched a compasse about,
and in good order of battell marched toward the bastile, which was in
the keeping of the lord Talbot: the which vpon the enimies approch,
like a capteine without all feare or dread of that great multitude,
issued foorth againt them, and gaue them so sharpe an incounter, that
they not able to withstand his puissance, fled (like sheepe before
the woolfe) againe into the citie, with great losse of men and small
artillerie. Of Englishmen were lost in the two Bastiles, to the number
of six hundred persons, or thereabout, though the French writers
multiplie this number of hundreds to thousands, as their maner is.

[Sidenote: The siege of Orleance broken vp.]

The earle of Suffolke, the lord Talbot, the lord Scales, and other
capteins assembled togither in councell, and after causes shewed to
and fro, it was amongst them determined to leaue their fortresses and
bastiles, and to assemble in the plaine field, and there to abide all
the daie to see if the Frenchmen would issue foorth to fight with them.
This conclusion taken was accordinglie executed: but when the Frenchmen
durst not once come foorth to shew their heads, the Englishmen set fire
of their lodgings, and departed in good order of Battell from Orleance.
The next daie, which was the eight daie of Maie, the earle of Suffolke
rode to Iargeaux with foure hundred Englishmen, and the lord Talbot
with an other companie returned to Mehun. And after he had fortified
that towne, he went to the towne of Lauall, and woone it, togither with
the castell, sore punishing the townsmen for their cankered obstinacie
against them.

Thus when the Englishmen had seuered themselues into garrisons, the
duke of Alanson, the bastard of Orleance, Ione le Pusell, the lord
Gawcourt, and diuerse other capteins of the Frenchmen, came the twelfe
daie of Iune, before the towne of Iargeaux, where the earle of Suffolke
and his two brethren soiourned, & gaue to the towne so fierce an
assault on three parts, that Poiton de Sentrailes, perceiuing an other
part void of defendants, scaled the wals on that side, and without
difficultie tooke the towne, and slue sir Alexander Poole, brother
to the erle, and manie other, to the number of two hundred. But the
Frenchmen gained not much thereby, for they lost three hundred good men
and more. Of the Englishmen fortie were taken, with the earle and his
other brother named Iohn.

[Sidenote: Prisoners slaine by the French as they were taken.]

The Frenchmen, as they returned to Orleance, fell at variance for
their prisoners, and slue them all, sauing the earle and his brother.
Shortlie after, the same French armie came to Mehun, where they tooke
the tower at the bridge foot, and put therein a garrison. From thence
they remooued to Baugencie, and constreined them that were within the
towne to yeeld, vpon condition they might depart with bag and baggage.
At the same place there came to the duke of Alanson, the new constable
Arthur of Britaine, and with him the lord Dalbret, and other. Also
after this the earle of Vandosme came to them, so that by the dailie
repaire of such as assembled togither to strengthen the French part,
they were in all to the number betweene twentie and three and twentie
thousand men.

[Sidenote: _Nichol. Giles._]

[Sidenote: Fiue thous[=a]d saith _Hall_.]

All which being once ioined in one armie, shortlie after fought with
the lord Talbot (who had with him not past six thousand men) neere
vnto a village in Beausse called Pataie: at which battell the charge
was giuen by the French so vpon a sudden, that the Englishmen had not
leisure to put themselues in arraie, after they had put vp their stakes
before their archers, so that there was no remedie but to fight at
aduenture. This battell continued by the space of three long houres;
for the Englishmen, though they were ouerpressed with multitude of
their enimies, yet they neuer fled backe one foot, till their capteine
the lord Talbot was sore wounded at the backe, and so taken.

[Sidenote: Great losse on the English side. The lords Talbot, Scales,
and Hungerford taken.]

Then their hearts began to faint, and they fled, in which flight were
slaine aboue twelue hundred, and fortie taken, of whome the lord
Talbot, the lord Scales, the lord Hungerford, & sir Thomas Rampston
were cheefe. Diuerse archers, after they had shot all their arrowes,
hauing onelie their swords, defended themselues, and with helpe of some
of their horsmen came safe to Mehun. This ouerthrow, and speciallie the
taking of the lord Talbot, did not so much reioise the Frenchmen; but
it did as much abash the Englishmen: so that immediatlie therevpon,
the townes of Ienuile, Mehun, Fort, and diuerse other, returned from
the English part, and became French. From this battell departed
without anie stroke striken sir Iohn Fastolfe, the same yeare for his
valiantnesse elected into the order of the garter. But for doubt of
misdealing at this brunt, the duke of Bedford tooke from him the image
of saint George, and his garter; though afterward by meanes of freends,
and apparant causes of good excuse, the same were to him againe
deliuered against the mind of the lord Talbot.

[Sidenote: The French king crowned.]

Charles the Dolphin that called himselfe French K. perceiuing fortune
to smile thus vpon him, assembled a great power, and determined to
conquer the citie of Reimes, that he might be there sacred, crowned,
and annointed, according to the custome of his progenitours, that all
men might iudge that he was by all lawes and decrees a iust and lawfull
king. In his waie thitherwards he besieged the citie of Auxerre, the
citizens whereof compounded with him to yeeld, if they were not rescued
within certeine daies. From thence he came before Trois, and after
twelue daies siege had that citie deliuered vnto him, by composition,
that the capteine sir Philip Hall (with his people and mooueables)
might depart in safetie. After that Trois was yeelded, the communaltie
of Chaalons rebelled against sir Iohn Aubemond their capteine, and
constreined him to deliuer the towne vpon like composition. In
semblable manner did they of Reimes, desiring him to giue safe conduct
to all the Englishmen safelie to depart. When Reimes was thus become
French, the foresaid Charles the Dolphin in the presence of the dukes
of Lorraine and Barre, and of all the noble men of his faction, was
sacred there king of France by the name of Charles the seauenth, with
all rites and ceremonies thereto belonging. They of Auxerre, when the
terme of their appointment was expired, submitted themselues to him;
and so likewise did all the cities and townes adioining.

[Sidenote: Ione taken to be a witch.]

The duke of Bedford aduertised of all these dooings, assembled his
power about him, and hauing togither ten thousand good Englishmen
(beside Normans) departed out of Paris in warlike fashion, and passing
thorough Brie to Monstreau fault Yonne, sent by his herald Bedford,
letters to the French king, signifieng to him; that where he had
(contrarie to the finall conclusion accorded betweene his noble brother
K. Henrie the fift, & king Charles the sixt, father to him that was
the vsurper) by allurement of a deuelish witch, taken vpon him the
name, title, & dignitie of the king of France; and further had by
murther, stealing, craft, and deceitfull meanes, violentlie gotten,
and wrongfullie kept diuerse cities and townes belonging to the king
of England his nephue; for proofe thereof he was come downe from Paris
with his armie, into the countrie of Brie, by dint of sword and stroke
of battell to prooue his writing and cause true, willing his enimie to
choose the place, and in the same he would giue him battell.

The new French king being come from Reimes to Dampmartine, studieng
how to compasse them of Paris, was halfe abashed at this message. But
yet to set a good countenance on the matter, he answered the herald,
that he would sooner seeke his maister, than his maister should need to
pursue him. The duke of Bedford hearing this answer, marched toward the
king, and pitched his field in a strong place. The French king, though
at the first he meant to haue abidden battell; yet when he vnderstood
that the duke was equall to him in number of people, he changed his
purpose, and turned with his armie a little out of the waie. The duke
of Bedford, perceiuing his faint courage, followed him by the hils and
dales, till he came to a town not far from Senlis, where he found the
French king and his armie lodged; wherefore he ordered his battels
like an expert cheefteine in martiall science, setting the archers
before, and himselfe with the noblemen in the maine battell, and put
the Normans on both sides for wings. The French king also ordered his
battels with the aduise of his capteins.

[Sidenote: The French armie fled in the night.]

[Sidenote: Boheme.]

Thus these two armies laie two daies and two nights either in sight of
other, without anie great dooing, except a few skirmishes, wherein the
dukes light horssemen did verie valiantlie. At length in the dead of
the night (as priuilie as might be) the French king brake vp his campe,
and fled to Braie. The duke of Bedford had much adoo to staie his
people in the morning from pursuit of the French armie: but for that he
mistrusted the Parisiens, he would not depart farre from that citie,
and so returned thither againe. [pilcrow] In this season pope Martin the fift
of that name, meaning to subdue the Bohemers that dissented from the
church of Rome in matters of religion, appointed Henrie Beaufort Bishop
of Winchester & cardinall of saint Eusebie, to be his legat in an armie
that should inuade the kingdome of Boheme, and to bring a power of
men with him out of England. And because the warre touched religion,
he licenced the cardinall to take the tenth part of euerie spirituall
dignitie, benefice, and promotion.

This matter was opened in the parlement house, and assented to:
wherevpon the bishop gathered the monie, and assembled foure thousand
men & aboue, not without great grudge of the people, which dailie
were with tallages and aids wearied and sore burdened. As this bishop
was come to Douer readie to passe the seas ouer into Flanders, the
duke of Glocester hauing receiued letters from the duke of Bedford,
conteining an earnest request to releeue him with some speedie aid of
men of warre, was constreined to write vnto the bishop of Winchester,
willing him in time of such need, when all stood vpon losse or gaine,
to passe with all his armie toward the duke of Bedford, to assist him
against his aduersaries; which thing doone, and to his honour atchiued,
he might performe his iournie against the vngratious Bohemers. The
cardinall (though not well contented with this countermand) yet least
he should run into the note of infamie, if he refused to aid the regent
of France in so great a cause, passed ouer with his power, and brought
the same vnto his coosine to the citie of Paris.

About the same season, the French king, in hope to be receiued into
the townes of Campaigne and Beauuois (by reason of the fauour and good
will which the inhabitants bare towards him) was come with an armie
towards Campaigne. Whereof the duke of Bedford being aduertised, and
hauing now his host augmented with the new supplie, which the cardinall
had of late brought vnto him, marched forward with great speed toward
the place where he vnderstood the French king was lodged: and comming
to Senlis, he perceiued how his enimies were incamped vpon the mount
Pilioll, betweene Senlis and Campaigne.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 8.]

Here might either armie behold the other: wherevpon for the auoiding
of dangers that might insue, the campes were trenched, and the battels
pitched, and the fields ordered as though they should haue tried the
matter by battell: but nothing was doone except with skirmishes, in
the which the Normans sore vexed the Frenchmen; and therefore receiued
great commendations and praises of the lord regent: who vndoubtedlie
determined to haue giuen battell to his enimies if they would haue
abidden it. But after the armies had thus lien ether in sight of other,
for the space of two daies together, the French king not determining
to aduenture in an open battell the whole chance of the game, least
he might thereby receiue a perpetuall checkemate, in the night season
remooued his campe, and fled to Crespie, though his number was double
to the English armie. The duke of Bedford, seeing that the French king
was thus cowardlie recoiled with all his power and armie, returned
againe to Paris, euer suspecting the deceitfull faith of the Parisiens.

[Sidenote: Boheme.]

[Sidenote: The pope did vnlegat the cardinall of Winchester.]

[Sidenote: K. Henries coronation at Westminster.]

The bishop of Winchester, after that the French king was retreated
backe, went into Boheme, and there did somewhat, though shortlie after
without anie great praise or gaine he returned into England, more
glad of his comming backe than of his aduancing forward. Anon after
the pope vnlegated him, and set an other in his place, wherewith he
was nothing contented. On the sixt daie of Nouember, being the daie
of saint Leonard, king Henrie in the eight yeare of his reigne was at
Westminster with all pompe and honour crowned king of this realme of
England. In the same yere the French king was receiued into the towne
of Campaigne, and shortlie after were the townes of Senlis and Beauuois
rendered to him. And the lord Longueall tooke by stelth the castell of
Aumarle, and slue all the Englishmen within it.

[Sidenote: _Thom. Wals._]

Also about the same time, the Frenchmen recouered castell Gaillard
foorth of the Englishmens hands, where the lord Barbason was found
in a dungeon, inclosed within a great grate of iron like to a little
chamber, and foorthwith they brake open the grate: but Barbason would
not come foorth, because he had giuen his faith and promise to one
Kingston that was capteine of that fortresse for the king of England,
to be true prisoner, vntill the Frenchmen had sent to the same Kingston
(that was departed vpon such couenants as they were agreed vpon at
the deliuerie of that fortresse) willing him to come backe againe
vpon safe conduct. Which at their earnest request he did, and withall
discharged the lord Barbason of his oth; and so then he came foorth,
and remained at his libertie, to the great reioising of the Frenchmen,
which iudged that he had beene rather dead than aliue all that time of
his imprisonment.

[Sidenote: A parlement at Rone called by the duke of Bedford.]

About the same time also the French king sought by all meanes possible
to breake the amitie betwixt the realme of England, and the house of
Burgognie. Whereof the duke of Bedford hauing intelligence, thought it
stood him vpon the more earnestlie to looke to his charge; and namelie
as it were an anchorhold, he determined to prouide that he might defend
and safelie keepe the duchie of Normandie, and therefore appointing the
bishop of Terrowen and Elie, named Lewes of Lutzenburgh, chancellor
for king Henrie of the realme of France, to remaine at Paris vpon the
defense of that citie, with a conuenient number of Englishmen, he
departed into Normandie, and comming to Rone, called a parlement there
of the three estates of the duchie, in the which he declared manie
things vnto them, touching the happie life, and great freedome which
they might be assured to inioy, so long as they continued vnder the
English obeisance: and therefore he exhorted them to abide constant
in their allegiance, faith, and promise made and sworne to his noble
brother king Henrie the fift.

[Sidenote: The French got saint Denis.]

[Sidenote: Ione had a hurt in the leg and a fall, drawen all durtie out
of the mire.]

Whilest the duke of Bedford was busie to reteine the Normans in their
due obedience, the French king departed from Senlis; and comming to the
towne of saint Denis, found it in maner desolate, so that he entered
there without resistance, and lodged his armie at Mount Martyr and
Amberuilliers, neere vnto the citie of Paris; and from thence sent
Iohn duke of Alanson, and his sorceresse Ione la Pusell, with three
thousand light horssemen to asssault the citie, and followed himselfe,
in hope to get it, either by force or treatie. But the English
capteins euerie one keeping his ward and place assigned, so manfullie
defended themselues, their walles and towers with the assistance of
the Parisiens, that they repelled the Frenchmen, and threw downe Ione
their great goddesse into the bottome of the towne ditch, where she lay
behind the backe of an asse sore hurt in the leg, till the time that
she (all filthie with mire and durt) was drawne out by Guischard of
Thienbrone, seruant to the duke of Alanson.

The French king, perceiuing that he could not preuaile in this
enterprise, left the dead bodies behind him, and taking with him the
wounded capteins, returned into Berrie. But in the meane waie, the
inhabitants of Laignie submitted themselues vnto him. The duke of
Bedford being in Normandie, hearing of this sudden attempt, with all
hast possible came to Paris, where he gaue manie great thanks, with
high commendations vnto the capteins, souldiers and citizens for their
assured fidelitie, great hardinesse & manlie dooing. Which his gentle
words so incouraged the harts of the Parisiens, that they sware,
promised and concluded, to be freends for euer to the king of England,
and his freends, and enimies alwaies to his foes and aduersaries,
making proclamation by this stile: "Freends to K. Henrie, freends to
the Parisiens; Enimies to England, enimies to Paris." Marie whether
this was vttered from their harts, it is hard so to saie, for the
sequeale of their acts seemed to proue the contrarie.

[Sidenote: Saint Denis by vs recouered againe.]

Soone after these dooings, came to Paris with a great companie Philip
duke of Burgognie, and then vpon long consultation had for the
recouerie of their losses, it was agreed that the duke of Bedford
should raise an armie, & that the duke of Burgognie should be his
deputie, and tarie at Paris for the defense of the citie. The duke of
Bedford then without any great resistance recouered againe the towne
of saint Denis, with diuerse other fortresses. And after this he sent
the bastard of Clarence to laie siege to the castell of Torsie, the
which (notwithstanding the great strength therof) after six moneths
siege, was rendred vp into his hands. During the siege of this castell,
sir Thomas Kiriell knight, with foure hundred Englishmen departed from
Gourneie in Normandie, and rode by Beauuois, spoiling and wasting the
countrie to the suburbes of Cleremont. Whereof the earle of that towne
hauing aduertisement, assembled all the men of warre of the garrisons
adioining, and with the same set forward to fight with the Englishmen,
whom he found in a streict place neere to Beauuois.

[Sidenote: La Hire.]

[Sidenote: Laignie besieged by the Englishmen.]

[Sidenote: _Le Rosier._]

The earle of Cleremont, perceiuing that he could not hurt them with
his men of armes, by reason of the strength, came downe on foot with
all his companie, and fiercelie set on the Englishmen: but by the
terrible shot of the English archers, the Frenchmen in the end were
constreined to flee; and the Englishmen perceiuing the matter, streight
leapt on horssebacke and followed the chase. In the which were taken
two hundred prisoners, and thrise as manie slaine. The earle escaped
by the swiftnesse of his horsse. At the same season the earle of
Suffolke besieging the towne of Aumarle (whereof was capteine the lord
of Rambures) after foure and twentie great assaults, had the towne
and castell simplie to him rendred. Thus by little and little the
Englishmen recouered manie townes which before they had lost. Howbeit
about the verie same time, the Frenchmen stale the towne of Lauall, by
treason wrought by a miller, which keeping a mill that ioined to the
wall, suffered the French to passe through his mill into the towne.
Shortlie after also sir Steuen de Vignoilles, surnamed la Hire, tooke
by scaling the towne of Louiers in Normandie. The Englishmen in the
cold moneth of December besieged the towne of Laignie in the which was
the Pusell, and diuerse other good capteins.

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

[Sidenote: 1430]

[In the moneth of Maie 1430, with a valiant man in feats of armes
on the duke of Burgognions side, one Franquet and his band of three
hundred souldiers, making all towards the maintenance of the siege, the
Pusell Ione and a foure hundred with hir did meet. In great courage and
force did she and hir people sundrie times assaile him, but he with his
(though much vnder in number) by meanes of his archers in good order
set, did so hardilie withstand them, that for the first and second
push she rather lost than wan? Wherat this captinesse striken into a
fretting chafe, called out in all hast the garrison of Laignie, and
from other the forts thereabout, who thicke and threefold came downe
with might and maine, in armour and number so far exceeding Franquets,
that though they had doone hir much hurt in hir horsemen; yet by the
verie multitude were they oppressed, most in hir furie put to the
sword; & as for to Franquet that worthie capteine himselfe, hir rage
not appeased, till out of hand she had his head stroken off: contrarie
to all manhood (but she was a woman, if she were that) & contrarie to
common right & law of armes. The man for his merits was verie much
lamented, and she by hir malice then found of what spirit she was.]

[Sidenote: Campiegne besieged.]

After this the duke of Bourgognie accompanied with the earles of
Arundell, and Suffolke, and the lord Iohn of Lutzenburgh besieged
the towne of Campiegne with a great puissance. This towne was well
walled, manned and vittelled, so that the besiegers were constreined
to cast trenches, and make mines, for otherwise they saw not how to
compasse their purpose. In the meane time it happened in the night of
the Ascension of our lord, that Poiton de Saintreiles, Ione la Pusell,
and fiue or six hundred men of armes issued out by the bridge toward
Mondedier, intending to set fire in the tents and lodgings of the lord
Bawdo de Noielle.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex Gesnero._]

[Sidenote: Richard Fleming bishop of Lincolne.]

[Sidenote: The books that he wrote.]

[pilcrow] In this yeare of our Lord, among diuerse notable men of learning and
knowledge, one Richard Fleming, English borne, a doctor of diuinitie
professed in Oxford, did flourish: who by the prouidence of God grew
in such fauour with this king Henrie the sixt, & the nobles neere &
about him, that he was preferred to the bishops see of Lincolne. This
man founded Lincolne college in Oxford, in which vniuersitie he had
beene a profitable student. Diuerse bookes he wrote (as the vniuersitie
librarie dooth beare witnesse) whereof these following haue beene
seene vnder their names and titles; to wit: A protestation against the
Spaniards, the Frenchmen, and the Scots, made in the generall councell
holden at Sens: one booke of the Etymologie of England; besides diuerse
other treatises, as Gesner reporteth Ex bibliotheca Oxonii, aforesaid.

[Sidenote: Ione the Pusell taken.]

At the verie same time that Campeigne was besieged (as before is said)
sir Iohn of Lutzenburgh, with eight other gentlemen, chanced to be
neere vnto the lodging of the said lord Bawdo, where they espied the
Frenchmen, which began to cut downe tents, ouerthrow pauilions, & kill
men in their beds: wherevpon they with all speed assembled a great
number of men, as well English as Burgognions, and couragiouslie set
on the Frenchmen, and in the end beat them backe into the towne, so
that they fled so fast that one letted another, as they would haue
entered. In the chase and pursute was the Pusell taken, with diuerse
other, besides those that were slaine, which were no small number.
Diuerse were hurt also on both parts. Among the Englishmen, sir Iohn
Montgomerie had his arme broken, and sir Iohn Steward was shot into the
thigh with a quarell.

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

[Sidenote: _Chroniques de Britaigne._]

[As before ye haue heard somewhat of this damsels strange beginning
and proceedings, so sith the ending of all such miraclemongers dooth
(for the most part) plainelie decipher the vertue and power that they
worke, by hir shall ye be aduertised what at last became of hir; cast
your opinions as ye haue cause. Of hir louers (the Frenchmen) reporteth
one, how in Campeigne thus besieged, Guillamne de Flauie the capteine
hauing sold hir aforehand to the lord of Lutzenburgh, vnder colour of
hasting hir with a band out of the towne towards their king, for him
with speed to come and leauie the siege there, so gotten hir foorth
he shut the gates after hir, when anon by the Burgognians set vpon
and ouermatcht in the conflict she was taken: marie yet (all things
accounted) to no small maruell how it could come so to passe, had she
beene of any deuotion or of true beleefe, and no false miscreant,
but all holie as she made it. For earlie that morning she gat hir to
saint Iameses church, confessed hir, and receiued hir maker (as the
booke termes it) and after setting hir selfe to a piller, manie of the
townesmen that with a fiue or six score of their children stood about
there to see hir, vnto them "(quod she) Good children and my deere
freends, I tell you plaine one hath sold me. I am betraied and shortlie
shall be deliuered to death; I beseech you praie to God for me, for I
shall neuer haue more power to doo seruice either to the king or to the
realme of France againe."

[Sidenote: _Le Rosier._]

[Sidenote: _In la vie du Charles septiesme._]

[Sidenote: Fiue thousand pounds fr[=e]ch crowns in monie.]

[Sidenote: An hundred and fiftie crownes rent.]

Saith another booke, she was intrapt by a Picard capteine of Soissons,
who sold that citie to the duke of Burgognie, and he then put it ouer
into the hands of the lord of Lutzenburgh, so by that meanes the
Burgognians approched and besieged Campeigne, for succour whereof
as damsell Ione with hir capteins from Laignie was thither come,
and dailie to the English gaue manie a hot skirmish, so happened it
one a daie in an outsallie that she made by a Picard of the lord of
Lutzenburghs band, in the fiercest of hir fight she was taken, and by
him by and by to his lord presented, who sold hir ouer againe to the
English, who for witchcraft and sorcerie burnt hir at Rone. Tillet
telleth it thus, that she was caught at Campeigne by one of the earle
of Ligneis soldiers, from him had to Beaureuoir castell, where kept a
three months, she was after for ten thousand pounds in monie and three
hundred pounds rent (all Turnois) sold into the English hands.

In which for hir pranks so vncouth and suspicious, the lord regent by
Peter Chauchon bishop of Beauuois (in whose diocesse she was taken)
caused hir life and beleefe, after order of law to be inquired vpon
and examined. Wherein found though a virgin, yet first shamefullie
reiecting hir sex abominablie in acts and apparell to haue counterfeit
mankind, and then all damnablie faithlesse, to be a pernicious
instrument to hostilitie and bloudshed in diuelish witchcraft and
sorcerie, sentence accordinglie was pronounced against hir. Howbeit
vpon humble confession of hir iniquities with a counterfeit contrition
pretending a carefull sorow for the same, execution spared and all
mollified into this, that from thencefoorth she should cast off hir
vnnaturall wearing of mans abilliments, and keepe hir to garments
of hir owne kind, abiure hir pernicious practises of sorcerie and
witcherie, and haue life and leasure in perpetuall prison to bewaile
hir misdeeds. Which to performe (according to the maner of abiuration)
a solemne oth verie gladlie she tooke.

[Sidenote: _Polydo. 23. in H. 6._]

[Sidenote: _Les grand chron._]

[Sidenote: _Les grandes chronic. le 4 liure._]

But herein (God helpe vs) she fullie afore possest of the feend, not
able to hold hir in anie towardnesse of grace, falling streight waie
into hir former abominations (and yet seeking to eetch out life as long
as she might) stake not (though the shift were shamefull) to confesse
hir selfe a strumpet, and (vnmaried as she was) to be with child. For
triall, the lord regents lenitie gaue hir nine moneths staie, at the
end wherof she found herein as false as wicked in the rest, an eight
daies after, vpon a further definitiue sentence declared against hir to
be relapse and a renouncer of hir oth and repentance, was she therevpon
deliuered ouer to secular power, and so executed by consumption of fire
in the old market place at Rone, in the selfe same steed where now
saint Michaels church stands, hir ashes afterward without the towne
wals shaken into the wind. Now recounting altogither, hir pastorall
bringing vp, rude without any vertuous instruction, hir campestrall
conuersation with wicked spirits, whome in hir first salutation to
Charles the Dolphin, she vttered to be our Ladie, saint Katharine,
and saint Annes, that in this behalfe came and gaue hir commandements
from God hir maker, as she kept hir fathers lambs in the fields (where
saints in warres among christen men were (be we sure) neuer so parciall
patrons or partners to maintenance of horrible slaughters, rapines, and
bloudshed) hereto hir murtherous mind in killing of Franquet hir owne
prisoner, hir two yeares continuance in hir abominations and deadlie
mischiefe without anie hir trauell or motion betweene the princes
for peace, hir relapse at last & falling againe into hir abiured
iniquities, by hir virginitie (if it were anie) by hir holie words, hir
fasting and praiers what they might be, sith satan (after S. Paule) can
change himselfe into an angell of light, the deeplier to deceiue.

[Sidenote: _Christianissimus rex._]

[Sidenote: _Tillet._]

[Sidenote: This prelate at his death left a hundred and fifteene
crownes in gold, that vnder colour of warres with the infidels he had
fleesed from christen princes.]

[Sidenote: _Piatina._]

These matters may verie rightfullie denounce vnto all the world hir
execrable abominations, and well iustifie the iudgement she had, and
the execution she was put to for the same. A thing yet (God wot) verie
smallie shadowed, and lesse holpen by the verie trauell of the Dolphin,
whose dignitie abroad foulle spotted in this point, that contrarie to
the holie degree of a right christen prince (as he called himselfe) for
maintenance of his quarels in warre would not reuerence to prophane
his sacred estate, as dealing in diuelish practises with misbeleeuers
and witches. Which maladie he full sorilie salued (like one that to
kill the strong sent of onions would cheaw a cloue of garlike) so a six
and twentie yeares after, he pact with pope Calixt the third, by whose
mandat directed to his three delegats, the bishops or Paris, Reimes,
and Constance, at the cathedrall church of Paris, in presence of Ione
(the pusels mother) Iohn and Peter hir brethren, the seuen and twentith
daie of Nouember 1455, the validitie and goodnesse of the processe and
sentence vpon hir was called in question, and in great solemnitie sit
vpon.

[Sidenote: _Li. 23 in vita. H. 6._]

Wherein the cause was so sincerelie canuassed among them, that
afterward, on the eight of Iulie 1456, a quite contrarie sentence was
there declared; of effect, that this Ione (forsooth) was a damsell
diuine, no fault in the Dolphin for his counsell and witcherie
practises with hir; the processe, iudgement, and condemnation against
hir all wrong and iniurious. And for iustification and remembrance
aswell of hir innocencie in life and death, as also of the sinceritie
of their later sentence, a new crosse in that old market to be reared.
In this tale of Tillets is she further likened to Debora, Iahell, and
Iudith, and vnto Romane Clelia compared by Polydor, that shames not
somewhat also to carpe at hir iudgment, and much pitieth hir paine. But
what puritie or regard of deuotion or conscience is in these writers
trow yee, who make no consideration of hir heinous enormities, or else
any difference betweene one stirred vp by mercie diuine, or naturall
loue, and a damnable sorcerer suborned by satan? And thus much of this
gentle Ione, and of hir good oratours that haue said so well for hir:
now iudge as ye list.]

After the bestowing of this Pusell in sort as yee haue heard, the siege
still continued before Campiegne, and the duke of Bedford sent to the
duke of Burgognie lieng at the siege, the earle of Huntington, and sir
Iohn Robsert (two iollie gentlemen, of no lesse prudence to parle with
the enimie, than puissance to incounter them) with a thousand archers
(whose actiuitie, I warrant you, stood not then vpon the first triall)
which dailie skirmished with them within, and made such bastiles &
fortresses, that the towne had beene rendred into their hands, but
that the duke of Burgognie departed from the siege to go into Brabant,
to receiue the possession of that duchie, by the death of his cousin
Philip the duke of that countrie, as then departed this world.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 9.]

[Sidenote: 1431.]

Sir Iohn de Lutzenburgh was left by the duke of Burgognie as generall
of the siege before Campiegne, the which he raised within a short space
after, contrarie to the minds of the Englishmen, which were verie
desirous to haue lien there till the towne had beene rendered, which
if the siege had beene continued but eight daies longer, must needs
haue come to passe; by reason that pestilence and famine had almost
consumed all the souldiers within the towne, so that it remained in
maner without defense. After the breaking vp of this siege, Iohn duke
of Norffolke tooke againe the townes of Dampmartine, and the Chasse
Mongaie, with diuerse other townes. Also the earle of Stafford tooke
the towne of Brin countie Robert, and from thence forraged all the
countrie to Sens, and after tooke Quesnoie in Brie, Grand Puis, and
Rampellon.

During this time, the Frenchmen on the otherside tooke Louiers and
Villeneuf. Then also did the towne of Melun rebell, and had such aid of
other townes adioining, that the English souldiers were faine to leaue
Melun, Morret, and Corbell. Thus did things wauer in doubtfull balance
betwixt the two nations English and French. But bicause the English
sore mistrusted further danger, it was concluded, that king Henrie in
his roiall person with a new armie should come into France, partlie
to visit and comfort his owne subiects there, and partlie either by
feare or fauour (bicause a child of his age and beautie dooth commonlie
procure them loue of elder persons) to moue the Frenchmen to continue
their due obeisance towards him.

[Sidenote: King Henrie the sixt in person goeth with an armie into
France.]

[Sidenote: S. Albons.]

[Sidenote: _Ed. Hull._]

Wherefore after a great host conuenient for that purpose assembled, and
monie for maintenance of the warre readie gathered, and the realme set
in an order vnder the gouernement of the duke of Glocester protector
(which during the kings absence appeased diuerse riots, and punished
the offenders) the king with a great power tooke shipping at Douer on
saint Georges euen within night, and landed at Calis on the morrow
being saint Georges daie, and sundaie, by seuen of the clocke in the
morning. He remained in Calis a good space, and from thence he remoued
to Rone, being there receiued with all triumph. He taried in that citie
a long time, his nobles dailie consulting on their great businesse &
weightie affaires.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex Polychron._]

[Sidenote: A widow without Algate murthered in hir bed by a Breton
whome she charitablie releeued.]

[pilcrow] In this kings time, & somewhat about this yeare, a certeine Breton,
whom a good honest widow had receiued into hir house, and conceiued
well of him in opinion, was by hir mainteined of hir owne pursse, &
(as Polychronicon saith) she found him of almes and for Gods sake.
This charitable deed of hirs deserued a deuout mind to God ward, and
a thankfull hart to hir. But (good soule) how was she recompensed?
[12]Euen murthered in hir bed by the hands of that villaine whome
so bountifullie she succored, and motherlike tendered. Vnto which
bloudie fact (which was a preparatiue to a further mischeefe bred
in his vnnaturall hart) he added another offense: for when he had
dispatched the woman, vsing the riddance of hir to his aduantage, and
as he had obteined oportunitie (to his thinking) he conueied all that
she had awaie with him for his owne releefe. Then being persecuted with
guiltinesse of conscience, which troubleth offenders with ceaselesse
vexations, and forceth them from place to place to seeke corners of
euasion and shift, he tooke priuilege of holie church at saint Georges
in Southwarke, where laieng hands on the crosse, as a shield of
sufficient safegard, he abiured this land, and by that meanes thought
himselfe free from afterclaps.

[12] O fowle ingratitude.

[Sidenote: The murther reuenged by women at the appointment of Gods
iustice.]

Neuerthelesse, God (whose mercifull nature abhorreth the effusion of
mans bloud) prepared a punishment for the malefactor, who passing
through the suburbs of London, without Algate (the place where he had
commited the murther) the women of the same parish and street (as it
were inraged) came out with stones, staues, kenell doong, and other
things, wherewith they so bethwackt him on all parts of his bodie, that
they laid him a stretching, and rid him quite of life. In the wreking
of this their teene they were so fell and fierce, that the constables
with their assistants (which were no small number) dooing what they
could by their authoritie and maine strength, were not able to rescue
him out of the womens hands; who had sworne in their hearts (as it
seemed by the maner of their reuenge which was void of all mercie)
to see the end of such a villaine as most vnnaturallie had slaine a
woman, a neighbour, a widow, a pitifull woman, a good neighbour, an
honest widow; the wretch himselfe being a fugitiue, a stranger borne, a
begger, and he to whome she shewed hir selfe the staffe of his support.
O singular ingratitude which nature abhorreth, law dissalloweth, heauen
disclaimeth, God detesteth, humanitie condemneth, and euerie good bodie
to the verie death defieth; as the old distichon excellentlie and with
good sense noteth;

    Lex & natura, coelum, Deus, omnia iura
    Damnant ingratum, moerent ilium quoq; natum.

But to returne to the affaires of king Henrie, who in the moneth of
Nouember remooued from Rone to Pontoise, and so to saint Denis, to
the intent to make his entrie into Paris, and there to be sacred king
of France. There were in his companie of his owne nation, his vncle
the cardinall of Winchester, the cardinall and archbishop of Yorke,
the dukes of Bedford, Yorke, and Norffolke, the earles of Warwike,
Salisburie, Oxenford, Huntington, Ormond, Mortaigne, and Suffolke. Of
Gascoigns, there were the earles of Longuille and Marche, besides manie
other noble men of England, Guien, and Normandie. And the cheefe of the
French nation were the dukes of Burgognie, and Lewes of Lutzenburgh,
cardinall and chancellor of France for king Henrie: the bishops of
Beauuois and Noion, both peeres of France, beside the bishop of Paris,
and diuerse other bishops; the earle of Vaudemount, and other noble
men, whose names were superfluous to rehearse. And he had in a gard
about his person three thousand price archers, some on horssebacke, and
part on foot.

[Sidenote: King Henrie the sixt crowned in Paris.]

[Sidenote: _Le Rosier historiad._]

To speake with what honour he was receiued into the citie of Paris,
what pageants were prepared, and how richlie the gates, streets, and
bridges on euerie side were hanged with costlie clothes of arras &
tapestrie, it would be too long a processe, and therefore I doo heere
passe it ouer with silence. On the seauenteenth daie of December,
he was crowned king of France, in our ladie church of Paris, by the
cardinall of Winchester, the bishop of Paris not being contented that
the cardinall should doo such an high ceremonie in his church and
iurisdiction. After all the ceremonies were finished, the king returned
toward the palace, hauing one crowne on his head, and another borne
before him; and one scepter in his hand, and the second borne before
him. As touching other the roiall seruices and princelie appointments,
they are verie diligentlie & at large set out in the French chronicle
of that time. This coronation of the king, Anglorum praelia as manie
other good and memorable matters, so this also he hath noted, saieng
thereof in comelie breuitie and truth, as after followeth:

    Aeternae famae paulo post rege sepulto,
    Parisijs, diadema vias & compita circum
    Junior Henricus portat lepidissimus infans.

This high and ioious feast passed not without some spot of displeasure
among the English nobilitie: for the cardinall of Winchester, which
at this time would haue no man be equall with him, commanded the duke
of Bedford to leaue off the name of regent, during the time that the
king was in France, affirming the cheefe ruler being in presence, the
authoritie of the substitute to be cleerlie derogate, according to the
common saieng; In the presence of the higher power, the smaller giueth
place. The duke of Bedford tooke such a secret displeasure with this
dooing, that he neuer after fauoured the cardinall, but stood against
him in all things that he would haue forward. This was the root (as
some haue thought) of that diuision amongst the English nobilitie,
where through their glorie within the realme of France began first to
decline.

[Sidenote: Montargis recouered by the English.]

The next daie after the solemne feast of the kings coronation, were
kept triumphant iusts and torneis, in the which the earle of Arundell,
and the bastard of S. Paule, by the iudgement of the ladies woone the
price. The king kept open hall the space of fiue daies to all commers,
and after (bicause the aire of Paris seemed contrarie to his pure
complexion) by the aduise of his councell, he remooued to Rone, where
he kept his Christmasse. But before his departure from Paris, the noble
men as well of France and Normandie did to him homage, and the common
people sware to him fealtie. In this meane time, sir Francis called
the Aragoignois, a noble capteine of the English part in Normandie,
tooke by force and policie the towne of Montargis, with a great preie
of treasure and prisoners, and put therein a garrison, leauing it well
furnished with vittels and munition.

[Sidenote: The lord Talbot ransomed by exchange.]

[Sidenote: The holie sheepheard.]

About the same time, the earle of Arundell, being truelie informed that
the lord Bousac, marshall of France, was come to Beauuois, intending to
doo some feat in Normandie, assembled the number of three and twentie
hundred men, and comming neere to the said towne of Beauuois, sent a
great number of light horssemen to run before the towne, to traine out
the Frenchmen within; the which issuing out and following the English
horssemen vnto their stale, were so inclosed and fought with, that in
maner all the number of them, saue a few which fled backe into the
towne with the marshall, were slaine or taken. Amongst other of the
cheefest prisoners, that valiant capteine Pouton de Santrails was one,
who without delaie was exchanged for the lord Talbot, before taken
prisoner at the battell of Pataie. There was also taken one called
the sheepheard, a simple man, and a sillie soule; but yet of such
reputation for his supposed holinesse amongst the Frenchmen, that if
he touched the wall of any of their aduersaries townes, they beleeued
verelie it would incontinentlie fall downe.

[Sidenote: Vaudemont besieged.]

This chance succeeded not fortunatlie alone vnto the English nation,
for Richard Beauchampe earle of Warwike had a great skirmish before the
towne of Gournie, where he discomfited and repelled his enimies: and
beside those that were slaine, he tooke fortie horssemen, all being
gentlemen of name and armes. Like chance happened to the freends of
king Charles, towards the marches of Loraine, where Reigner duke of Bar
besieged the towne of Vaudemont perteining to the earle thereof named
Anthonie, coosine to the same duke Reigner. This earle, before the
dukes approching, left a conuenient crue within the towne to defend it,
and with all speed rode to the dukes of Bedford and Burgognie, being
then at the foresaid great triumph at Paris, where he purchased such
fauour at their hands, bicause he had euer taken their parts, that not
onelie sir Iohn Fastolfe was appointed to go with him, hauing in his
companie six hundred archers, but also the duke of Burgognies marshall
named sir Anthonie Toulongon, accompanied with fifteene hundred other
men of warre.

When the duke of Bar heard that his enimies were thus comming towards
him, like a hardie capteine he raised his siege, and met face to face
with the earle and his companie, betweene whome was a cruell and
mortall battell. The horssemen of the French side endured long, but in
conclusion the English archers so galled their horsses, and so wounded
the men, that the Barrois, Almains, and other of duke Reigners side
were compelled to flee. In the chase was taken the duke of Bar, the
bishop of Metz, the lord of Roquedemaque, sir Euerard of Salseburgh,
the vicont Darcie, and two hundred other, beside three thousand which
were slaine.

[Sidenote: Saint Seuerine besieged.]

In this luckie time also, no lesse occasion of victorie was offered
to the Englishmen in an other part, if they could haue vsed it with
such circumspect warinesse as had beene expedient. For Robert lord
Willoughbie, and Matthew [13]Gough, a valiant Welshman, with fifteene
hundred Englishmen, laid siege to a towne in Aniou called saint
Seuerine. Whereof Charles the French king being aduertised, sent
with all speed the lord Ambrose de Lore, with manie noble men to the
succours of them within the towne, wherof the same lord Ambrose was
capteine: and therefore made the more hast to releeue his deputie, and
the other being streictlie besieged, but yet staied at the towne of
Beaumont, till his whole power might come to him.

[13] or rather Goche.

The Englishmen aduertised of this intent of the capteine, came vpon him
in the night, and found the Frenchmens watch so out of order, that a
thousand men were entered into the campe before they were espied; by
reason whereof the Englishmen found small resistance. But when the daie
began to appeare, and that the sunne had set foorth his bright beames
abroad, that all things might be seene, the Englishmen giuen wholie to
spoile, followed not their enimies in chase, but being contented with
their preie and game, began to retreit toward the siege againe, which
the lord Willoughbie still mainteined with a part of the armie.

But see the chance. The Frenchmen which were c[=o]ming after, hearing
by the noise of the people that some fraie was at hand, put spurres to
their horsses, and set on the Englishmen pestered with bag and baggage
of the spoile and preie which they had gotten in the French campe. The
other of the Frenchmen which before had fled, returned againe, and
aided their fellowes; so that the Englishmen being taken out of order,
were compelled to flee, of whome Matthew [14]Gough and diuerse other
were taken prisoners. And yet of the other part manie were slaine, and
a great number taken: amongst whom was the lord de Lore, who (for all
that the Frenchmen could doo) was kept, and not deliuered. The lord
Willoughbie hearing of this mishap, raised his siege, and departed
verie sore displeased in his mind, but could not remedie it.

[14] Goche.

[Sidenote: A legat from Rome sent to treat a peace betwixt the English
and the French.]

[Sidenote: A truce for six yeares.]

[Sidenote: Chartres taken by treason notwidthstanding the truce.]

[Sidenote: The two errours.]

About this season, Nicholas the cardinall of the holie crosse was sent
into France, as a legat from Eugenie the fourth as then bishop of Rome,
to treat a peace betweene the Englishmen and Frenchmen. But when after
great instance and labour made betweene the parties, he saw their
obstinate and froward minds, nothing inclined to anie agreement, he
wan so much at their hands by earnest sute, that a truce was granted
to indure for six yeares to come: but as the same was hardlie granted,
so was it of the Frenchmen soone and lightlie broken. For the bastard
of Orleance newlie made earle of Dunois, tooke by treson the towne
of Chartres from the Englishmen, affirming by the law of armes, that
stealing or buieng a towne, without inuasion or assault, was no breach
of league, amitie, or truce. In which towne he slue the bishop, bicause
he was a Burgognian. Hereby did new malice increase, and mortall warre
began eftsoones to be put in vse.

Whilest these things were dooing in France, the cardinall of Winchester
was come backe againe into England, to appease certeine commotions
and sturres attempted by sundrie persons vnder colour of religion:
but after that William Mandeuile, and Iohn Sharpe the cheefe authors
thereof were apprehended and executed by the gouernour and the kings
iustices, the residue yeelded and confessed their offenses, whereof
two articles were these (as some write) that priests should haue no
possessions, and that all things by order of charitie among christian
people should be in common. Other thought their opinions were not such
errours, but that their enimies spread abroad such rumors of them, to
make them more odious to the people.

[Sidenote: A parlement called by the duke of Glocester the king being
in France.]

[Sidenote: A peace concluded with the Scots.]

After that, a parlement was called by the duke of Glocester, in the
which monie was assigned to be leuied, and men appointed, which should
passe ouer into France to the aid of the duke of Bedford, for the
maintenance of the warres: bicause it was suspected the truce would
not long continue. During this parlement, Iames the king of Scots
sent ambassadors to conclude a peace with the duke of Glocester, who
(bicause the king was absent) referred the matter to the three estates.
After long consultation, not without great arguments, a peace was
concluded. When the parlement was ended, the cardinall well furnished
with men & monie, departed out of England, and came to Rone to the
king, to whome also resorted the duke of Bedford from Paris, to consult
of things not vnlikelie to follow.

Herevpon a great councell was kept in the castell of Rone, and manie
doubts mooued, and few weightie things out of hand concluded. At
length, after great disputation, with manie arguments ended, the dukes
of Bedford and Yorke, and Edmund late earle of Mortaigne, and now (by
the death of Iohn duke of Summerset, leauing behind him a sole daughter
and heire, maried to the earle, and called Margaret after the countesse
of Richmond) atteined to the name and title of duke of Summerset,
approoued the reason of those, that held it expedient to haue an armie
in a redinesse for defense, least the Frenchmen suddenlie should
attempt anie enterprise to the danger of the Englishmen, and losse of
those townes and countries that were vnder them.

[Sidenote: 1432]

[Sidenote: King Henrie returneth out of France into England.]

When all things were agreed, king Henrie came to Calis, from thence to
Douer; and so by easie iournies the one and twentith daie of Februarie
to London, where he was triumphantlie receiued, and richlie presented,
as in the chronicles of Robert Fabian it maie at large appeare. After
that the king was departed into England, the duke of Bedford regent
of France, and captein of Calis, taried behind in the marches of
Picardie, where he was informed certeine souldiers of Calis grudging
at the restraint of woolles, began to murmur against the king and his
councell, to some danger of the towne. The duke vpon due examination
had caused diuerse to be put to death, and manie banished that towne
and marches for euer.

[Sidenote: The duchesse of Bedford sister to the duke of Burgognie
deceassed.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Bedford marieth with the earle of saint Paules
daughter.]

In the meane time, the ladie Anne duchesse of Bedford departed this
life at Paris, by whose death the fast knot of faithful friendship
betwixt the duke of Bedford and his brother in law the duke of
Burgognie began somewhat to slacken. Shortlie after, to wit, about the
beginning of the next yeare 1433, the said duke of Bedford being thus a
widower, through the persuason of the lord Lewes of Lutzenburgh bishop
of Terwine and Elie, and chancellor of France for king Henrie, agreed
to marrie the ladie Iaquet, daughter to Peter earle of saint Paule, and
neece to the said bishop, and to the lord Iohn of Lutzenburgh.

The mariage was solemnized at Terwine with great triumph. Which ended,
the duke with his new spouse (being about the age of seauenteene
yeares) came vnto Calis, and so into England, from whence in the
moneth of August next he returned to Paris. The duke of Burgognie,
though nothing pleased with this new aliance contracted by the duke
of Bedford, with the house of Lutzenburgh, but yet not able to doo
anie thing to let it; bicause of the mariage consummate yer he could
find any power or knowledge to hinder it. Whilest these things were a
dooing, in some places the French souldiers of the Dolphins, lacking
wages (as the time serued) tooke both Englishmen and Burgognians,
ransoming and spoiling them at their pleasure. Herewith the regent much
mooued, prepared for warre after six moneths the truce had beene taken:
and so the warre againe was renewed.

[Sidenote: The Frenchmen breake the peace and take the towne of Saint
Valerie.]

[Sidenote: Laignie besieged.]

The Frenchmen anon as open truce-breakers, raised a crue, and suddenlie
tooke the towne of saint Valerie in Normandie, neere to the mouth of
the riuer of Some. An other armie, vnder the leading of sir Ambrose de
Lore, wasted and destroied all the countrie about Caen. The duke of
Bedford on his part sent the earle of Arundell, the earle of Warwikes
sonne, the lord Lisle Adam marshall of France for king Henrie, and
twelue hundred men of warre with ordinance and munition to besiege
the town of Laignie vpon the riuer of Marne. The earle with shot of
canon brake the arch of the bridge, and got from the Frenchmen their
bulworke, and set it on fire. Diuerse assaults were attempted, but the
towne was well defended: for there were within it an eight hundred men
of armes, besides other meane souldiers.

The duke of Bedford herewith gathered an armie of six thousand men,
whereof were capteins; Robert lord Willoughbie, sir Andrew Ogard
chamberlaine to the duke, sir Iohn Saluaine bailiffe of Rone, sir Iohn
Montgomerie bailiffe of Caux, sir Philip Hall bailiffe of Vernoill, sir
Richard Ratcliffe deputie of Calis, sir Rafe Neuill, sir Rafe Standish,
sir Iohn Hanford, sir Richard Euthin, sir Richard Harington bailiffe
of Eureux, sir William Fulthorpe, sir Thomas Griffin of Ireland, Dauid
Hall, Thomas Stranguish, Leonard Ormstone esquiers, and Thomas Gerard.
All gentlemen of courage, and as forward to giue the French the foile,
as the French for their liues to giue them the discomfiture. But vnto
which side the victorie should befall, vncerteine it was before the
triall of both their chances had determined the doubt by the euent of
the conflict.

The duke of Bedford furnished with this armie and companie of worthie
capteins came to the siege before Laignie, where he made a bridge of
boats, and brought his ordinance so neere the towne, that to all people
it seemed not long able to resist. But the earle of Dunois, otherwise
called the bastard of Orleance, with diuerse hardie capteins, as
valiantlie defended as the Englishmen assaulted. At length the French
king, perceiuing this towne to be the three cornerd keie betweene the
territories Burgognion, English, and French, and the losse thereof
should turne him to irreuocable damage, sent the lord of Rieux, Poiton,
the Hire, the lord Gawcourt, and six thousand men, with great plentie
of vittels, to the intent either to raise the siege, or else to vittell
the towne.

The Frenchmen made a brag, as though they would haue assailed the
Englishmen in their campe, but when they perceiued the courage of the
lord regent, and the desire he had to fight, they framed themselues
so in order of battell, as though they could doo all things, and yet
in effect did nothing: but that whilest part of them mainteined a
skirmish, a sort of rude & rusticall persons were appointed to conueie
into the towne thirtie oxen, and other small vittels. But this sweet
gaine was deerelie paied for, if the losse with the gaine be pondered
in equall balance: for hauing regard to their 30 leane oxen, in the
skirmish were slaine the lord Saintreiles brother to that valiant
capteine Poiton de Saintreiles, also capteine Iohn brother to the lord
Gawcourt, and fiftie other noble and valiant personages.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 11]

The Frenchmen thus politiklie hauing doone their feat, in the beginning
of August, remooued their armie vnto Fort vnder Yer, where, by a bridge
of tuns they passed into the Ile of France. The duke of Bedford (like
a wise prince) not minding to leaue the more in ieopardie for hope
of the lesse, nor the accident for the substance, raised his siege,
and returned to Paris, nothing more minding than to trie his quarrell
with dint of sword against the enimies, if they would thereto agree.
And herevpon sent Bedford his herald to the lord Gawcourt and other
capteins of the French armie, offering them battell and a pitched
field within a conuenient time, and where they would appoint. The
French capteins answered the English herald, that there was time to
gaine, and time to lose: and for choise of times they would vse their
owne discretions.

[Sidenote: 1433]

[Sidenote: The castell of Rone like to be taken by treason of the
capteine.]

Shortlie after, Piers Audebeufe constable of the castell of Rone,
corrupted with monie, suffered the marshall of France, with two
hundred other, as persons disguised to enter the place by stealth: but
they were soone espied, and driuen to the dungeon, where they were
constrained to yeeld themselues prisoners: of the which some were
hanged, some headed, and some ransomed, at the pleasure of the regent.
This pageant thus plaied, the lord regent sent the earle of sainte
Paule, and Robert lord Willoughbie, with a competent number of men to
besiege the town of S. Valerie, which the Frenchmen a little before
had taken. This siege continued the space of three weeks; at the end
whereof the Frenchmen within yeelded the towne, and departed with their
horsse and harnesse onelie to them saued.

[Sidenote: The lord of saint Paule deceassed.]

The earle put there in garrison fresh and valiant souldiers, and
appointed capteine there, sir Iohn Aubemond. [pilcrow] In the same towne
(whether by infection of aire, or by corrupt vittels, which the
townesmen did eat) a great pestilence shortlie after happened, which
consumed within a small time two parts of the people. The earle of
saint Paule, and the lord Willoughbie returning backe to the regent,
were ioifullie receiued, and within a while after, the earle departed
from Paris to laie siege to the castell of Mouchas. But being incamped
neere the towne of Blangie, he by a sudden maladie departed this life,
the last of August, leauing his seigniories to Lewes de Lutzenburg
his sonne and heire. Bicause this dead earle was father in law to the
regent, solemne obsequies were kept for him both in Paris and in London.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 12.]

[Sidenote: Prisoners killed.]

In the meane season, the Frenchmen entering into high Burgognie,
burnt, tooke, and destroied diuerse townes; wherevpon the Burgognians
assembled a great armie, both to reuenge their quarrels, and to recouer
their townes taken from them. To whome as to his freends the duke
of Bedford sent the lord Willoughbie, and sir Thomas Kiriell, with
a conuenient number of souldiers, which entering into the lands of
Laonnois, were incountered with a great power of their enimies. But
after long fight, the Frenchmen were ouerthrowne, and of them left dead
in the field an hundred and sixtie horssemen, beside prisoners, which
after vpon vrgent cause were all killed.

[Sidenote: 1434.]

[Sidenote: The lord Talbot saileth into France.]

Whilest these things happened thus in France, Iohn lord Talbot gathered
togither a crue of chosen men of warre in England, to the number of
eight hundred, and sailed into Normandie, and passed by Rone to Paris.
In his waie he tooke the strong castell of Ioing betweene Beauuois and
Gisours, and caused all the Frenchmen within to be taken and hanged,
and after raced and defaced the castell. After he had rested himselfe
a while at Paris, and taken aduise with the councell there, what waie
it should be best for him to take, without prolonging time; he with the
lord de Lisle Adam and others, departed from thence, hauing in their
retinues sixteene hundred men of warre. And comming to the castell
of Beaumont vpon Oise, whereof was capteine sir Amadour de Vignoils
brother to the Hire, they found it abandoned by them that had it in
keeping, who were withdrawne to the towne of Creill.

[Sidenote: The lord Talbot.]

[Sidenote: Earle of Arundell.]

Thither therefore the lord Talbot followed, who slaieng in a skirmish
the said Amadour, he wan at length the said towne of Creill, and after
the townes of Pont S. Marence, Neufuile in Esmoie, la Rouge maison,
Crespie in Valois, & Cleremont in Beauuois, and after with great riches
and good prisoners returned to Paris. Neither had the lord Talbot such
good and prosperous successe alone but the earle of Arundell also at
the verie same season tooke the castell of Bomeline, & raced it to the
ground, after he got by force the castell of Dorle, & from thence came
to S. Selerine, where the lord Ambrose de Lore, being capteine, issued
out and fought with the Englishmen so egerlie, that he droue them backe
an arrow shoot by fine force: but the earle so incouraged his men,
that they gaue a fresh onset vpon the Frenchmen, and followed it so
fiercelie, that they slue a great number of them, and droue the residue
into the towne.

[Sidenote: Louiers besieged.]

[Sidenote: Saint Selerine won by assault.]

After this victorie, he besieged Louiers, whereof was capteine the
Hire, and his brother, who rendered the towne without assault. Then
the earle assembling togither a great armie, returned againe to S.
Selerine, & inuironed the towne with a strong siege. When he had lien
there almost three moneths, euerie daie attempting or dooing somewhat,
he finallie gaue so fierce an assault, that by force he entered the
towne, and slue Iohn Almaigne, and Guilliam saint Albine, the cheefe
capteins, and eight hundred other men of warre. The children of le
seigneur de Lore were taken prisoners. The earle put new men of warre
into the towne, and made capteine there sir Iohn Cornewall. After this,
he before the strong towne of Sillie pitched his campe. The inhabitants
terrified at the losse of saint Selerine, deliuered him pledges,
vpon condition, that if they were not rescued within thirtie daies
next, then they (their liues saued) should render the towne into his
possession: which offer was receiued.

The French king, being aduertised hereof by a post, appointed (as
some saie) Arthur earle of Richmont (or as other write, Iohn duke of
Alanson) with a great companie of men of warre to go to the rescue of
this towne. But whether it was the earle or duke, certeine it is at
his approching to the siege, he incamped himselfe by a brooke side,
ouer the which a man might haue striden, & perceiuing how stronglie the
English were incamped against him, he thought it not for his profit
to giue battell; & so in the night season raised & went his waie
without further attempt. When they within the towne knew that their
succours failed, they rendered themselues to the mercie of the earle
of Arundell, who gentlie receiued them, and leauing a garrison in the
towne, departed to Mans, and in his waie tooke the castels of Mellaie
and saint Laurence. About this time the lord Willoughbie & sir Thomas
Kiriell, returning with great victorie out of Burgognie, passing by the
towne of Louiers, latelie reduced to the English obeisance, furnished
it both with men and munition.

[Sidenote: An insurrection in Normandie.]

Among so manie good chances, some euill are accustomed to happen, or
else the gainers would not know themselues. And so at this time it
happened, that a great number of the common and rusticall people in
Normandie dwelling by the sea coast, either prouoked by the French
king, or desirous of alteration and change (which thing the commons
much couet and desire) made an insurrection, put on harnesse, and
by force expelled certeine English garrisons out of their holds,
publishing and proclaming openlie, that their onelie purpose and
intent was to expell and banish the whole English nation out of their
countries and coasts. Wherefore it maie be likelie, that the blacke
Morian will sooner become white, than the people bred in France will
heartilie loue an English borne. For it standeth not with their enuious
nature to alter their malicious maners; as the old prouerbe saith
truelie of them:

    Celtica natura semper sequitur sua iura.

These rebels thus frantikelie assembled, with all speed marched toward
Caen, to the intent there both to increase their number, and also to
consult what waie they should follow in their new begun enterprise.
But the dukes of Yorke and Summerset, then lieng in Normandie,
hauing perfect knowledge hereof, immediatlie sent foorth the earle
of Arundell, and the lord Willoughbie with six thousand archers, and
thirteene hundred light horssemen, to staie and keepe them from making
anie further progresse. The earle of Arundell appointed the lord
Willoughbie, with two thousand archers, and certeine horssemen to go
afore him, and lie in a stale within some couert place. Which doone,
the earle followed; & so keeping in the multitude at the backe, droue
them before him as deare into a buckestale: and when the miserable
wretches came neere to the stale, the earle made a token, whereat a
gun shot off for a signe. Therewith the lord Willoughbie set on them
before, and the earle behind, shooting so fiercelie, that the poore
caitiues, wounded and galled with the shot of arrowes, threw awaie
their harnesse, and cried out instantlie for mercie.

The earle of Arundell mooued with compassion, caused his souldiers
to staie from further slaughter, and apprehending those that were
knowen to be stirrers and leaders of the rest, let the other returne
home without further damage: but yet, yer the souldiers could be
brought backe vnder their standards, there were aboue a thousand of
the rebels slaine. And this commotion thus appeased, vpon inquirie
of the principall offenders, such as were found guiltie were put to
terrible executions; as they had well deserued. During which rebellion,
Peter Rokeford and his companie gat by treason the towne of Diepe and
diuerse other holds thereto adioiming. After the earle of Arundell
had obteined so good successe in his enterprises (as partlie ye haue
heard) he attempted another, which was the last worke and finall labour
of his liuing daies. For the duke of Bedford, being informed that his
aduersaries had gotten the towne of Rue, and therein put a garrison,
which sore vexed the countries of Ponthieu, Arthois, and Bolennois,
sent word to the earle that he without delaie should besiege the said
towne.

The earle obeieng his commandement assembled his people, and came to
Gourneie, where he heard tell how there was a castell neere to Beauuois
called Gerberoie, the which being fallen in decaie, Charles the French
king had appointed sir Stephan de Vignoils, commonlie called the Hire,
to repare and newlie to fortifie, bicause it stood commodiouslie to
serue as a countergarrison against the English townes and fortresses
on those frontiers. The earle aduertised hereof, and perceiuing that
this new building would be greatlie preiudicial to the Englishmen,
determined first to dispossesse his enimies of that place, supposing
to find small resistance: but he was deceiued. For there was the said
Hire, and three thousand men of warre with him. The erle comming
thither, incamped himselfe with fiue hundred horssemen in a little
close not farre from the castell.

The Frenchmen, perceiuing that the earle and his horsses were wearie,
and that his archers were not yet come, determined to set vpon him
before the comming of his footmen, the which they knew to be little
more than a mile behind. Wherfore for a policie, they set foorth fiftie
horssemen, as though there had beene no mo within the castell. The
earle perceiuing this, sent foorth sir Randolfe Standish to incounter
them, hauing with him an hundred horsses. The Frenchmen fought
couragiouslie awhile, and suddenlie came out all the remnant, and
slue sir Randolfe Standish and all his companie, and boldlie set on
the earle and his band, which manfullie resisted the Frenchmen, till
at length the Hire caused three culuerings to be shot off amongst the
Englishmen, wherof one strake the earle on the ancle, and so brake his
leg, that for paine he fell from his horsse.

[Sidenote: The earle of Arundell deceassed.]

Then the Frenchmen entered amongst the Englishmen, tooke the earle
lieng on the ground, with sir Richard Wooduile, and six score more,
and there were slaine almost two hundred. The residue saued themselues
as well as they might. The earle was caried to Beauuois, where of his
hurt he shortlie died, & was buried in the frier Minors. He was a
man of singular vertue, constancie, and grauitie, whose death in so
troublous a season did sore appall the harts of the English people.
Thus oftentimes varied the chance of doubtfull warre, so that one time
the Englishmen got by assault, and yeelded diuerse strong townes,
castels, and piles: and at another season the French people, sometime
by bargaine, sometime by assault, obteined the same againe, or other in
their steed.

[Sidenote: The duke of Bourbon dieth at London.]

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

About the moneth of Iune in this twelfth yeare, Iohn duke of Bourbon
and Auuergne, taken prisoner at the battell of Agincourt eighteene
yeeres past (as before ye haue heard) now paieng his ransome, which
was eighteene thousand pounds sterling, was taken with a most sore
and grieuous feuer, the which made an end of his life in the citie of
London, on the same daie that was appointed for his departure towards
France, whose corpse was interred in the graie friers of the same
citie. [pilcrow] This yeare also about the latter end of Maie, was a meeting
appointed to be had at saint Omers betwixt the dukes of Bedford and
Burgognie, for the qualifieng of certeine displeasures and grudges
betwixt them kindled and mainteined by some flattering taletellers, who
raising matters of reproch touching their honors, bred such grudges,
that all loue betwixt them ceassed, all affinitie reiected, and all
old freendship forgotten; such enuie insueth where enimitie once hath
princes harts possessed.

These two dukes come into the towne of saint Omers, the duke of Bedford
being then regent of France, sonne, brother, and vncle to kings,
thought that the duke of Burgognie should haue come and visited him in
his lodging. The duke of Burgognie on the other part, being lord and
souereigne of the towne, iudged it as much vnmeet for him to go to the
regent where he was lodged. Howbeit by intreatie of freends, to meet
in a place indifferent betweene both their lodgings was appointed;
which offer not accepted, both parties departed discontent, and neuer
after saw nor communed togither. Thus by the proud disdaine and enuious
discord of these two high stomached princes, Bedford not minding to
haue anie peere, and Burgognie not willing to abide anie superior,
shortlie after England much lost, and Burgognie greatlie gained not, as
by the sequeale may appeare.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 13]

[Sidenote: A towne surprised by entrance of a common priuie.]

[Sidenote: The fruits of warre.]

The bastard of Orleance, called the earle of Dunois, the lord Rochford
marshall of France, with other, in the beginning of this thirteenth
yeare, tooke the towne of S. Denis by treason, skirmished with them
of Paris, and leauing behind them a great garrison, tooke the towne
of Howdone, and Pont saint Marence by composition. And at the same
time was the towne of Pont Meulan taken by the sudden scaling of two
fishermen, who entered vp at a common priuie standing in the wall.
Thus warre continuallie lasted betwixt these two mightie nations,
English and French, within the realme of France (than which therefore
no countrie thought more miserable.) And though the poore people and
inhabitants of the good townes and villages, susteined most losse in
their substance, yet the men of warre oftentimes paied deerest for the
bargaine, being daily slaine, wounded, and taken prisoners; for warre
seldome beareth anie other fruit.

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

[Sidenote: 1434.]

[Sidenote: _Onophrius Panuinius._]

[It may serue verie well here to recount, how somewhat before these
daies, Martin the fift, in the fifteenth yeare of his popedome, An.
1431, agreeing vpon a generall councell to be holden at Basill the same
yeare, did anon after deceasse: whom Eugenie the fourth succeeding, and
liking right well of the time and place, by his authority signified and
sent with Iulian Cesarine his legat, did confirme the choise. Wherevpon
as the councell the nineteenth of Iulie the same 1431 was there begun,
and his holinesse soone after aduertised how malapertlie his ghostlie
children had imbusied themselues in checking at their holie fathers
faults, and about reformation of his church at Rome; his sublimitie
therat highlie offended (for great cause it had) commanded his legat
by and by to dissolue that synod, and in his name to appoint a new at
Ferrar, and so come his waie: vnder colour forsooth how that place was
meetest for the prelats of the Greeke church, who had to confer with
the Latine councell about points of religion, wherein they long had
remained at square.

But these Basilien clerks, there still fastlie conteining themselues,
so smallie regarded this summons of Eugenie (who then with his prelats,
as the time was run on, vpon prorogation from Ferrar kept an other
councell at Florence 1439) as by a confident countermand cited Eugenie
and all his cardinals to come to them at their solemne set councell at
Basill. Which his supremassie (for so best became it, notwithstanding
sundrie citations) vtterlie contemning to doo, they soone after
like verie impious imps, first for contumacie accurssed his holie
fatherhood, then depriued him of his papasie, and out of hand chose
another in his office, one Amedius late duke of Sauoie, who afore that
time hauing giuen vp his possessions & dignitie vnto his children,
became an heremite in a monasterie of his own building by mount Geuenna
in Sauoie nigh the lake Leman, where he by title of Decanus militum
Iesu Christi, and ten more of nobilitie with him, had setled themselues
to liue.

[Sidenote: _An. 3. Nichol._]

The vertuous minded man thus chosen pope by spirituall counsell
inueigled, left the holie life (such as it was) that he had profest,
tooke the papasie vpon him the same 1439, and called Felix the fift,
which promotion yet he not long inioied. For after, by his successour
Nicholas the fifts ambition, that had suborned emperour Frederike to
be a worker in the matter, this sillie Amedius was coosined of his
popes golden crowne for a cardinalls felt hat. Then (good man) at
last could he find, whether were neerer to christen profession, the
life of a vertuous prince ruling in iustice, of a solitarie heremite
vertuouslie occupied, of an imperious pope that may know no peere, or
of a licentious cardinall to liue as he list. This poore prince had
experience of all, and then knew the best: when well might he lament
him, but too late repent him.

[Sidenote: 1435]

And in the fift yeare of this Basilien councell that had a continuance
of eleuen yeare (whereof an eight were run yer Felix was chosen, in
which Eugenie remaining pope still, though of curst hart he neuer
came at them) motion was made among Sigismund the emperour and other
christen kings (who for appeasing this schisme betweene the pope
and his prelats, were all present by person or proxie) that sith
such horror of bloudshed betweene the two nations continuallie so
lamentablie raged in France, some mediation might be made for accord:
whereof one thing seemed to minister occasion of the more hope,
bicause the duke of Burgognie was willing (so that it were not of his
owne sute) to returne and reconcile himselfe with the French king his
mortall enimie and ancient aduersarie.]

[Sidenote: A solemne tretie of peace at Arras.]

Heerevpon by authoritie of this generall councell, two graue prelats,
the one Nicholas Albergat a Carthusian frier, intituled a preest
cardinall of the holie crosse; the other Hugh Lusignan a Cyprian,
Greeke, bishop cardinall of Prenest in Italie, came to the towne of
Arras in Arthois, whither were sent from the king of England, Henrie
Beauford cardinall of Winchester, Henrie archbishop of Yorke, William
de la Poole earle of Suffolke, and Iohn Holland earle of Huntington,
with diuerse other knights and esquiers. And for the French king were
there present Charles duke of Bourbon, Lewes erle of Vandosme, Arthur
of Britaine constable of France, the archbishop of Reimes, and sir
Philip Harecourt. The duke of Burgognie was there in proper person,
accompanied with the duke of Guelders, and the earles of Estampes,
Lignie, S. Paule, Vaudemont, Neures, and Daniell sonne to the prince of
Orange, with a great gard and a gallant companie.

Vpon the daie of the first session, the cardinall of S. Crosse declared
to the three parties the innumerable mischeefes, that had followed
to the whole state of the christian common-wealth by their continual
dissention and dailie discord, exhorting them for the honour of God,
& for the loue which they ought to beare towards the aduancement of
his faith and true religion, to conforme themselues to reason, and to
laie aside all rancor, malice and displeasure; so that in concluding
a godlie peace, they might receiue profit and quietnesse heere in
this world, and of God an euerlasting reward in heauen. After this
admonition, and diuerse daies of communication, euerie partie brought
in their demands, which were most contrarie, and farre from anie
likelihood of comming to a good conclusion.

The Englishmen would that king Charles should haue nothing but what it
pleased the king of England, and that not as dutie, but as a benefit
by him of his meere liberalitie giuen and distributed. The Frenchmen on
the other part would that K. Charles should haue the kingdome franklie
and freelie, and that the king of England should leaue the name, armes,
and title of the king of France, and to be content with the dukedomes
of Aquitaine and Normandie, and to forsake Paris, and all the townes
which they possessed in France, betweene the riuers of Some and Loire,
being no parcell of the duchie of Normandie. To be breefe, the demands
of all parts were betweene them so farre out of square, as hope of
concord there was none at all.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl._]

The cardinals seeing them so farre in sunder, minded not to dispute
their titles, but offered them reasonable conditions of truce and
peace for a season, which notwithstanding, either of frowardnesse,
or of disdaine on both parts, were openlie refused. Insomuch that
the Englishmen in great displeasure, departed to Calis, and so into
England. [pilcrow] One writer affirmeth, that they being warned of a secret
conspiracie mooued against them, suddenlie departed from Arras, and
so returned into their countrie. But what cause soeuer hindered their
accord and vnitie (sith this and that may be surmized) certeine it is,
that the onelie and principal cause was, for that the God of peace and
loue was not among them, without whom no discord is quenched, no knot
of concord fastened, no bond of peace confirmed, no distracted minds
reconciled, no true freendship mainteined: for had he beene among them,
their dissenting and waiward willes had sounded the sweet harmonie of
amiable peace, which of all things that God hath bestowed vpon man is
the verie best, and more to be set by than manie triumphs, as the poet
excellentlie well saith:

[Sidenote: _Sil. Ital. lib._ 11.]

    ---- pax optima rerum
    Quas homini nouisse datum: pax vna triumphis
    Innumeris potior, pax custodire salutem
    Et ciues aequare potens.

Now whiles this treatie of peace was in hand, the lord Talbot, the
lord Willoughbie, the lord Scales, with the lord Lisle Adam, and fiue
thousand men of warre, besieged the towne of saint Denis with a strong
band. The earle of Dunois hearing hereof, accompanied with the lord
Lohac, and the lord Bueill, with a great companie of horssemen hasted
thitherwards to raise the siege, and by the waie incountred with sir
Thomas Kiriell, and Matthew [15]Gough, riding also toward saint Denis,
beetweene whom was a great conflict. But suddenlie came to the aid of
the Frenchmen the garrison of Pont Meulan, which caused the Englishmen
to returne without anie great harme or damage: sauing that Matthew
[16]Gough by foundering of his horsse was taken, and carried to Pont
Meulan.

[15] Or rather Goche.

[16] Or Goche.

[Sidenote: S. Denis taken by the Englishmen.]

[Sidenote: A peace between Charles of France and the duke of Burgognie.]

In the meane time was the towne of saint Denis rendered to the
Englishmen, the which raced the walles and fortifications, sauing the
walles of the abbeie, and of the tower called Venin. Shortlie after the
towne of Pontois, where sir Iohn Ruppelleie was capteine, rebelled;
and by force the Englishmen were expelled, the inhabitants yeelding
themselues to the French king. This towne was small, but the losse
was great, bicause it was the keie that opened the passage betwixt
the cities of Paris and Rone. But now to returne to the communication
at Arras, which after the departure of the English commissioners held
betwixt the Frenchmen and Burgognians, till at length a peace was
concluded, accorded, and sworne betwixt king Charles and duke Philip of
Burgognie, vpon certeine conditions, as in the French histories more
plainlie appeareth.

And after, the duke of Burgognie, to set a veile before the king of
Englands eies, sent Thoison Dore his cheefe herald to king Henrie
with letters, excusing the matter by way of information, that he was
constreined to enter in this league with K. Charles, by the dailie
outcries, complaints, and lamentations of his people; alledging against
him, that he was the onlie cause of the long continuance of the wars,
to the vtter impouerishing of his owne people, and the whole nation
of France. Therefore sith he could not otherwise doo, but partlie to
content his owne people, and cheefelie to satisfie the request of the
whole generall councell, was in manner compelled for his part to growe
vnto a peace and amitie with king Charles.

He likewise wished that king Henrie, vpon reasonable and honorable
conditions of agreement offered, should in no wise refuse the same:
whereby the long continued warre at length might ceasse and take end,
to the pleasure of almightie God, which is the author of peace and
vnitie: & hereto he promised him his aid and furtherance, with manie
gaie words, which I passe ouer. The superscription of this letter was
thus [To the high and mightie prince, Henrie by the grace of God king
of England, his welbeloued cousine.] Neither naming him king of France,
nor his souereigne lord, according as (euer before that time) he was
accustomed to doo. This letter was much maruelled at of the councell,
after they had throughlie considered all the contents thereof, & they
could not but be much disquieted, so far foorth that diuerse of them
offended so much with the vntruth of the duke, that they could not
temper their passions, but openlie called him traitor.

[Sidenote: Spoil vpon the Burgognian people in London.]

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

But when the rumor of the dukes reuolting was published amongst the
people, they left words, and fell to bestowing of stripes: for being
pricked with these euill tidings, they ran in great outrage vpon all
the Flemings, Hollanders, and Burgognions, which then inhabited within
the citie of London, and the suburbes of the same, and slue and hurt
a great number of them before they, by the kings proclamation, could
be staied from such iniurious dooing: for the king nothing more minded
than to saue innocent bloud, and to defend them that had not offended.
The officer at armes was willed to tell his maister, that it stood not
with his honor to be enimie to the English nation; and that his dutie
had beene to keepe his ancient truth and allegiance, rather than to be
occasion of new warre. And what a new reconciled enimie was in respect
of an old tried freend, he might shortlie find. [When the messenger
with this answer was dispatched, and vpon consultation found, a matter
standing both with good policie in forceing the proud subiect to know
his obedience, and also with great equitie to twitch a quareller with
such pinsars as wherewith afore he had nipt an other, so was it anon
brought about, that sundrie of his good townes and cities rebelled
against him, whereby (lesse to his liking than to his deseruing) he was
verie well made to bite of a chokepeare of his own grafting.]

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 14.]

[Sidenote: The death of the duke of Bedford regent of Fr[=a]ce.]

[Sidenote: A worthy saieng of a wise prince.]

This yeare the fourteeth daie of September died Iohn duke of Bedford,
regent of France, a man both politike in peace, and hardie in warre,
and yet no more hardie than mercifull when he had the victorie, whose
bodie was with all funerall solemnitie buried in the cathedrall church
of our ladie in Rone, on the north side of the high altar, vnder
a sumptuous and costlie monument. Which toome when king Lewes the
eleauenth, by certeine vndiscreet persons was counselled to deface,
affirming that it was a great dishonour both to the king and to the
realme, to see the enimie of his father and theirs to haue so solemne
and rich a memorial: he answered saieng, "What honour shall it be to
vs, or to you, to breake this monument, and to pull out of the ground
the dead bones of him, whome in his life neither my father nor your
progenitors, with all their power, puissance, and freends were once
able to to make flee one foot backward; but by his strengh, wit, and
policie, kept them all out of the principall dominions of the realme of
France, and out of this noble and famous duchie of Normandie? Wherefore
I saie, first, God haue his soule, and let his bodie now lie in rest,
which when he was aliue, would haue disquieted the proudest of vs all.
And as for the toome, I assure you, it is not so decent nor conuenient,
as his honour and acts deserued, although it were much richer, and more
beautifull."

[Sidenote: Great Frost.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke made regent of France.]

The frost was so extreame this yeare, beginning about the fiue and
twentith daie of Nouember, and continuing till the tenth of Februarie,
that the ships with merchandize arriuing at the Thames mouth, could not
come vp the riuer: so their lading there faine to be discharged, was
brought to the citie by land. After the death of that noble prince the
duke of Bedford, the bright sunne in France toward Englishmen, began
to be cloudie, and dailie to darken, the Frenchmen began not onelie to
withdrawe their obedience by oth to the king of England, but also tooke
sword in hand & openlie rebelled. Howbeit all these mishaps could not
anie thing abash the valiant courages of the English people: for they
hauing no mistrust in God and good fortune, set vp a new saile, began
the warre afresh, and appointed for regent in France, Richard duke of
Yorke, sonne to Richard earle of Cambridge.

Although the duke of Yorke was worthie (both for birth and courage) of
this honor and preferment, yet so disdeined of Edmund duke of Summerset
being cousine to the king, that by all means possible he sought his
hindrance, as one glad of his losse, and sorie of his well dooing: by
reason whereof, yer the duke of Yorke could get his dispatch, Paris
and diuerse other of the cheefest places in France were gotten by the
French king. The duke of Yorke perceiuing his euill will, openlie
dissembled that which he inwardlie minded, either of them working
things to the others displeasure, till through malice & diuision
betweene them, at length by mortall warre they were both consumed, with
almost all their whole liues and ofspring.

The Normans of the countrie of Caux, being heartened by the death of
the duke of Bedford, began a new rebellion, slue diuerse Englishmen,
robbed manie townes that were vnder the English obeisance, and tooke
the towne of Harflue by assault, and diuerse other townes. But the
lord regent being aduertised, sent foorth the lord Scales, sir
Thomas Kiriell, and the lord Hoo, which so afflicted those rebels
of Caux, that they slue aboue fiue thousand persons, and burnt all
the townes and villages in the countrie, not being walled: so that
in that part was neither habitation nor tillage, for all the people
fled into Britaine, and all the beasts of the countrie were brought
to Caudebecke, where a good sheepe was sold for an English penie,
and a cow for twelue pence. Dailie was skirmishing and fighting in
euerie part, in so much that the lord Scales at the Rie beside Rone,
discomfited the Hire, and fifteene hundred valiant Frenchmen; of the
which, aboue three hundred were taken prisoners, beside the gaine of
seauen faire coursers.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl._]

[Sidenote: See before pag. 129.]

Amongst other of the prisoners, were sir Richard Reginald de
Fountaines, sir Alain Gerond, Alain Monsaie, and Geffrie Grame,
capteine of the Scots. But yet this victorie and others the like,
staied not the Frenchmen from working treason dailie, insomuch that
diuers townes turned to the part of K. Charles, and some were taken by
practise, as Diepe, Bois, Vincennes, and others. [pilcrow] So that here partlie
was accomplished the prophesie of Henrie the fift, giuen out in the
ninth yeare of his reigne when he laie at siege before Meaux, that
Henrie of Windsore should loose all that Henrie of Monmouth had gotten
(for so they are named according to the place of their natiuitie) and
this prediction was complet and full by that time the yeares of his
regiment were expired.

[Sidenote: 1436]

But heere is one cheefe point to be noted, that either the disdeine
amongest the cheef peeres of the realme of England (as yee haue heard)
or the negligence of the kings councell (which did not foresee dangers
to come) was the losse of the whole dominion of France, betweene the
riuers of Seine and Marne, and in especiall, of the noble citie of
Paris. For where before, there were sent ouer thousands for defense of
the holds and fortresses, now were sent hundreds, yea and scores, some
rascals, and some not able to draw a bowe, or carrie a bill: for the
lord Willoughbie, and the bishop of Terwine, which had the gouernance
of the great citie of Paris, had in their companie not two thousand
Englishmen.

Which weakenesse king Charles well perceiued, and therefore by
authentic appointed the constable, Arthur of Britaine, the earle
of Dunois, the lords de la Roch, and Lisle Adam, with other valiant
capteins and men of warre, as well Burgognions as French, to go
before Paris, trusting by fauour of certeine citizens, with whome he
had intelligence, shortlie to be lord of the citie, without great
losse or battell. So these capteins came before the citie of Paris.
But perceiuing that all things succeeded not according to their
expectation, they returned to Mont Martyr, and the next daie suddenlie
set on the towne of saint Denis, and constreined the Englishmen
that kept it, to flee into the abbeie, and into the tower Venin. In
this conflict two hundred Englishmen were slaine, the residue vpon
reasonable composition rendered vp the place, and departed to Paris.

Thomas lord Beaumont, who of late was come to Paris with eight hundred
men, issued foorth with six hundred souldiers, intending to view the
dooings and number of the French armie; but suddenlie compassed about,
within a small space was discomfited and taken, with him fourescore
prisoners, beside two hundred slaine in the field, the remnant chased
to the verie gates of the citie. The Parisiens, and especiallie the
maister of the halles, and some of the vniuersitie, and Michaell
Lallier, and manie notable burgesses of the citie (who euer with an
English countenance couered a French hart) perceiuing the weaknesse
of the Englishmen, and force of the French; signified to the French
capteins their toward minds willing them with all diligence to come &
receiue so rich a preie without anie difficultie, readie to be giuen
and deliuered into their hands.

[Sidenote: The treson of the Parisiens.]

The constable delaieng no time, came with his power, lodged by the
charter house: and the lord Lisle Adam, approching to the walles,
shewed to the citizens a charter, sealed with the great seale of
king Charles, by the which he had pardoned them their offenses, and
granted to them all their old liberties, and ancient priuileges, so
that they would hereafter be to him true and obedient: which thing to
them declared, they ran about the towne, crieng; S. Denis, liue king
Charles. The Englishmen perceiuing this, determined to keepe the gate
S. Denis, but they were deceiued: for the cheines were drawne in euerie
street, and women and children cast downe stones and scalding water on
the Englishmens heads, and the citizens in armour fought with them and
chased them from street to street, and from lane to lane, and slue and
hurt diuerse and manie of them.

[Sidenote: Paris yeelded to the French king.]

The bishop of Terwine, chancellor there for king Henrie, the lord
Willoughbie, and sir Simon Morhier, tooke great paine to appease the
people: but when they saw that all auailed not, they withdrew into the
bastile of saint Anthonie, which fortresse they had well vittelled,
and furnished with men and munitions. Whilest this rumor was in the
towne, the earle of Dunois and others scaled the walles, and some
passed the riuer by botes, and opened gate of saint Iames, by the which
the constable with his banner displaied, entered, at whose entrie the
Parisiens made great ioy. The bishop and the lord Willoughbie, with
their small companie, defended their fortresse ten daies, looking for
aid: but when they saw that no comfort appeared, they yeelded their
fortresse, so that they and theirs, with certeine baggage, might
peaceablie returne to Rone. Thus was the citie of Paris brought into
the possession of Charles the French king, through the vntrue demeanour
of the citizens, who contrarie to their oths, and promised allegiance,
like false and inconstant people, so reuolted from the English.

After this glorious gaine, the Frenchmen besieged the towne of Craill
vpon Oise, wherof sir William Chamberlaine was capteine, the which with
fiue hundred Englishmen issued out of the towne, and after long fight,
discomfited his enimies, & slue two hundred, and tooke a great number
prisoners: the remnant not liking the market departed to Campaigne,
and other townes adioining. During which season, twelue burgesses of
the towne of Gisours sold it for monie vnto Poiton de Xantrailes. But
he had not the castell deliuered, & therefore with all his power he
besieged the same; whereof the lord Talbot being aduertised, sent for
the lord Scales, and they both with eighteene hundred men rescued the
castell, tooke the towne, and discomfited their enimies, and slue of
them foure hundred persons.

[Sidenote: The duke s[=e]t into France too late.]

Now according to the old saieng (when the steed is stolen shut the
stable doore) the duke of Yorke appointed at the last parlement to be
regent of France (after that Paris, Saint Denis, Saint Germans in Laie,
and diuerse other townes in France were taken and betraied for lacke of
conuenient succours) was sent ouer into Normandie with eight thousand
men, and in his companie, the earles of Salisburie, and Suffolke, and
the lord Fawconbridge, and diuerse other valiant capteins. When he was
landed, the earle of Salisburie besieged the castell of Chambois which
shortlie was to him rendered. Then the duke remooued to Rone, where
he set good orders, and did great iustice to the countrie; wherefore
the Normans in their chronicles highlie extoll him for that point.
Howbeit they saie, that he gat by long siege the towne and abbeie of
Fecampe, and did none other notable act, during the time of his rule
and gouernment.

[Sidenote: The duke of Burgognie prepareth an armie against Calis.]

In this fourteenth yeare, the duke of Burgognie determined by the
aduise of his councell, to attempt the winning of Calis. The prouision
was woonderous great which was made for the atchiuing of this
enterprise: whereof sir Iohn Ratcliffe, deputie of the towne of Calis,
hauing perfect intelligence, aduertised king Henrie, and his councell,
who incontinentlie sent thither the earle of Mortaigne, sonne to the
duke of Summerset, and the lord Camois, with fifteene hundred men, and
great foison of vittels, that issued out of Calis, and came before
Grauelin, where they were incountered with a great number of Flemings,
who were shortlie discomfited, foure hundred of them slaine, and six
score taken prisoners. Within two daies after, the Englishmen draue by
fine force the lords of Warren and Bado to the barriers of Ard, and
discomfited their whole companie, to the number of fifteene hundred,
slue seauen valiant capteins, and tooke manie gentlemen prisoners.

[Sidenote: The Duke of Burgognie with fortie thousand m[=e].]

The duke of Burgognie, remaining still in his former purpose,
assembled togither, of Flemings, Picards, Hollanders, and Heneweirs,
a great armie, to the number of fortie thousand, so well armed, so
well vitteled, so well furnished with ordinance, and garnished in
all things, that they thought and blazed amongst themselues, that
the Calisians would leaue their towne desolate, and flee for their
safegard, hearing onelie of the dukes approch: but they reckoned
without their host; and so paid a deerer shot than they looked for.
Now when this mightie armie was past the water of Grauelin, the duke
intending to begin his feats, assaulted the little poore castell of
Oie, which hauing in it but fiftie souldiers, whereof twelue sold
their liues deerelie; the remnant (compelled by necessitie) yeelded
themselues to the dukes mercie. Which to please the Gantois (being of
number most puissant in all the armie) liberallie gaue to them, both
the castell and prisoners, who (rude and cruell people) not onelie
raced the castell but also hanged nine and twentie of the captiues, and
had so doone with the residue, if the duke, offended at their crueltie,
had not willed a staie.

[Sidenote: Calis besieged by the Duke of Burgognie.]

After this feat doone, the Picards besieged the castell of Marke, and
gaue three assaults to it. The Englishmen within, being in number two
hundred and six, vnder the gouernement of their capteine sir Iohn
Gedding, valiantlie defended the place; vntill at length, despairing
of succours, they yeelded themselues (their liues and lims saued.) The
castell of Marke being thus deliuered, was raced to the ground. Then
the duke, accompanied with the duke of Cleues, the earle of Estampes,
the lords of Dantoing, Croie, Crisquie, Humiers, and manie other barons
and knights, with his great armie, came before Calis, & placed his
siege about the same most to his aduantage: he gaue three assaults,
and gained nothing by them, but constreined to keepe them further
off. At the first assault, the Hire which was come to see the duke of
Burgognie, was sore wounded and hurt. A cooling card it was also vnto
them, still to see ships arriued in the hauen out of England, openlie
before their faces, laden with vittels, munition and men.

[Sidenote: The dukes enterprise to bar the hauen.]

The duke on a daie riding about to view the situation of the towne, to
the intent to take his most aduantage (either by assault or otherwise)
was quickelie espied, and with the shot of a canon, a trumpetter,
which rode next before him, and three horsses in his companie were
slaine out of hand. The lord of Croie, and a conuenient number with
him, was appointed to besiege the castell of Guisnes, where he got
little profit, and did lesse harme. Moreouer, for the better aduancing
of his enterprise, the duke minded to stop vp the hauen; so that no
succours should enter there. Herevpon, he caused foure great hulkes to
be fraught with great square stones, cemented and ioined togither with
lead, to the intent they should lie still like a mount, and not seuer
in sunder.

These ships, with the residue of the dukes nauie, were conueied into
the mouth of Calis hauen, and at a full sea, by craft and policie,
were soonke downe to the ground. But whether God would not that the
hauen should be destroied, either the conueiers of the hulkes knew not
the verie chanell; these foure great ships, at the low water, laie
openlie vpon the sands, without hurting the rode or chanell. Which
when the souldiers perceiued, they issued out of the towne, brake the
ships, and caried both the stones and timber into the towne. An other
deuise the duke had, which was the building of a strong bastile vpon a
little mountaine, which he furnished with foure hundred men, and much
artillerie, that did impeach the Englishmen from issuing foorth of the
towne, to their great displeasure.

Whilest these things were adooing, there came to the duke an herald
called Penbroke, belonging to duke of Glocester, who declared to the
duke of Burgognie, that the protector of England his maister (if God
would send him wind & weather) would giue him battell, either there, or
in anie other place within his owne countrie, where he would appoint,
and that with speed, if God vouchsafed him wind and weather. The duke
answered the herald; "Sir, saie to your maister, that his chalenge is
both honorable and reasonable: howbeit, he shall not need to take the
paines to seeke me in mine owne countrie, for (God willing) he shall
find me heere, till I haue my will of the towne, readie to abide him
and all the power he can bring." After the herald had receiued this
answer, he was highlie cheered, and had a cup and an hundred guildens
to him giuen in reward, and so he returned to Calis.

[Sidenote: The dukes bastile woone.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Burgognie breaketh vp the siege before Calis,
and fleeth, the 26 of Iulie.]

After whose departure, the duke called a councell in the cheefe
pauilion of the Gantois, about this message of the English herald,
where it was determined with great courage, that they would abide
the battell, if the duke of Glocester came to offer it. Whilest this
great matter was in consultation, the Calisians, not well content
with the bastile which the duke had newlie builded, issued out of
the towne in great number, part on horssebacke and part on foot. The
footmen ran to assault the bastile, and the horssemen went betweene
the armie & the assailants, to stop the aid and succours that might
come. Vpon the sounding of the alarme, the duke himselfe in person was
comming on foot, to releeue his men: but being kept backe a space by
the English horssemen, in that delaie of time, the bastile was woone
by fine force, and eight score persons of those that kept it slaine,
beside the residue which were taken prisoners, and led to Calis with
all the ordinance and artillerie, to the high displeasure of the duke
and his prudent councell. The next daie after, there sprang a rumor
in the armie (no man could tell how) that the duke of Glocester with
a great puissance was alreadie imbarked, and would arriue at the next
tide. The same night the duke fled awaie, and sent in all hast to
the lord of Croie, to raise his siege before Guisnes, which tidings
were to him verie ioious, for he neither got nor saued. So these two
capteins departed, leauing behind them, both ordinance, vittels, &
great riches. [pilcrow] The French writers (to saue the honor of the duke
of Burgognie) saie, that there was a certeine discord and commotion
amongst the Flemings and Duch nation, affirming, that the great lords
and the Picards (whome the Frenchmen greatlie extoll) would betraie
and sell the Flemings and their freends, and that for the same cause
in a great furie they cried; Home, home: and would not tarrie for
anie request that the duke could make, and so by their misgouernance,
the duke was inforced to raise his siege, and to depart. The Flemish
authors affirme the contrarie, saieng, that they were readie to abide
the comming of the duke of Glocester: but the duke of Burgognie fearing
to be intrapped betweene the English armie without, and the garrison
within the towne of Calis, fled awaie in the night, giuing to them no
warning thereof before, so that for lacke of time, and conuenient space
to lade and carrie their stuffe, and being commanded vpon the sudden to
dislodge with all speed, they left behind them their vittels, tents,
and other things, to their great losse and detriment.

[Sidenote: A gun called Digeon.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Glocester spoileth Flanders.]

Howsoeuer the matter was, the truth is, that he fled the six and
twentith daie of Iulie, in the night. And the next daie in the
morning, the duke of Glocester landed in Calis hauen, & streight went
into the campe, where his enimies the night before were lodged, and
there he found manie faire peeces of ordinance, and speciallie one
called Digeon: so named, after the cheefe towne of Burgognie; beside
pauilions, wine, beere, meale, and innumerable vittels. The duke of
Glocester, seeing his enimies reculed, hauing in his companie fiue and
twentie thousand men, entered into Flanders, burning houses, killing
such as made resistance, destroieng the countrie on euerie part,
setting fire in the townes of Poperinch, Bailleull, and others. Also,
they wasted the suburbes of diuerse closed townes, and after passed
by Newcastell, Rimesture, and Valon chapell: and then entering into
Artois, they came to Arques and Blandesques, setting fire in euerie
part where they came. Thus they passed by saint Omers, and finallie by
Arde returned to Guisnes: and so to Calis at the six weeks end, with
great booties of cattell and riches.

[Sidenote: _Barlund._]

[Sidenote: _Enguerant._]

[Sidenote: The king of Scots fled from his siege at Rockesburgh.]

In all this their iournie, they had but small store of bread, which
caused much faintnesse and diuerse diseases in the armie, whereof a
greater number died than did of the enimies sword: and yet the Flemings
write, that they of Bruges distressed to the number of two thousand
Englishmen in this iournie. Howbeit, the French writers affirme, that
the Englishmen lost more of their companie in the marches about Ard,
than they did in all other places where they had beene before, hauing
passed through the parties of Flanders, without incounter, or any
damage doone to them by the enimies. After that, the duke of Glocester
returned into England, where he was aduertised, that Iames king of
Scots had besieged the castell of Rockesburgh with thirtie thousand
men: but the capteine thereof, sir Rafe Greie defended it so manfullie,
for the space of twentie daies, that king Iames being then aduertised,
that the earle of Northumberland was comming to fight with him, fled
with no lesse losse than dishonor, and inough of both.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 15.]

[Sidenote: A truce taken betweene the king of England and the duchesse
of Burgognie.]

Shortlie after that the duke of Burgognie had beene before Calis,
at the desire of princes, a truce for a time was moued to be had
betweene the king of England & the said duke. For which cause were
sent to Grauelin for the king of England, Henrie Beauford cardinall of
Winchester, Iohn lord Mowbraie duke of Northfolke, Humfrie earle of
Stafford, and diuerse other well learned & honorable personages. And
for the duke of Burgognie, there appeared the duchesse his wife, the
bishop of Arras, the lord of Croie, and diuerse other. At this treatie,
a truce was taken for a small time, and for a lesse obserued, which was
concluded betweene the king of England, and the duchesse of Burgognie
(interlacing the duke and his name.)

[Sidenote: _Hall._]

Some thinke, that the king of England would neuer enter in league with
him, bicause he had broken his promise, oth, and writing sealed to
him, and to his father. Other imagined this to be doone of a cautell,
to cast a mist before the French kings eies, to the intent he should
beleeue that this feat was wrought by the duchesse, without assent
or knowledge of the duke or his councell; and so he was not bound to
accomplish anie act or thing doone in his wiues treatie. Thus may you
see, that princes sometime with such vaine glosses and scornefull
expositions will hide their dooings, and cloke their purposes; to the
intent they would not either be espied, or else that they may plucke
their heads out of the collar at their pleasure. But (as the common
opinion goeth) he which is a promise-breaker escapeth not alwaies
with impunitie. For it is well seene by dailie and vsuall euents both
in princes and priuat persons, that for violating their faith, and
breaking of promise, manie discommodities arise, and inconueniences
not a few doo follow. To the due keeping whereof the heathen bare such
a religious conscience, that a prophane man in respect of others,
preferreth it before sacrifice, the sentence is of great excellencie
out of a pagans mouth:

    Non boue mactato coelestia numina gaudent,
      Sed quae praestanda est & sine teste fide.

[Sidenote: 1437.]

[Sidenote: Katharine mother to king Henrie maried Owen Teuther.]

About this season, queene Katharine mother to the king of England
departed out of this life, and was buried by hir husband in the abbeie
of Westminster. This woman, after the death of king Henrie the fift
hir husband, being yoong and lustie, following more hir owne wanton
appetite than freendlie counsell, and regarding more priuate affection
than princelike honour, tooke to husband priuilie a galant gentleman
and a right beautifull person, indued with manie goodlie gifts both of
bodie & mind, called Owen Teuther, a man descended of the noble linage
and ancient line of Cadwallader last king of the Britains. By this Owen
she brought foorth three goodlie sonnes, Edmund, Iasper, and another
that was a monke in Westminster and liued a small time: also a daughter
which in hir youth departed out of this transitorie life.

[Sidenote: _Ab. Fl._]

King Henrie, after the death of his mother, bicause, they were his
brethren of one wombe, created Edmund earle of Richmund, and Iasper
earle of Penbroke: which Edmund of Margaret daughter and sole heire
to Iohn duke of Summerset begat Henrie, who after was king of this
realme, called Henrie the seuenth, of whome ye shall heare more in
place conuenient. This Owen, after the death of the queene his wife,
was apprehended and committed to ward, bicause that (contrarie to
the statute made in the sixt yeare of this king) he presumptuouslie
had maried the queene, without the kings especiall assent, out of
which prison he escaped, and let out other with him, but was againe
apprehended, and after escaped againe. [pilcrow] Polychronicon saith that
he was a squier of low birth and like degree, the same author also
reporteth that he was commanded to Newgate by the duke of Glocester
then lord protector of the realme: out of which prison he brake by
the helpe of a preest that was his chapline. Neuerthelesse he was
apprehended afterwards by the lord Beaumont, & brought againe to
Newgate, whence (when he had remained there a while) he was deliuered
and set at libertie.

[Sidenote: Queene Elizabeth.]

The duchesse of Bedford also, sister to Lewes erle of S. Paule, more
for affection than increase of honour, without councell of hir freends,
maried a lustie yoong knight, called sir Richard Wooduile, to the great
displeasure of hir vncle the bishop of Terwine, and the earle hir
brother. This sir Richard was made baron of Riuers, and after earle,
and had by this ladie manie noble sonnes, and faire daughters, of the
which one was the ladie Elizabeth, after queene of England, by reason
she was married vnto Edward the fourth. [pilcrow] Whilest this marriage was
a celebrating, Iane late queene of England, and before duchesse of
Britaine, daughter to the king of Nauarre, and wife to king Henrie the
fourth, died at the manor of Hauering, and was buried by hir husband
at Canturburie. [pilcrow] About the same time, deceassed also the countesse of
Warwike, and Henrie archbishop of Yorke.

[Sidenote: Harflue besieged and woon by the Englishmen.]

In this yeare also, the duke of Summerset, accompanied with the lords
of Fauconbridge, Talbot, sir Francis Surien, the Arrogonnois, Matthew
[17]Gough, Thomas Paulet, Thomas Harington, Walter Limbrike, Iohn
Gedding, William Watton, esquiers, and Thomas Hilton bailiffe of Rone,
with a great companie of the English partie, besieged the towne of
Harflue (latelie before gotten by the Frenchmen) both by water and
land: the capteine within the towne was one sir Iohn d'Estouteuille,
hauing his brother Robert with him, and a six hundred good fighting
men. The assailants cast trenches and so fortified themselues in their
campe and lodgings, that when the earles of Ew and Dunois, the valiant
bastard of Bourbon, the lord Gawcourt, and other famous capteins, with
a foure thousand men, sent to the rescue of them within, came before
the towne, they could not succour their freends, nor annoie their
enimies by any meanes they could deuise; & so for feare to lose honour,
they returned backe againe, with much trauell and little profit.

[17] Or rather Goche.

[Sidenote: The duke of Summersets infortunatnes.]

[Sidenote: Iames king of Scots murthered.]

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex Polychr._]

The capteins within the towne perceiuing they could not be aided,
did shortlie after render the towne to the duke of Summerset; who
after committed it to the keeping of Thomas Paulet, William Limbrike,
Christopher Barber, and George saint George, which manie yeares (till
the diuision began in England) manfullie and valiantlie defended both
the towne and the hauen. But afterward, when this duke of Summerset
was regent and gouernour of Normandie, he not onlie lost this towne of
Harflue, but also the citie of Rone, and the whole duchie of Normandie,
whereas now (being but a deputie) he got it to his high praise and
glorie. In this yeare was Iames king of Scots murthered by certeine
traitors of his own subiects [euen in his bedchamber by night, which
king (saith Polychr.) had beene prisoner in England fifteene yeares,
the murtherers of whom being afterwards taken, were terriblie executed.]

[Sidenote: The earle of Warwike made regent of France.]

The lord Talbot besieged Tankeruile, and after foure moneths had
it simplie to him rendered. This towne was no great gaine to the
Englishmen, for in the meane season, the French king in his owne person
besieged the strong towne of Monstreau fault Yonne; whereof Thomas
Gerard being capteine, more for desire of reward, than for feare of
enimies, sold the towne to the French king, and had of him great gifts
and interteinement, as afterwards was openlie knowen. This towne had
beene rescued of the French king fought withall, if one chance had not
happened. For the duke of Yorke about that time was discharged of his
office, and the earle of Warwike preferred to the same, so that the
duke of Yorke, lieng as then at Rone, would haue gladlie rescued the
towne, if his authoritie had not surceassed; and the earle of Warwike
could not come in time, for the wind was contrarie to him.

This present yeare was a parlement holden at Westminster, in the which
manie good and profitable acts for the preseruation of concord at home,
and defense against the enimies abroad, were ordeined and deuised. [pilcrow]
Arthur of Britaine constable of France, and Iohn duke of Alanson, were
sent by the French king into Normandie, with a great armie, to besiege
the towne of Auranches, standing vpon the knob of an hill: where after
they had laien a certeine space without gaine, the lord Talbot with a
valiant companie of men came thither, and offered the enimies battell.
Which when they at all hands refused, the lord Talbot perceiuing their
faint harts, raised his field, and in the open sight of them all,
entered into the towne, and the next daie issued out; and finding the
Frenchmen riding abroad to destroie the plaine countrie, he compassed
them about, and slue manie of them, and tooke diuerse prisoners.
Although the Frenchmen got neither honor nor profit by this iournie,
yet they enterprised a greater matter, as the winning of Rone; in so
much that Pouton de Santreils, and the Hire, with manie other notable
capteins, hauing promise of certeine burgesses of that citie to haue
entrie made them, secretlie in the night came forward to a towne called
Rise or Riz, not past foure leagues from Rone, and there lodged.

The lord Talbot, the lord Scales, and sir Thomas Kiriell hearing of
their approch, set out of Rone at midnight, & with great paine came to
Rise so couertlie in the morning, that the French suddenlie surprised
and set vpon, like men all amazed ran awaie and fled. In the chase
were taken the lord of Fontains, sir Aleine Geron, sir Lewes de Balle,
and threescore knights, and esquiers, beside others; and there were
slaine two hundred and more. The Hire escaped verie narrowlie, by
swiftnesse of his horsse, though not vnwounded. The Englishmen returned
to the towne of Rise, and found there great number of horsses & other
baggages, which they ioiouslie brought with them to Rone.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 16.]

[Sidenote: The earle of Warwike regent came into France.]

[Sidenote: Croitoy besieged by the duke of Burgognie.]

On the sixt daie of Nouember this present yeare, the earle of Warwike,
as regent of France, passed the sea, after he had beene seuen times
shipped and vnshipped, and landed at Homflue with a thousand fresh
souldiers, and came to Rone, and then the duke of Yorke returned
into England. Betweene the change of these two capteins, the duke of
Burgognie (which sore enuied the glorie of the Englishmen) besieged the
towne of Crotoy, with ten thousand men and more, hauing with him great
plentie of guns and goodlie ordinance. The earle of Warwike aduertised
hereof, sent the lord Fauconbridge, sir Thomas Kiriell, sir Iohn
Montgomerie, Thomas Limbrike, Thomas Chandois, Dauid Hall, and diuerse
other knights and esquiers, and an host of fiue thousand men, which
passed the riuer of Some, beside the towne of saint Valerie, wading in
the water vp to the chin, so glad were they to rescue their felowes.

[Sidenote: Croitoy rescued.]

When the duke of Burgognie was informed of the approching of the lord
Talbot, he with all his power (sauing foure hundred, which were left
in a bastile by him there newlie builded) fled to Abuile, the bastile
was soone gained by the Englishmen, and those within either slaine
or taken. After this, the lord Talbot sent to the duke of Burgognie,
signifieng that except he would come foorth, and bide by a battell, he
would vtterlie wast his countrie of Picardie. According wherevnto (the
duke of Burgognie shrinking) he burnt townes, spoiled and slue manie
people in Picardie. But for all those his doings, the duke of Burgognie
appeared not, but got him from Abuile to Amiens, so that the lord
Talbot abode twentie daies full in Picardie and Arthois, destroieng
all afore him, and after returned vntouched. In the meane season,
sir Thomas Kiriell had gotten all the dukes cariages and ordinance,
and left as much vittell in the towne of Croitoy, as would serue six
hundred men a whole yeare, and conueied the residue to the earle of
Warwike, who highlie praised them for their hardie dooings.

[Sidenote: 1438]

After this, Henrie earle of Mortaigne, sonne to Edmund duke of
Summerset, ariued at Chierburgh with foure hundred archers, & three
hundred speares, and passed through Normandie, till he came into the
countie of Maine, where he besieged a castell called saint Anian, in
the which were three hundred Scots, besides Frenchmen. This castell he
tooke by assault, slue the Scots, and hanged the Frenchmen, bicause
they were once sworne English. After this he got also another castell,
two miles from saint Iulians, called Alegerche, which was shortlie
after recouered; and the lord of Camewis, which came to the rescue of
the same, in the meane waie was intrapped and taken. Thus flowed the
victorie, sometime on the one partie, and sometime on the other. For
about the same time the townes of Meaux in Brie, and saint Susan were
sold and deliuered to the French part, by the vntruth of the burgesses
and inhabitants of the same towns, about the latter end of this
sixteenth yeare.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 17.]

[Sidenote: Dearth of vittels.]

[Sidenote: 1439]

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex Polychr._]

[Sidenote: Bread made of ferne roots.]

This yeare (by reason of great tempests) raging winds, and raine,
there rose such scarsitie, that wheat was sold at three shillings
foure pense the bushell, wine at twelue pense the gallon, baisalt at
fourteene pense the bushell, and malt at thirteene shillings foure
pense the quarter, and all other graines at excessiue prices aboue the
old rate. [pilcrow] Wherevpon Steuen Browne (saith Polychronicon) at the same
season maior of London, tendering the state of the citie in this want
of breadcorne, sent into Pruse certeine ships, which returned loden
with plentie of rie: wherwith he did much good to the people in that
hard time speciallie to them of the citie, where the want of corne was
not so extreame as in some other places of the land, where the poore
distressed people that were hungerbitten, made them bred of ferne
roots, and vsed other hardshifts, till God prouided remedie for their
penurie by good successe of husbandrie.

[Sidenote: A feat of a politike capteine & wise councellor.]

In the moneth of Iune, the earle of Huntington (as Steward of Guien)
with two thousand archers, and foure hundred speares was sent into
Gascoigne, as a supplie to the countrie and c[=o]mons of the same: for
the king of England and his councell were informed, that the earle of
Dunois laie in the frontiers of Tholouse secretlie, by rewards and
faire promises practising to procure diuerse townes in Guien to become
French. Wherefore this earle (like a politike warrior) altered not
onelie the capteins in euerie towne and citie, but also remoued the
magistrates, and changed the officers from towne to towne, and roome to
roome; so that by this meanes, the earle of Dunois at that time lost
both trauell and cost.

[Sidenote: Two shrewd persuaders.]

In the same moneth also, sir Richard Wooduile, sir William
Chamberleine, sir William Peito, and sir William Storie, with a
thousand men, were sent to stuffe the townes in Normandie, which at
that time had therof great need: for the English capteins had small
confidence in the Normans, and not too much in some of their own
nation. For that harlot briberie, with hir fellow couetousnesse,
ran so fast abroad with French crownes, that hard was it to remaine
vncorrupted. In this yeare, the Dolphin of France alied with Iohn duke
of Alanson and Iohn duke of Burgognie, rebelled against his father king
Charles: but in the end, by wise persuasions, and wittie handling of
the matter, the knot of that seditious faction was dissolued, and the
king with his sonne, and the other confederates openlie and apparantlie
pacified. The Englishmen taking aduantage of this domesticall diuision
in France, raised an armie, and recouered againe diuerse townes,
which had beene surprised from them before, and prepared also to haue
recouered the citie of Paris, till they hard of the agreement betwixt
the father and the sonne, and then they left off that enterprise.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 18.]

[Sidenote: Ponthoise recouered by the English.]

In Nouember of this yeare, there was such a great frost, and after that
so deepe a snow, that all the ground was couered therwith, and all
the diches frosen. Which wether put the Englishmen in hope to recouer
againe the towne of Ponthoise, by the French king gotten before,
by corrupting with monie diuerse burgesses of the towne. Hervpon
the Englishmen clothed all in white, with Iohn lord Clifford their
capteine, came in the night to the diches, passed them without danger
by reason of the frost, scaled the walles, slue the watch, and tooke
the towne, with manie profitable prisoners. [pilcrow] After the regaining of
this towne, the lord Richard Beauchampe earle of Warwike died in the
castell of Rone, from whence conueied into England, he was with solemne
ceremonies buried at his college of Warwike, in a verie faire and
sumptuous sepulchre.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 19.]

[Sidenote: _Enguerant._]

About the beginning of Lent, the duke of Summerset, and the lord
Talbot, with other capteins and men of warre to the number of two
thousand, which they had assembled in the marches of Normandie towards
Rone, marching forward towards Picardie, passed ouer the riuer of
Seine; and through the towne of Monteruell, came before the fortresse
of Folleuile, which the duke besieged, whilest the lord Talbot entered
further into the countrie. After that the duke had mounted his great
artillerie, and began to batter the hold, the capteine within chanced
to be slaine with a shot of the same artillerie, & shortlie after,
the batterie being still continued, the rest of the men of warre that
serued vnder him yeelded the place, in which the duke left a competent
garrison of souldiers, which afterwards sore indamaged the countrie.

This doone, the duke followed the lord Talbot, who was alreadie entered
a good waie within the countrie of Santhois, and now ioining their
powers togither, they came to a fortresse called Lihons in Santhois,
which was also rendered vnto them, after they had burnt the church;
which the countrie people kept against them, and would not yeeld
it, till they were fired out, burnt, and slaine; to the number of
three hundred. After the fortresse was deliuered into their hands
by composition, the duke with his power laie there about ten daies,
sending diuerse troops of his men of warre abroad into the countrie,
which spoiled the same, tooke the fortresse of Herbonneres, and the
lord thereof within it, who for his ransome, and to haue his subiects
and house saued from spoile and fire, compounded with his takers for
a thousand saluz of gold, which he paid to them. Finallie, after the
duke of Summerset, and the lord Talbot with their power, had laine in
Lihons about ten daies, they departed from thence, and returned into
Normandie, without anie impeachment.

[Sidenote: 1441]

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke againe made regent of France.]

[Sidenote: Ponthoise besieged by the French king, but valiantlie
defended.]

After the death of the earle of Warwike, the duke of Yorke was againe
made regent of France, which accompanied with the earle of Oxenford,
the lord Bourchier called earle of Ewe, sir Iames of Ormond, the lord
Clinton, sir Richard Wooduile, & diuerse other noble men, sailed
into Normandie. Before whose ariuall, the French king sore greeued
with the taking of the towne of Ponthoise, assembled a great armie,
and besieged the said towne himselfe in person, inuironing it with
bastiles, trenches, and ditches, beating the walles and bulworks with
shot of great ordinance, and giuing therevnto diuerse great and fierce
assaults. But Iohn lord Clifford, like a valiant capteine, defended the
towne so manfullie, that the Frenchmen rather lost than woone.

The duke of Yorke at his landing receiued true aduertisement of this
siege, wherevpon he sent for the lord Talbot, and a great number of
soldiers, and so came neere to the towne of Ponthoise, and there
incamped himselfe; who therewith sent word to the French king, that
thither he was come to giue him battell, if he would come out of his
strength and bastiles. But the French king by aduise of his councell,
determined not to venture his person with men of so base degree, but
meant to keepe his ground, bidding the lord regent to enter at his
perill, and in the meane season did what he could to stop the passage
of the riuer of Oise, so that no vittels should be brought to the
English armie by that waie, in hope so to cause them to recule backe.

[Sidenote: A policie for a bridge.]

The duke of Yorke, perceiuing that the French king minded not to fight,
purposed to passe ouer the riuer of Oise, and so to fight with him in
his lodging. Whervpon he remooued his campe, and appointed the lord
Talbot and other, to make a countenance, as they would passe the riuer
by force at the port of Beaumont: and appointed an other companie in
boates of timber and leather, and bridges made of cords and ropes
(whereof he had great plentie caried with him in chariots) to passe
ouer beneath the abbie. Whilest the lord Talbot made a crie, as though
he would assault the gate, certeine Englishmen passed the water in
botes, and drew a bridge of cords ouer, so that a great number of them
were got to the other side, yer the Frenchmen were aduised what had
happened. When they saw the chance, they ran like mad men, to haue
stopped the passage, but it was too late: for the most part of the
Englishmen were got ouer, in so much that they chased their enimies
backe, and slue sir Guilliam de Chastell, nephue to the lord Taneguie
du Chastell, and diuerse others.

[Sidenote: _Enguerant de Monstrellet._]

[Sidenote: _Edw. Hall._]

The Frenchmen seeing their euill hap irrecouerable, returned to the
French king, and told him what had chanced: wherevpon he doubting to
be assailed to his disaduantage, thought not good longer to tarrie,
but with all speed remoouing his ordinance into the bastile of
saint Martin, which he had newlie made, dislodged in the night from
Maubuisson, and went to Poissie, leauing the lord de Cotignie admerall
of France, with three thousand men to keepe the bastile. If he had
taried still at Maubuisson, the lord Talbot which had passed the riuer
of Oise in two small leather botes, had either taken or slaine him the
same night. The Englishmen the next daie in good order of battell came
before the towne of Ponthoise, thinking there to haue found the French
king, but he was gone: and in his lodging they found great riches, and
much stuffe which he could not haue space for to carrie awaie for feare
of the sudden inuasion.

Then the duke with his power entred into the towne, and sent for new
vittels, and repaired the towers and bulworks about the towne, &
diuerse times assaulted the bastile of the Frenchmen, of the which
he made no great accompt, bicause they were not of power either to
assault or stop the vittels or succors from the towne. After this,
the duke intending once againe to offer the French king battell, left
behind him at Ponthoise for capteine there, sir Geruais Clifton,
sir Nicholas Burdet, Henrie Chandos, and a thousand soldiers, and
therewith remoouing with his whole armie, came before Poissie, where
he set himselfe and his men in good order of battell readie to fight.
There issued out some of the French gentlemen to skirmish with the
Englishmen, but to their losse: for diuerse of them were slaine, and
foure valiant horssemen taken prisoners. The duke perceiuing the faint
hearts of the Frenchmen, and that they durst not incounter in field
with the English power, dislodged from Poissie, and came to Maunt, and
soone after to Rone.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 20.]

[Sidenote: Ponthoise gotten by the French.]

[Sidenote: _Enguerant._]

[Sidenote: Sir Nicholas Burdet slaine.]

When the regent and the lord Talbot were returned againe into
Normandie, the French king considering how much it should redound
to his dishonour to let rest the towne of Ponthoise in his enimies
hands, sith he had beene at such charges and trauell about the winning
thereof, he eftsoones assembled all his puissance. And returning
suddenlie vnto Ponthoise, he first by assault got the church, and after
the whole towne, tooke the capteine, and diuerse other Englishmen, and
slue to the number of foure hundred, which sold their liues dearelie:
for one French writer affirmeth, that the French king lost there three
thousand men; and the whole garrison of the Englishmen was but onelie
a thousand. Among other that were slaine here of the defendants, was
sir Nicholas Burdet knight, cheefe butler of Normandie. After this
hot tempest, the weather began somewhat to wax more calme: for king
Henrie and king Charles agreed to send ambassadors to commen of some
good conclusion of peace: so that king Henrie sent the cardinall of
Winchester, with diuerse other noble personages of his councell to
Calis, with whome was also sent Charles duke of Orleance yet prisoner
in England, to the intent that he might be both author of the peace,
and also procurer of his owne deliuerance.

The French king sent the archbishop of Reimes, and the earle of Dunois:
and the duke of Burgognie sent the lord de Creuecueur, and diuerse
other. All these met at Calis, where the duke of Orleance courteouslie
receiued the earle of Dunois (his bastard brother) thanking him
greatlie for his paines taken in gouerning his lands & countrie,
during the time of his captiuitie and absence. Diuerse communications
were had, as well for the deliuerance of the duke as for a finall
peace; but nothing was concluded, sauing that an other meeting was
appointed, so that in the meane season the demands of either partie
might be declared to their souereigne lords and maisters: and herevpon
the commissioners brake vp their assemblie, and returned into their
countries. The Englishmen (as the French writers record) required not
onelie to possesse peaceablie the two duches of Aquitane and Normandie,
discharged of all resort, superioritie, and souereigntie against the
realme of France, the kings and gouernours of the same; but also to
be restored to all the townes, cities, and places, which they within
thirtie yeeres next before gone and past, had conquered in the realme
of France. Which request the Frenchmen thought verie vnreasonable,
and so both parties, minding rather to gaine or saue than to loose,
departed for that time, as yee haue heard.

After this meeting thus proroged, Philip duke of Burgognie, partlie
mooued in conscience to make amends to Charles duke of Orleance (as
yet prisoner in England for the death of duke Lewes his father), whome
duke Iohn, father to this duke Philip cruellie murthered in the citie
of Paris; and partlie intending the aduancement of his neece, the
ladie Marie, daughter to Adolfe duke of Cleue (by the which aliance, he
trusted, that all old rancor should ceasse), contriued waies to haue
the said duke of Orleance set at libertie, vpon promise by him made
to take the said ladie Marie vnto wife. This duke had beene prisoner
in England euer since the battell was fought at Agincourt, vpon the
daie of Crispine and Crispinian, in the yeare 1415, and was set now at
libertie in the moneth of Nouember, in the yeare 1440, paieng for his
ransome foure hundred thousand crownes, though other saie but three
hundred thousand.

The cause whie he was detained so long in captiuitie, was to pleasure
thereby the duke of Burgognie: for so long as the duke of Burgognie
continued faithfull to the king of England, it was not thought
necessarie to suffer the duke of Orleance to be ransomed, least vpon
his deliuerance he would not ceasse to seeke meanes to be reuenged vpon
the duke of Burgognie, for the old grudge and displeasure betwixt their
two families, and therefore such ransome was demanded for him as he
was neuer able to pay. But after the duke of Burgognie had broken his
promise, and was turned to the French part, the councell of the king
of England deuised how to deliuer the duke of Orleance, that thereby
they might displeasure the duke of Burgognie. Which thing the duke of
Burgognie perceiuing, doubted what might follow if he were deliuered
without his knowledge, and therefore to his great cost practised his
deliuerance, paid his ransome, and ioined with him amitie and aliance
by mariage of his neece.

[Sidenote: The duke of Orleance deliuered.]

[Sidenote: Lewes the twelfe.]

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

This duke being now deliuered, and speaking better English than French,
after his arriuall in France, repaired to the duke of Burgognie, and
according to his promise and conuention, maried the ladie Marie of
Cleue, in the towne of saint Omers, on whome he begat a sonne, which
after was French king, and called Lewes the twelfe. [Festered sores
that rankle inward, as they may perchance be palliat by sleight of
surgerie; so sildome come they to sound cure, but often doo burst out
againe to greater paine and perill of patient than euer afore: and so
befell it betweene these two noble houses of Orleance and Burgognie,
who for all this mariage and plausible peace (that continued a twentie
yeares) fell out yet after at square vnattonablie:] their children
and cousins, to the great vnquietting of much part of christendome,
speciallie in the times of king Francis the first, and his sonne
Henrie the second, heires of the house of Orleance. For Iohn earle of
Angolesme, vncle to this duke Charles, begat Charles, father to the
said king Francis: which earle Iohn had beene as pledge in England
for the debt of Lewes duke of Orleance, from the last yeare of king
Henrie the fourth; till that now his nephue being deliuered, made shift
for monie, and ransomed him also, and at length restored him to his
countrie.

In the beginning of this twentith yeare, Richard duke of Yorke, regent
of France, and gouernour of Normandie, determined to inuade the
territories of his enimies both by sundrie armies, and in seuerall
places, and therevpon without delaie of time he sent the lord of
Willoughbie with a great crue of soldiers to destroie the countrie
of Amiens, and Iohn lord Talbot was appointed to besiege the towne
of Diepe; and the regent himselfe accompanied with Edmund duke of
Summerset, set forward into the duchie of Aniou. The lord Willoughbie,
according to his commission, entred into the countrie of his enimies in
such wise vpon the sudden, that a great number of people were taken yer
they could withdraw into anie place of safegard.

[Sidenote: Earle of saint Paule freend to the English.]

The Frenchmen in the garrisons adioining, astonied with the clamour
and crie of the poore people, issued out in good order, and manfullie
fought with the Englishmen. But in the end, the Frenchmen seeing their
fellowes in the forefront slaine downe, and kild without mercie, turned
their backes, and fled: the Englishmen followed, and slue manie in the
chase; and such as escaped the sword, were robbed by the earle of saint
Paule, who was comming to aid the Englishmen. In this conflict were
slaine aboue six hundred men of armes, and a great number taken. The
dukes of Yorke and Summerset likewise entered into Aniou and Maine,
and there destroied townes, and spoiled the people, and with great
preies and prisoners repaired againe into Normandie, whither also the
lord Willoughbie withdrew, after his valiant enterprise atchiued (as
before yee haue heard) with rich spoiles and good prisoners.

[Sidenote: This should be as _Enguerant_ noteth two yeares after this
present yere 19, to wit, _An._ 1440.]

The duke of Summerset vpon further valiance, entered into the marches
of Britaine, and tooke by fierce assault a towne named la Gerche,
appertaining to the duke Alanson, spoiling and burning the same. This
doone, he went to Ponzaic, where he soiorned two moneths, sending
foorth dailie his men of war to destroie the countries of Aniou,
Traonnois, and Chatragonnois. The French king sent the marshall
Loiach with foure thousand men to resist the inuasions of the duke
of Summerset, which marshall intended to haue set on the duke in his
lodgings in the dead time of the night: but that (as by a wise and
hardie capteine) well foreseene, he marched forward, and met the
Frenchmen halfe the waie, and after long fight, discomfited them,
slue an hundred of the marshals men, and tooke three score and two
prisoners, wherof the cheefe were the lord Dausignie, sir Lewes de
Buell, all the other (almost) were knights and esquiers.

[Sidenote: Three thousand hath _Nicholas Giles_.]

After this incounter, the duke tooke the towne of Beaumont le vicount,
and manned all the fortresses on the frontiers of his enimies, and
with rich booties and prisoners returned againe to the duke of Yorke.
In this meane time the lord Talbot, besieging the towne of Diepe,
inuironed it with deepe trenches; building also vpon the mount Paulet
a strong and noisome bastile. But at length perceiuing the towne to be
stronglie defended, and that he lacked such furniture of men, vittels
and ordinance as was necessarie for the winning of it, he deliuered
the custodie of the bastile, with the gouernance of the siege to his
bastard sonne, a valiant yoong gentleman, and departed to Rone for aid,
monie, and munition. The French king aduertised hereof, sent his sonne
the Dolphin of Vienne with the earle of Dunois, and fifteene thousand
men to raise the siege from Diepe.

[Sidenote: The earle of saint Paule reuolteth to the French.]

Three daies they assailed the bastile, in the which six hundred
Englishmen were inclosed, and at length bicause powder and weapon
failed them within, the Frenchmen wan it, and tooke the bastard Talbot
prisoner, with sir William Peitow, and sir Iohn Repleie, which shortlie
after were redeemed. The other English souldiers seeing the bastile
woone by the Frenchmen, stood all a daie in good order of battell, and
in the night following, politikelie saued themselues and returned to
Rone, without losse or damage. In the assaulting of the bastile, the
Frenchmen saie, they slue two hundred Englishmen; and denie not but
that they lost fiue hundred of their owne men, beside those that were
hurt. Whilest these things were a dooing, Philip duke of Burgognie made
sharpe warre against the earle of saint Paule, in taking from him his
townes and castels, that made him to renounce his allegiance swoorne
and promised to the king of England, and returned to the French part.

[Sidenote: 1441.]

[Sidenote: Tartas besieged.]

The English capteins in Guien besieged the strong towne of Tartas,
belonging to the lord Dalbreth their old and ancient enimie. The towne
perceiuing that it was not able to resist the force of the Englishmen
anie long time, tooke appointment, that the towne should remaine
neuter. For assurance therof, they deliuered Cadet the sonne of the
lord de la Breth in pledge, vpon this condition; that if the said
lord de la Breth would not assent to the agreement, then he should
signifie his refusall to the English capteins within three moneths next
insuing, and he to haue his pledge, and they to doo their best. The
French king, at the request of the lords of Guien, caused the lord de
la Breth to signifie his disagreement vnto the earle of Huntington,
as then lieutenant to the king of England in the duchie of Aquitaine.
And therewith to gratifie the lords of Guien, he assembled an armie of
threescore thousand men, & came to Tholouse, and so to Tartas, to whome
the cheefteins of the towne, seeing no succours comming from the king
of England, rendred the towne: and Cadet de la Breth, which was left
there as a pledge, was also deliuered.

[Sidenote: The change in warre.]

The French king, after the yeelding of Tartas, remooued to saint
Seuerine, which towne he tooke by force, slue three hundred persons,
and tooke sir Thomas Rampston prisoner. After this, he came to the
citie of Arques, tooke a bulworke by force, and had the towne yeelded
to him by composition. The capteine, which was the lord of Montferrant,
departed with all the English crue to Burdeaux, where he found the
earle of Longuile, the Capdau de Beufe, and sir Thomas Rampston, which
was a little before deliuered. After this, the fortresses of the Rioll
and Mermandie were also yeelded to the French king: who notwithstanding
at length was constreined for lacke of vittels (which were cut off by
the Englishmen that laie abroad in diuerse fortresses for the purpose)
to breake vp his armie, & to retire into France. And then after his
departure, the Englishmen recouered againe the citie of Arques, &
the other townes by the French king gained, and tooke prisoner his
lieutenant called Reginald Guilliam the Burgognion, and manie other
gentlemen, and all the meane souldiers were either slaine or hanged.

[Sidenote: The lord Talbot.]

[Sidenote: The earle of Dunois.]

[Sidenote: An excellent finesse in warre.]

While the French king was in Guien, the lord Talbot tooke the towne of
Couchet, and after marched toward Galliardon, which was besieged by
the bastard of Orleance, otherwise called the earle of Dunois: which
earle hearing of the lord Talbots approch, raised his siege, and saued
himselfe. The Frenchmen a little before this season, had taken the
towne of Eureux by treason of a fisher. Sir Francis the Arragonois
hearing of that chance, apparelled six strong fellowes, like men of the
countrie, with sacks and baskets, as cariers of corne and vittels, and
sent them to the castell of Cornill, in the which diuerse Englishmen
were kept as prisoners, and he with an ambush of Englishmen laie in a
vallie nigh to the fortresse.

The six counterfet husbandmen entered the castell vnsuspected, and
streight came to the chamber of the capteine, & laieng hands on him,
gave knowledge to them that laie in ambush to come to their aid. The
which suddenlie made foorth, and entered the castell, slue and tooke
all the Frenchmen, and set the Englishmen at libertie: which thing
doone, they set fire in the castell, and departed to Rone with their
bootie and prisoners. This exploit they had not atchiued peraduenture
by force (as happilie they mistrusted) and therefore by subtiltie
and deceit sought to accomplish it, which meanes to vse in warre
is tollerable, so the same warre be lawfull; though both fraud &
bloudshed otherwise be forbidden euen by the instinct of nature to be
put in practise and vse; and that dooth the poet insinuat in a proper
sententious verse, saieng:

[Sidenote: _Ouid. 1. de art._]

    Fraus absit, vacuas caedis habete manus.

[Sidenote: A new breach betweene the duke of Glocester, and the bishop
of Winchester.]

But now to speake somewhat of the dooings in England in the meane time.
Whilest the men of war were thus occupied in martiall feates, and
dailie skirmishes, within the realme of France: ye shall vnderstand,
that after the cardinall of Winchester, and the duke of Glocester,
were (as it seemed) reconciled either to other, yet the cardinall, and
the archbishop of Yorke ceassed not to doo manie things without the
consent of the king or of the duke, being (during the minoritie of
the king) gouernor and protector of the realme, whereas the duke (as
good cause he had) greatlie offended, therevpon in writing declared
to the king, wherein the cardinall and the archbishop had offended
both his maiestie, and the lawes of the realme. This complaint of
the duke of Glocester was conteined in foure and twentie articles,
which chieflie rested, in that the cardinall had from time to time,
through his ambitious desire to surmount all others in high degrees
of honor and dignitie, sought to inrich himselfe, to the great and
notorious hinderance of the king, as in defrauding him not onelie
of his treasure, but also in dooing and practising things greatlie
preiudiciall to his affaires in France, and namelie by setting at
libertie the king of Scots, vpon so easie conditions, as the kings
maiestie greatlie lost thereby as in particularities thus followeth.




A complaint made to king Henrie the sixt, by the duke of Glocester,
vpon the cardinall of Winchester.


[Sidenote: _Ex Ed. Hall._ 143, 144, 145, 146.]

1 THESE be in part, the points and articles, which I Humfrie duke
of Glocester, for my truth & acquitall, said late, I would giue in
writing (my right redoubted lord) vnto your highnesse, aduertising your
excellencie, of such things in part, as haue beene doone in your tender
age, in derogation of your noble estate, and hurt of both your realmes,
and yet be doone and vsed dailie.

2 First, the cardinall then being bishop of Winchester, tooke vpon him
the state of cardinall, which was naied and denaied him, by the king
of most noble memorie, my lord your father (whome God assoile) saieng
that he had as leefe set his crowne beside him, as see him weare a
cardinals hat, he being a cardinall. For he knew full well, the pride
and ambition that was in his person, then being but a bishop, should
haue so greatlie extolled him into more intollerable pride, when that
he were a cardinall: and also he thought it against his freedome, of
the cheefe church of this realme, which, that he worshipped, as dulie
as euer did prince, that blessed be his soule. And howbeit, that my
said lord your father (whome God assoile) would haue agreed him to haue
had certeine clearks of this land cardinals, and to haue no bishoprikes
in England; yet his intent was neuer to doo so great derogation to
the church of Canturburie, to make them that were his suffragans, to
sit aboue their ordinarie and metropolitan. But the cause was that in
generall, and in all matters which might concerne the weale of him, and
of his realme, he should haue proctors of his nation, as other kings
Christen had, in the court of Rome, and not to abide in this land, nor
to be in anie part of his councels, as beene all the spirituall and
temporall, at parlements and other great councels, when you list to
call them. And therefore, though it please you to doo him that worshop,
to set him in your priuie councell after your pleasure: yet in your
parlement, where euerie lord both spirituall and temporall, hath his
place, he ought to occupie but his place as a bishop.

3 Item, the said bishop, now being cardinall, was assoiled of his
bishoprike of Winchester, wherevpon he sued vnto our holie father, to
haue a bull declaratorie, notwithstanding he was assumpt to the state
of cardinall, that the see was not void, where in deed it stood void
by a certeine time, yet the said bull were granted; and so he was
exempt from his ordinarie, by the taking on him the state of Cardinall,
and the church bishoprike of Winchester, so standing void, he tooke
againe of the pope (you not learned thereof ne knowing whereby he was
fallen into the case of prouision) so that all his good was lawfullie
& cleerlie forfeited to you my right doubted lord, with more; as the
statute declareth plainelie for your aduantage.

4 Item, it is not vnknowen to you (doubted lord) how thorough your
lands it is noised, that the said cardinall and the archbishop of Yorke
had and haue the gouernance of you, and all your land, the which none
of your true liege men ought to vsurpe nor take vpon them. And haue
also estranged me your sole vncle, my cousine of Yorke, my coosine of
Huntington, and manie other lords of your kin, to haue anie knowledge
of anie great matter, that might touch your high estate, or either
of your realmes. And of lords spirituall, of right, the archbishop
of Canturburie should be your cheefe councellor, the which is also
estranged and set aside. And so be manie other right sad lords, and
well aduised, as well spirituall as temporall, to the great hurt of you
my right doubted lord, and of your realmes, like as the experience and
workes shewen cleerelie and euidentlie, more harme it is.

5 Item, in the tender age of you, my right doubted lord, for the
necessitie of an armie, the said cardinall lent you foure thousand
pounds vpon certeine iewels, prised at two and twentie thousand markes,
with a letter of sale, that and they were not quited at a certeine
daie, you should leese them. The said cardinall seeing your monie
readie to haue quited your iewels, caused your treasuror of England,
at that daie being, to paie the same monie, in part of an other armie,
in defrauding you my right doubted lord of your said iewels, keeping
them yet all awaie to his owne vse, to your right great losse, and his
singular profit and auaile.

6 Item, the said cardinall, then being bishop of Winchester, and
chancellour of England, deliuered the king of Scots, vpon certeine
appointments (as maie be shewed) presumptuouslie, and of his owne
authoritie, contrarie to the act of parlement. I haue heard notable
men of law say, that they neuer heard the like thing doone among them:
which was too great a defamation to your highnesse, and also to wed
his neece to the said king, whom that my lord of notable memorie, your
father, whome God assoile, would neuer haue so deliuered. And there
as he should haue paid for his costs fortie thousand pounds, the said
cardinall, chancellour of England, caused you to pardon him thereof ten
thousand marks, whereof the greater summe he paied you, right a little,
what, I report me to your highnesse.

7 Item, where the said cardinall lent you, my redoubted lord, great and
notable summes, he hath had and his assignes, the rule and profit of
the port of Hampton, where the customers beene his seruants, where (by
likelihood and as it is to be supposed) standing the cheefe merchant of
the wools of your land, that you be greatlie defrauded, and vnder that
rule, what wools and other merchandizes haue beene shipped, and maie be
from time to time, hard is to esteeme, to the great hurt and preiudice
of you my right doubted lord, and of all your people.

8 Item, howbeit that the said cardinall hath diuerse times lent you
great summes of monie, since the time of your reigne, yet his loane
hath beene so deferred and delaied, that for the most part, the
conuenable season of the imploieng of the good lent was passed. So that
litle fruit or none came thereof, as by experience both your realmes
haue sufficientlie in knowledge.

9 Item, where there was iewels and plate prised at eleuen thousand
pounds in weight, of the said cardinall, forfeited to you my right
redoubted lord, he gat him a restorement thereof for a loane of a
little parcell of the same: and so defrauded you wholie of them, to
your great hurt, and his auaile, the which good might greatlie haue
eased your highnesse, in sparing as much of the poore commons.

10 Item, the cardinall being feoft of my said lord your father (whome
God assoile) against his intent, gaue Elizabeth Beauchampe, three
hundred markes liuelihood, where that his will was, that and she were
wedded within a yeare, then to haue it, or else not, where in deed it
was two or three years after, to your great hurt, and diminishing of
your inheritance.

11 Item, notwithstanding that the said cardinall hath no maner of
authoritie nor interest in the crowne, nor none maie haue by anie
possibilitie; yet he presumeth and taketh vpon him in partie, your
estate roiall, in calling before him, into great abusion of all your
land, and derogation of your highnesse, which hath not beene seene nor
vsed in no daies heretofore, in greater estate than he is, without your
expresse ordinance and commandement.

12 Item, the said cardinall, nothing considering the necessitie of you
my right doubted lord, hath sued a pardon of dismes, that he should
paie for the church of Winchester, for terme of his life, giuing
thereby occasion to all other lords spirituall, to draw their good will
for anie necessitie, to grant anie disme: and so to laie all the charge
vpon the temporaltie, and the poore people.

13 Item, by the gouernance and labour of the said cardinall, and
archbishop of Yorke, there hath beene lost and dispended much notable
and great good, by diuerse ambassadors sent out of this realme. First
to Arras, for a feigned colourable peace, whereas by likelinesse it
was thought and supposed, that it should neuer turne to the effectuall
auaile of you my right doubted lord, nor to your said realmes: but
vnder colour thereof, was made the peace of your aduersarie, and the
duke of Burgognie. For else your partie aduerse, & the said duke, might
not well haue found meanes nor waies to haue communed togither, nor
to haue concluded with other their confederations and conspirations
made and wrought there, then, at that time, against your highnesse,
whereby you might haue (right doubted lord) the greater partie of
your obeisance, as well in your realme of France, as in your duchie
of Normandie, and much other thing gone greatlie, as through the said
colourable treatie, & otherwise, since the death of my brother of
Bedford (whome God assoile.)

14 Item, now of late was sent an other ambassador to Calis, by the
labour and counsell of the said cardinall, and archbishop of Yorke, the
cause why of the beginning, is to me your sole vncle, and other lords
of your kin and councell vnknowen, to your great charge, and against
the publike good of your realme; as it openlie appeareth. The which
good if it be imploied for the defense of your lands, the merchandizes
of the same might haue had other course, and your said lands not to
haue stand in so great mischeefe as they doo.

15 Item, after that, to your great charge, and hurt of both your
realmes, the said cardinall & archbishop of Yorke went to your said
towne of Calis, and diuerse lords of your kin, and of your councell
in their fellowship, and there, as there was naturall warre betweene
the duke of Orleance, and the duke of Burgognie, for murther of their
fathers, a capitall enimitie like to haue indured for euer: the said
cardinall and archbishop of Yorke licenced and suffered the said duke
of Orleance, to intreat and common apart with the councell of your
said aduersaries, as well as with the duchies of Burgognie: by which
meane the peace and aliance was made betweene the two dukes, to the
greatest fortifieng of your said capitall aduersaries that could be
thought, and consequentlie (my deere redoubted lord) to your greatest
charge, and hurt to both your realmes. Vnder colour of which treatie,
your said aduersaries in meane time wan your citie of Meaux, and the
countrie thereabout, and manie diuerse roades made into your duchie of
Normandie, to the great noisance and destruction of your people, as it
sheweth openlie.

16 Item, the said archbishop of Yorke, sent with other into this your
realme from the said cardinall, after communication had with your
aduerse partie, at your said towne of Calis, made at his comming
into your notable presence at Windesor, all the suasions and colour,
all motions in the most apparant wise that he could, to induce
your highnesse to your agreement, to the desires of your capitall
aduersaries, as I saw there in your noble presence of his writing, at
which time (as I vnderstood) it was his singular opinion, that is to
saie: that you should leaue your right, your title, and your honour
of your crowne, and nomination of you king of France, during certeine
yeares, & that you should vtterlie absteine you and be content onelie
in writing, with Rex Angliae, &c. to the great note of infamie that
euer fell to you or anie of your noble progenitours, since the taking
of them first, the said title and right of your realme and crowne of
France. To which matter in your presence there, after that it had liked
your said highnesse, to aske mine aduise therevpon, with other of your
blood and councell; I answerd and said, that I would neuer agree me
thereto to die therfore, and of the same disposition I am yet, and will
be while I liue in conseruation of your honour, and of your oth made
vnto your said crowne, in time of your coronation there.

17 Item, the said cardinall and archbishop of Yorke, haue so laboured
vnto your highnesse, that you should intend to a new daie of
conuention, in March or Aprill next comming, where it is noised to be
more against your worship than with it. And where it was euident to
all the world, that the rupture and breaking of the said peace, should
haue fallen heretofore, of your aduerse partie; because of the great
vntruths. Now by that meanes it is like peraduenture to be laid vnto
the verie great slander of you my doubted lord, like to come to none
other purpose nor effect, than other conuentions haue doone afore time:
and so by subtilties and counsell of your said enimies, your land (they
in hope and trust of the said treatie, not mightilie nor puissantlie
purueied for) shall be like vnder the colour of the same treatie to be
burnt vp and destroied, lost, and vtterlie turned from your obeisance.

18 Item it is said, that the deliuerance of the said duke of Orleance,
is vtterlie appointed by the mediation, counsell, and stirring of the
said cardinall and archbishop of Yorke; and for that cause diuerse
persons beene come from your aduersaries, into this your realme, and
the said duke also brought to your citie of London, where as my lord
your father (whom God assoile) peising so greatlie the inconueniences;
and harme that might fall, onlie by his deliuerance, concluded,
ordeined, and determined in his last will, vtterlie in his wisedome,
his conquest in his realme of France. And yet then it is to be doone,
by as great deliberation, solemnitie and suertie, as may be deuised
or thought. And seeing now the disposition of your realme of France,
the puissance and might of your enimies, and what aid they haue gotten
against you there, aswell vnder the colour of the said treatie, as
otherwise; what may or ought to be thought or said, for that laboring
the said duke (all things considered) by such particular persons, the
lords of your bloud not called therevnto, I report me vnto your noble
grace and excellencie, and vnto the said wise true men of this your
realme.

19 Item, where that euerie true councellor, speciallie vnto anie
king or prince, ought of truth and of dutie, to counsell, promote,
increase, prefer, and aduance the weale and prosperitie of his lord:
the said cardinall, being of your councell (my right doubted lord)
hath late purchased of your highnesse, certeine great lands and
liuelod: as the castell and lordship of Chirke in Wales, and other
lands in this your realme; vnto which I was called suddenlie, and so
in eschewing the breaking and losse of your armies then againe, seeing
none other remedie, gaue therevnto mine assent, thinking that who that
euer laboured, moued or stirred the matter first vnto your lordship,
counselled you neither for your worship nor profit.

20 More, the said cardinall hath you bound apart, to make him a sure
estate of all the said lands, by Easter next comming, as could be
deuised by anie learned counsell; or else that suertie not made, the
said cardinall to haue and enioy to him, and his heirs for euermore,
the lands of the duchie of Lancaster, in Norffolke, to the value of
seuen or eight hundred marks by yeare. Which thing seemeth right
strange and vnseene, and vnhard waies of anie liege man, to seeke
vpon his souereigne lord, both in his inheritance and in his iewels
and goods. For it is thought, but if right and extreame necessitie
caused it, there should, nor ought no such things to be doone: from
which necessitie God (for his mercie) euer preserue your noble person.
Wherfore my redoubted lord, seeing that ye should be so counselled,
or stirred to leaue your crowne and inheritance in England; and also
by fraud and subtill meanes, as is afore rehearsed, so to lose your
iewels: in my truth and in mine acquitall (as me seemeth) I may not nor
ought not counsell so great an hurt to you and to all your land.

21 Item, it is not vnknowen to you my right doubted lord, how
oftentimes I haue offered my seruice, to and for the defense of your
realme of France, and duchie of Normandie, where I haue beene put
there-from by the labour of the said cardinall, in preferring other
after his singular affection. Which hath caused a great part of the
said duchie of Normandie, aswell as of your realme of France to be
lost, as it is well knowen. And what good (my right doubted lord)
was lost on that armie that last sent thither, which the earle of
Mortaigne, your councell of France, hath well & cleerelie declared to
your highnesse here before?

22 Item, my right doubted lord, it is not vnknowen, that it had not
beene possible to the said cardinall, to haue come to his great
riches, but by such meanes, for of his church it might not rise, and
inheritance he had none. Wherfore my right doubted lord, sith there is
great good behouefull at this time, for the weale and safegard of your
realmes, the pouertie, necessitie, & indigence of your liege people; in
highnesse vnderstand, like it vnto your noble grace, to consider the
said lucre of the said cardinall, and the great deceipts that you be
receiued in by the labour of him & of the archbishop, aswell in this
your realme as in your realme of France and duchie of Normandie, where
neither office, liuelod, nor capteine may be had, without too great
good giuen vnto him, wherby a great part of all the losse that is lost,
they haue beene the causers of; for who that would giue most, his was
the price, not considering the merits, seruice, nor sufficiance of
persons. Furthermore, it is greatlie to be considered, how, when the
said cardinall had forfeited all his goods, bicause of prouision, as
the statute therevpon more plainelie declareth; by hauing the rule of
you my right doubted lord, purchased himselfe in great defraudation of
your highnesse, a charter of pardon, the which good and it had be well
gouerned, might manie yeares haue susteined your warres, without anie
tallage of your poore people.

23 Item, my redoubted lord, whereas I write much thing for the weale
of you and of your realms, peraduenture some will saie and vnderstand,
that I would or haue written by waie of accusement of all your
councell, which God knoweth, I doo not: for your highnesse may well
see, that I name them that be causers of the said inordinate rule.
Wherfore, considering that the said cardinall and archbishop of Yorke
beene they, that pretend the gouernance of you, and of your realmes
and lordships: please it vnto your highnesse, of your right wisenesse
to estrange them of your councell, to that intent, that men may be at
their freedome, to say what they thinke of truth.

24 For truth, I dare speake of my truth, the poore dare not doo so. And
if the cardinall and the archbishop of Yorke, may afterward declare
themselues, of that is, and shalbe said of them; you my right doubted
lord may then restore them againe to your councell, at your noble
pleasure.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the king had heard the accusations thus laid by the duke of
Glocester against the cardinall, he committed the examination thereof
to his councell, whereof the more part were spirituall persons; so
that what for feare, and what for fauor, the matter was winked at, and
nothing said to it: onelie faire countenance was made to the duke, as
though no malice had beene conceiued against him. But venem will breake
out, & inward grudge will soone appeare, which was this yeare to all
men apparant: for diuers secret attempts were aduanced forward this
season against this noble man Humfreie duke of Glocester a far off,
which in conclusion came so neere, that they beereft him both of life
and land; as shall hereafter more plainelie appeere.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex Polychron._]

[Sidenote: _Alias_ Iohn Hum.]

For first this yeare, dame Eleanor Cobham, wife to the said duke, was
accused of treason; for that she by sorcerie and inchantment intended
to destroie the king, to the intent to aduance hir husband vnto the
crowne. Vpon this, she was examined in saint Stephans chappell before
the bishop of Canturburie, and there by examination conuict, and iudged
to doo open penance in three open places within the citie of London.
[Polychronicon saith she was inioined to go through Cheapside with a
taper in hir hand] and after that adiudged to perpetuall imprisonment
in the Ile of Man, vnder the keeping of sir Iohn Stanlie knight. At the
same season were arrested, arreigned, and adiudged giltie, as aiders
to the duchesse, Thomas Southwell priest, and canon of S. Stephans at
Westminster, Iohn Hun priest, Roger Bolingbrooke a cunning necromancer
(as it was said) and Margerie Iordeine, surnamed the witch of Eie.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl._]

[Sidenote: King Edward the fourth borne.]

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl._]

[Sidenote: A great fraie by night.]

The matter laid against them, was, for that they (at the request of
the said duchesse) had deuised an image of wax representing the king,
which by their sorcerie by little and little consumed, intending
thereby in conclusion to waste and destroie the kings person. Margerie
Iordeine was burnt in Smithfield, and Roger Bolingbrooke was drawne to
Tiborne, and hanged and quartered; taking vpon his death that there was
neuer anie such thing by them imagined. Iohn Hun had his pardon, and
Southwell died in the Tower the night before his execution: [for (saith
Polychr.) he did prophesie of himselfe, that he should die in his
bed, and not by iustice.] The duke of Glocester bare all these things
patientlie, and said little. Edward sonne to the duke of Yorke was
borne this yeare the nine and twentith of Aprill at Rone, his father
being the kings lieutenant in Normandie. [pilcrow] In this yeare was a great
fraie in Fleetstreet in the night time, betweene gentlemen of courts
and inhabitants of London; insomuch that much bloud was spilt, diuerse
slaine outright, and some mortallie wounded; besides great harme
otherwise doone and suffered.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex Fabian._ 438.]

[Sidenote: Tailors malepertnesse at the election of an alderman.]

[pilcrow] Vpon the daie of the translation of saint Edward, or the twelfth
of October, vpon which daie the maior and his brethren for the yeare
following, and daie when the commoners of the citie, after their
ancient custome had chosen two aldermen, such as before had beene
shiriffes of London and of Middlesex, namelie Robert Clopton draper,
and Rafe Holland tailor, and them presented by name vnto the maior
and his brethren, then sitting in the vtter chamber where the maiors
courts be kept, to the intent that the said maior and his brethren
might choose one of the said two, such as they thought most necessarie
and worshipfull for the roome; the said maior and his brethren choosing
Robert Clopton, brought him after downe vpon his right hand towards
the hall. Whereof when certeine tailors there present were aware, and
saw that Rafe Holland was not chosen, anon they cried; Nay, nay: not
this, but Rafe Holland. Wherewith the old maior being astonished, stood
still vpon the staire, and commanded them to keepe silence, and so held
on his waie to the east end of the hall, where he sat him downe, and
his brethren about him. In the meane time, the said tailors continued
their crie, and incensed others of base trades of the citie (as
simple persons) to take their part, and to crie as fast as they, not
proffering to cease their misrule for all that the maior could saie, no
nor yet when the maiors sergeant at armes had cried O-yes. Herevpon the
maior, to appease the rumor, sent downe the shiriffes, and commanded
them to take the offendors, and send them to the goale; which precept
was fulfilled, & about twelue or sixteene of the principall committed
to Newgate, where some of them abode a long time imprisoned; and others
that were fined set at libertie. This is reported by Polychronicon, but
in somewhat a differing maner.

[Sidenote: 1442]

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 21.]

[Sidenote: Iohn lord Talbot created earle of Shrewesburie.]

The councell of England forgat not the late enterprise of the French
king, atchiued in the duchie of Guien, and therefore doubting some
other the like attempt, they sent thither sir William Wooduile with
eight hundred men, to strengthen the frontiers, and further, set foorth
a proclamation, that all men which would transport anie corne, cheese,
or other vittels thither, should paie no maner of custome of tallage:
which licence caused the countrie of Aquitaine to be well furnished of
all things necessarie. About this season Iohn the valiant lord Talbot
for his approued prowesse and wisdome, aswell in England as in France,
both in peace & warre so well tried, was created earle of Shrewesburie,
and with a companie of three thousand men sent againe into Normandie,
for the better defense of the same.

[Sidenote: 1443]

[18] This yeere died Lodowike or Lewes Lischburne, bishop of Elie,
being the fiue and twentith that inioied that place, who came to the
same after this maner. After the death of Philip Morgan bishop of that
see, the moonks of Elie chose for their pastor Robert fitz Hugh bishop
of London; but he dieng at saint Osees before his confirmation, neuer
possessed the honour thereof. Wherevpon the king directed his letters
to the couent of Elie, to make election of Thomas Rudburne (bishop of
S. Dauids in Wales) for their bishop. But they contrarie therevnto
(taking it now for a custome, hauing so often vsed it before, as did
well appeare) made choise of Thomas Bourchier (borne of a noble house,
sonne to the countesse of Stafford, chancellor of Oxenford, and bishop
of Worcester) to succeed Philip Morgan. Which Bourchier, the king
(offended with the moonkes for the little regard had to his request)
vtterlie refused, and would not admit him vnto that place. Wherevpon
there were buls procured from Eugenius the fourth (then bishop of Rome)
which were sent into England to conlirme the Election of the said
Bourchier.

[18] _Fr. Thin._

But he wiselie fearing to fall into the dangerous statute of Premunire,
durst not receiue or execute the tenor of the popes commandement.
By reason whereof least the see might otherwise remaine void, (if
speedie remedie were not prouided) the king did in commendam bestow the
bishoprike of Elie vpon this Lodowike Lischburne archbishop of Rone, by
office, Card. 4. Coronat. Cancellar. Franciae & Normanniae, and kinsman
to the said king. Which doone, Eugenius (when he saw no other remedie)
did reuoke his buls made before to Thomas Bourchier, in the yeare of
Christ 1437. This Lodowike remaining bishop six yeares and so manie
moneths, died in the yeare as before, the eighteenth of September, at
his manor of Hatfield, whose bowels were buried in the said church: his
hart was caried to Rone, and there honourablie intoomed, and his bodie
was committed to the earth, in the church of Elie, betweene two marble
pillors next to the altar of the relikes.

In this yeare died in Guien the countesse of Comings, to whome the
French king and also the earle of Arminacke pretended to be heire, in
so much that the earle entred into all the lands of the said ladie.
And bicause he knew the French king would not take the matter well, to
haue a Rouland for an Oliuer; he sent solemne ambassadours to the king
of England, offering him his daughter in mariage, with promise to be
bound (beside great summes of monie, which he would giue with hir) to
deliuer into the king of Englands hands, all such castels and townes,
as he or his ancestors deteined from him within anie part of the duchie
of Aquitaine, either by conquest of his progenitors, or by gift and
deliuerie of anie French king: and further to aid the same king with
monie for the recouerie of other cities within the same duchie, from
the French king; or from anie other person that against king Henrie
vniustlie kept, and wrongfullie withholden them.

[Sidenote: The earle of Arminacks daughter affied vnto king Henrie.]

[Sidenote: The erle with his ladie, his sonne and two daughters taken.]

This offer seemed so profitable and also honorable to king Henrie and
the realme, that the ambassadours were well heard, honorablie receiued,
and with rewards sent home into their countrie. After whome were sent
for the conclusion of the marriage into Guien, sir Edward Hull, sir
Robert Ros, and Iohn Gralton deane of S. Seuerines, the which (as all
the chronographers agree) both concluded the mariage, and by proxie
affied the yoong ladie. The French king not a little offended herewith,
sent his eldest sonne Lewes the Dolphin of Vienne into Rouergue with
a puissant armie, which tooke the earle and his yoongest sonne, with
both his daughters, and by force obteined the countries of Arminacke,
Louuergne, Rouergue, and Moulessonois, beside the cities Seuerac &
Cadeac, chasing the bastard of Arminacke out of his countries, and so
by reason hereof, the concluded mariage was deferred, and that so long
that it neuer tooke effect; as hereafter it may appeare.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex Fabian 441._]

[Sidenote: A law against buieng and selling on the sundaie.]

[pilcrow] In this yeare was an act made by authoritie of the common councell of
London, that vpon the sundaie no maner of thing within the franchises
and liberties of the said citie should be bought or sold; neither
vittels nor other thing. It was also enacted by the same common
councell with full consent, and ratified by the authoritie of the
law-makers, that no artificer or handicrafts man should bring his
wares, commodities, or worke, vnto anie person or persons to be worne
or occupied on that dale: bicause it was iudged a foule prophanation
thereof. And peoples minds giuen to couetousnesse, make no exception
of times or places in a case of aduantage and gaine. In consideration
whereof, and for the suppressing of this abuse, this law was ordeined
and made: the force whereof did principallie extend to tailors and
shoomakers (who as on that daie bring home their garments and shoos
to the parties for whome they are made) and likewise to all other
occupations and trades. But this ordinance (saith mine author) was too
good for so bad an age, and therefore died within a short time after
the magistrate had giuen it life.

[Sidenote: _Abrv. Fl. ex. Fabian_, 441, & _Polychr._]

[Sidenote: Paules steeple burnt.]

[pilcrow] On Candlemasse eeue this yeere by lightning in a tempest that fell
with claps of thunder at afternoone, Paules steeple was set on fier in
the middest of the speare or shaft in the verie timber worke; which
was quenched by the painfulnesse of diuerse persons, and specialie by
the diligent labour of a preest of Bow in Cheape. Howbeit the same was
thought vnpossible to be quenched, but that the grace of God was cheefe
worker in the same. This steeple hath diuerse times beene ouerthrowne
and defaced, partlie by winds, and partlie by lightning, as may be
obserued in the reading of this volume: yea when the same hath beene
repared by the choisest workemen, and of the substantiallest stuffe,
and all meanes (that stood with the deepe deuise of man) vsed to make
it so sure that it might continue, as a monument of perpetuitie for
posteritie to woonder at and admire. But to returne to the historie.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 22.]

[Sidenote: The diet at Tours for a peace to be had betweene England and
France.]

Whilest England was vnquieted (as you haue heard) and France by spoile,
slaughter, and burning sore defaced (a mischeefe in all places much
lamented) therefore to agree the two puissant kings, all the princes
of christendome trauelled so effectuouslie by their oratours and
ambassadours, that a diet was appointed to be kept at the citie of
Tours in Touraine; where for the king of England appeared William de la
Poole earle of Suffolke, doctor Adam Molins keeper of the kings priuie
seale, also sir Robert Ros, and diuers other. And for the French king
were appointed Charles duke of Orleance, Lewes de Bourbon earle of
Vandosme, great maister of the French kings houshold, Piers de Bresse
steward of Poictou, and Bertram Beauuan lord of Presignie.

[Sidenote: A truce for 18 moneths.]

There were also sent thither ambassadours from the empire, from
Spaine, from Denmarke, & from Hungarie; to be mediatours betwixt the
two princes. The assemblie was great, but the cost was much greater,
insomuch that euerie part for the honour of their prince and praise of
their countrie, set foorth themselues, as well in fare as apparell, to
the vttermost. Manie meetings were had, and manie things mooued for a
finall peace: but in conclusion, by reason of manie doubts which rose
on both parties, no full concord could be agreed vpon; but in hope
to come to a peace, a certeine truce, as well by sea as by land, was
concluded by the commissioners for eighteene moneths, which afterward
againe was prolonged to the yeare of our Lord 1449.

[Sidenote: 1444]

In treating of this truce, the earle of Suffolke aduenturing somewhat
vpon his commission, without the assent of his associats, imagined,
that the next waie to come to a perfect peace, was to contriue a
mariage betweene the French kings kinsewoman, the ladie Margaret
daughter to Reiner duke of Aniou, and his souereigne lord king Henrie.
This Reiner duke of Aniou named himselfe king of Sicill, Naples, and
Ierusalem, hauing onlie the name and stile of those realmes; without
anie penie, profit, or foot of possession. This mariage was made
strange to the earle at the first, and one thing seemed to be a great
hinderance to it; which was, bicause the king of England occupied a
great part of the duchie of Aniou, and the whole countie of Maine,
apperteining (as was alledged) to king Reiner.

The earle of Suffolke (I cannot saie either corrupted with bribes, or
too much affectioned to this vnprofitable mariage), condescended, that
the duchie of Aniou and the countie of Maine should be deliuered to
the king, the brides father demanding for hir mariage neither penie
nor farthing: as who would saie, that this new affinitie passed all
riches, and excelled both gold and pretious stones. And to the intent
that of this truce might insue a finall concord, a daie of enteruiew
was appointed betweene the two kings in a place conuenient betweene
Chartres and Rone. When these things were concluded, the earle of
Suffolke with his companie returned into England, where he forgat not
to declare what an honourable truce he had taken, out of the which
there was a great hope that a finall peace might grow the sooner for
that honorable mariage, which he had concluded, omitting nothing
that might extoll and set foorth the personage of the ladie, or the
nobilitie of hir kinred.

[Sidenote: The protector misliked this second motion of the kings
mariage.]

But although this mariage pleased the king and diuerse of his
councell, yet Humfrie duke of Glocester protector of the realme was
much against it, alledging that it should be both contrarie to the
lawes of God, and dishonorable to the prince, if he should breake that
promise and contract of mariage, made by ambassadours sufficientlie
thereto instructed, with the daughter of the earle of Arminacke, vpon
conditions both to him and his realme, as much profitable as honorable.
But the dukes words could not be heard, for the earles dooings were
onelie liked and allowed. So that for performance of the conclusions,
the French king sent the earle of Vandosme, great maister of his house,
and the archbishop of Reimes first peere of France, and diuerse other
into England, where they were honorablie receiued; and after that the
instruments were once sealed and deliuered on both parts, the said
ambassadours returned againe into their countries with great gifts and
rewards.

[Sidenote: Creations of estates.]

When these things were doone, the king both for honour of his realme,
and to assure to himselfe mo freends, created Iohn Holland earle
of Huntington duke of Excester as his father was: Humfrie earle of
Stafford was made duke of Buckingham: and Henrie earle of Warwike was
elected to the title of duke of Warwike, to whome the king also gaue
the castell of Bristowe, with the Ile of Iernesenie, and Garneseie.
Also the earle of Suffolke was made marquesse of Suffolke, which
marquesse with his wife and manie honorable personages of men and women
richlie adorned both with apparell & iewels, hauing with them manie
costlie chariots and gorgeous horslitters, sailed into France for the
conueiance of the nominated queene into the realme of England. For king
Reiner hir father, for all his long stile had too short a pursse to
send his daughter honorablie to the king hir spouse.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 23.]

[Sidenote: 1445.]

This noble companie came to the citie of Tours in Touraine, where
they were honorablie receiued both of the French king and of the king
of Sicill. The marquesse of Suffolke as procurator to king Henrie,
espoused the said ladie in the church of saint Martins. At the
which mariage were present the father and mother of the bride; the
French king himselfe, which was vncle to the husband; and the French
queene also, which was aunt to the wife. There were also the dukes
of Orleance, of Calabre, of Alanson, and of Britaine, seauen earls,
twelue barons, twentie bishops, beside knights and gentlemen. When the
feast, triumph, bankets and iusts were ended, the ladie was deliuered
to the marquesse, who in great estate conueied hir through Normandie
vnto Diepe, and so transported hir into England, where she landed at
Portesmouth in the moneth of Aprill. This ladie excelled all other, as
well in beautie and fauour, as in wit and policie, and was of stomach
and courage more like to a man than a woman.

[Sidenote: Margaret daughter to Reiner K. of Sicill & Ierusalem maried
to Henrie the sixt.]

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex Polychron._]

Shortlie after hir arriuall, she was conueied to the towne of Southwike
in Hamshire, where she with all nuptiall ceremonies was coupled in
matrimonie to king Henrie the sixt of that name. [pilcrow] On the eighteenth
of Maie she came to London, all the lords of England in most sumptuous
sort meeting and receiuing hir vpon the waie, and speciallie the
duke of Glocester with such honour as stood with the dignitie of his
person. Now when she came to Blackheath, the maior, aldermen, and men
of occupations, in blew gownes imbrodered with some deuise, expressing
their art and trades whereby to be knowne, did all shew themselues,
with congratulation of hir comming; from whence they attended hir to
London, where with goodlie pageants and sundrie gallant historicall
shewes in diuerse places erected, she was verie magnificallie welcomed.
The maner and order of which pompe in sundrie places exhibited to the
high honour of the king, queene, & states is verie amplie set foorth
by Fabian, pag. 423, 424, 425, 426, 427. Vpon the thirtith of Maie
next following, she was crowned queene of this realme of England at
Westminster, with all the solemnitie thereto apperteining.

[Sidenote: An ominous mariage.]

This mariage seemed to manie both infortunate and vnprofitable to the
realme of England, and that for manie causes. First, the king had
not one penie with hir; and for the fetching of hir, the marquesse
of Suffolke demanded a whole fifteenth in open parlement. And also
there was deliuered for hir the duchie of Aniou, the citie of Mans,
and the whole countie of Maine, which countries were the verie staies
and backestands to the duchie of Normandie. And furthermore, the earle
of Arminacke tooke such displeasure with the king of England for this
mariage, that he became vtter enimie to the crowne of England, and was
the cheefe cause that the Englishmen were expelled out of the whole
duchie of Aquitaine.

But most of all it should seeme, that God was displeased with this
mariage: for after the confirmation thereof, the kings freends fell
from him, both in England and in France, the lords of his realme fell
at diuision, and the commons rebelled in such sort, that finallie
after manie fields foughten, and manie thousands of men slaine, the
king at length was deposed, and his sonne killed, and this queene sent
home againe, with as much miserie and sorrow as she was receiued with
pompe and triumph: such is the instabilitie of worldlie felicitie, and
so wauering is false flattering fortune. Which mutation and change
of the better for the worse could not but nettle and sting hir with
pensiuenesse, yea and anie other person whatsoeuer, that hauing beene
in good estate, falleth into the contrarie: whereto the saieng of the
poet giueth credit, in these few words following;

[Sidenote: _Ouid. 2. de art._]

    Quem res plus nimio delectauere secundae,
    Mutatae quatiunt.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 24.]

[Sidenote: 1446]

[Sidenote: The duke of Summerset made regent of Norm[=a]die, and the
Duke of Yorke discharged.]

This yeare, after the deceasse of Henrie Chicheleie archbishop of
Canturburie, succeeded Iohn Stafford in that see, being translated from
Bath and Wels. He was the threescore and one archbishop, as Polydor
noteth. During the time of the truce, Richard duke of Yorke and diuerse
other capteins repaired into England, both to visit their wiues,
children, and freends, and also to consult what should be doone, if the
truce ended. For the which cause a parlement was called, in the which
it was especiallie concluded, that by good foresight Normandie might be
so furnished for defense before the end of the truce, that the French
king should take no aduantage through want of timelie prouision: for
it was knowne, that if a peace were not concluded, the French king did
prepare to imploie his whole puissance to make open warre. Heerevpon
monie was granted, an armie leuied, and the duke of Summerset appointed
to be regent of Normandie, and the duke of Yorke thereof discharged.

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke appointed to the charge againe.]

I haue seene in a register booke belonging sometime to the abbeie of
saint Albons that the duke of Yorke was established regent of France,
after the deceasse of the duke of Bedford, to continue in that office
for the tearme of fiue yeares; which being expired, he returned home,
and was ioifullie receiued of the king with thanks for his good
seruice, as he had full well deserued in time of that his gouernement:
and further, that now when a new regent was to be chosen and sent ouer,
to abide vpon safegard of the countries beyond the seas as yet subiect
to the English dominion, the said duke of Yorke was eftsoones (as a man
most meet to supplie that roome) appointed to go ouer againe, as regent
of France with all his former allowances.

[Sidenote: The appointm[=e]t disappointed, and pointed to the
marquesse of Suffolke.]

But the duke of Summerset still maligning the duke of Yorkes
aduancement, as he had sought to hinder his dispatch at the first
when he was sent ouer to be regent, as before yee haue heard: he
likewise now wrought so, that the king reuoked his grant made to the
duke of Yorke for enioieng of that office the terme of other fiue
yeeres, and with helpe of William marquesse of Suffolke obteined that
grant for himselfe. Which malicious deling the duke of Yorke might so
euill beare, that in the end the heate of displeasure burst out into
such a flame, as consumed at length not onelie both those two noble
personages, but also manie thousands of others, though in diuers times
and seasons, as in places hereafter (as occasion serueth) it shall more
euidentlie appeare. But now to returne to the parlement.

[Sidenote: The marques of Suffolks request.]

The marques of Suffolke, supposing all men had as well liked his
dooings (during the time of his legation in France) as himselfe, the
second daie of Iune in the first session of this parlement in the
higher house openlie, eloquentlie, and boldlie declared his paine,
trauell, and diligence susteined in his said legation, as well for the
taking and concluding an abstinence of warre, as in the making of the
mariage; remembring them also that the said truce expired the first of
Aprill next, except a finall peace, or a further truce were concluded
in the meane season: and therefore he aduised them to prouide and
foresee things necessarie for the warre (as though no concord should
succeed) least happilie the Frenchmen perceiuing them vnprouided,
would take their aduantage, and agree neither to peace nor amitie;
saieng vnto them further, that sith he had admonished the king and them
according to his dutie, if anie thing happened otherwise than well, he
was thereof innocent and guiltlesse and had acquited himselfe like a
true and louing subiect, and a faithfull councellour, praieng the lords
to haue it in remembrance.

Likewise on the morow after, he descended into the common house,
accompanied with certeine lords, and there declared the same matter
to the knights, citizens, and burgesses, praieng the commons for his
discharge, that as well all his dooings and proceedings in the kings
affaires beyond the sea, as also his aduertisement and counsell opened
to the lords and commons now togither assembled, might be by the
king and them inacted and inrolled in the records of the parlement.
Wherevpon the next daie after, the speaker William Burghleie, and the
companie of the lower house, repaired vnto the kings presence, sitting
amongst the lords of the vpper house, & there humblie required that
the request of the marquesse might be granted. And so likewise the
lords made the like petition kneeling on their knees, insomuch that the
king condescended to their desires: and so the labours, demeanours,
diligences, and declarations of the said marquesse, togither with the
desires not onelie of the lords, but also of the commons, as well
for the honour of him and his posteritie, as for his acquitall and
discharge, were inacted and inrolled in the records of the parlement.

[Sidenote: The marques of Suffolke, cheefest in fauour and authoritie
with the king and queene.]

By the queenes meanes shortlie after also was the said marquesse
aduanced so in authoritie, that he ruled the king at his pleasure,
and to his high preferment obteined the wardships both of the bodie
and lands of the countesse of Warwike, and of the ladie Margaret sole
heire to Iohn duke of Summerset, which ladie was afterward moother to
king Henrie the seauenth: and besides that, caused the king to create
Iohn de Fois, sonne vnto Gaston de Fois, earle of Longuile, and the
Capdau de Beufe earle of Kendall, which Iohn had married his neece,
and by his procurement the king elected to the order of the garter
the said Gaston, and Iohn his sonne, giuing to the sonne towards the
maintenance of his degree, lands and castels, amounting to the summe of
one thousand pounds, which lands, name, and stile the issue and line of
the said earle of Kendall at this daie haue and inioy.

[Sidenote: A commotion in Norwich.]

[Sidenote: The liberties of Norwich seized into the kings hands.]

[Sidenote: Indirect meanes to reforme wrongs.]

These things being thus in dooing, the French king, seeing that the
towne of Mans was not deliuered according to the appointment taken
by force of the marriage, raised an armie for to recouer the same.
Whereof the king of England being aduertised (least the breach of the
truce should come by him) caused the towne to be deliuered without
anie force. This yeare was a great commotion in Norwich against the
prior of the place. At length the citizens opened the gates to the duke
of Norffolke, who came thither to appease the matter, though at the
first they would not suffer him to enter. The cheefe offendors were
(according to their demerits) greeuouslie punished and executed, and
the maior was discharged of his office, and sir Iohn Clifton was made
gouernour there, vntil the king had restored the citizens to their
ancient liberties. This commotion was begun for certeine new exactions
which the prior claimed and tooke of the citizens, contrarie to their
ancient freedome. But herein a wrong taken for getting of right was
worthilie corrected.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex Fabian._ 343.]

[Sidenote: _Polychron._]

[Sidenote: Combats in cases of appeales touching treason.]

[Sidenote: Drunkennese the ouerthrow of right and manhood.]

[pilcrow] In the foure and twentith yeare of this kings reigne, the prior of
Kilmaine appeached the earle of Ormond of treason. For triall whereof
the place of combat was assigned in Smithfield, & the barriers for
the same there readie pitcht. Howbeit, in the meane time a doctor of
diuinitie, named maister Gilbert Worthington, parson of saint Andrews
in Holborne, and other honest men, made such sute with diligent labour
and paines-taking to the kings councell, that when the daie of combat
approched, the quarell was taken into the kings hands, and there ended.
[pilcrow] In the same yeare also, a certeine armourer was appeached of treason
by a seruant of his owne. For proofe whereof a daie was giuen them
to fight in Smithfield, insomuch that in conflict the said armourer
was ouercome and slaine; but yet by misgouerning of himselfe. For on
the morow, when he should come to the field fresh and fasting, his
neighbours came to him, and gaue him wine and strong drinke in such
excessiue sort, that he was therewith distempered, and reeled as he
went, and so was slaine without guilt. As for the false seruant, he
liued not long vnpunished; for being conuict of felonie in court of
assise, he was iudged to be hanged, and so was, at Tiburne.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 25.]

[Sidenote: The description of the queene.]

Whilest the warres betweene the two nations of England & France
ceassed (by occasion of the truce) the minds of men were not so quiet,
but that such as were bent to malicious reuenge, sought to compasse
their prepensed purpose, not against forren foes and enimies of their
countrie, but against their owne countriemen, and those that had
deserued verie well of the common-wealth: and this speciallie for
ouermuch mildnesse in the king, who by his authoritie might haue ruled
both parts, and ordered all differences betwixt them, but that in
deed he was thought too soft for gouernor of a kingdome. The queene
contrariwise, a ladie of great wit, and no lesse courage, desirous of
honour, and furnished with the gifts of reason, policie, and wisdome;
but yet sometime (according to hir kind) when she had beene fullie bent
on a matter, suddenlie like a weather cocke, mutable and turning.

This ladie disdaining that hir husband should be ruled rather than
rule, could not abide that the duke of Gloucester should doo all things
concerning the order of weightie affaires, least it might be said, that
she had neither wit nor stomach, which would permit and suffer hir
husband, being of most perfect age, like a yoong pupill to be gouerned
by the direction of an other man. Although this toy entered first into
hir braine thorough hir owne imagination, yet was she pricked forward
to the matter both by such of hir husbands counsell, as of long time
had borne malice to the duke for his plainesse vsed in declaring their
vntruth (as partlie ye haue heard) and also by counsell from king
Reiner hir father, aduising that she and the king should take vpon them
the rule of the realme, and not to be kept vnder, as wards and mastered
orphanes.

[Sidenote: The queene taketh vpon hir the gouernement, and dischargeth
the duke of Glocester.]

[Sidenote: The faint quarell piked to the duke of Glocester.]

What needeth manie words? The queene persuaded by these meanes, first
of all excluded the duke of Glocester from all rule and gouernance,
not prohibiting such as she knew to be his mortall foes to inuent
and imagine causes and greefs against him and his, insomuch that
by hir procurement, diuerse noblemen conspired against him. Of the
which diuerse writers affirme the marquesse of Suffolke, and the duke
of Buckingham to be the cheefe, not vnprocured by the cardinall of
Winchester, and the archbishop of Yorke. Diuerse articles were laid
against him in open councell, and in especiallie one; That he had
caused men adiudged to die, to be put to other execution, than the law
of the land assigned. Suerlie the duke verie well learned in the law
ciuill, detesting malefactors, and punishing offenses in seueritie of
iustice, gat him hatred of such as feared condigne reward for their
wicked dooings. And although the duke sufficientlie answered to all
things against him obiected: yet because his death was determined, his
wisedome and innocencie nothing auailed.

[Sidenote: 1447.]

[Sidenote: A parlement at saint Edmundesburie.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Glocester suddenlie murthered.]

But to auoid danger of tumult that might be raised, if a prince so
well beloued of the people should be openlie executed; his enimies
determined to worke their feats in his destruction, yer he should
haue anie warning. For effecting whereof, a parlement was summoned
to be kept at Berrie, whither resorted all the peeres of the realme,
and amongst them the duke of Glocester; which on the second daie
of the session was by the lord Beaumont, then high constable of
England, accompanied with the duke of Buckingham, and others arrested,
apprehended, and put in ward, and all his seruants sequestred from
him, and thirtie two of the cheefe of his retinue were sent to diuerse
prisons, to the great admiration of the people. The duke the night
after he was thus committed to prison, being the foure and twentith of
Februarie, was found dead in his bed, and his bodie shewed to the lords
and commons, as though he had died a palsie, or of an imposteme.

[Sidenote: _Edw. Hall._]

[Sidenote: A pardon at a pinch.]

But all indifferent persons (as saith Hall) might well vnderstand that
he died of some violent death. Some iudged him to be strangled, some
affirme that an hot spit was put in at his fundament, other write that
he was smouldered betweene two featherbeds, and some haue affirmed that
he died of verie greefe, for that he might not come openlie to his
answer. His dead corpse was conueied to saint Albons, and there buried.
After his death, none of his seruants suffered: although fiue of them,
to wit, sir Roger Chamberline knight, Middleton, Herbert, Arteise
esquiers, and Richard Nedham gentleman, were arreigned, condemned,
and drawen to Tiborne, where they were hanged, let downe quicke, and
stripped to haue beene bowelled and quartered: but the marques of
Suffolke comming at that instant brought their pardons, shewed the same
openlie, and so their liues were saued.

[Sidenote: Dukes of Glocester vnfortunate.]

Some thinke that the name and title of Glocester hath beene vnluckie
to diuerse, which for their honours haue beene erected by creation
of princes to that stile and dignitie, as Hugh Spenser, Thomas of
Woodstoke, sonne to king Edward the third, and this duke Humfreie:
which three persons by miserable death finished their daies; and after
them king Richard the third also, duke of Glocester in ciuill warre
slaine. So that this name duke of Glocester is taken for an vnhappie
stile, as the prouerbe speaketh of Seians horsse, whose rider was euer
vnhorssed, & whose possessor was euer brought to miserie. But suerlie,
by the pitifull death of this noble duke and politike gouernour, the
publike wealth of the realme came to great decaie, as by sequele here
may more at large appeare.

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

[Oft times it hapneth that a man in quenching of smoke, burneth his
fingers in the fire:] so the queene in casting how to keepe hir husband
in honor, and hir selfe in authoritie, in making awaie of this noble
man, brought that to passe, which she had most cause to haue feared,
which was the deposing of hir husband, & the decaie of the house of
Lancaster, which of likelihood had not chanced if this duke had liued:
for then durst not the duke of Yorke haue attempted to set foorth
his title to the crowne, as he afterwards did, to the great trouble
of the realme, and destruction of king Henrie, and of manie other
noble men beside. This is the opinion of men, but Gods iudgements are
vnsearchable, against whose decree and ordinance preuaileth no humane
counsell.

But to conclude of this noble duke: he was an vpright and politike
gouernour, bending all his indeuours to the aduancement of the
common-wealth, verie louing to the poore commons, and so beloued of
them againe; learned, wise, full of courtesie; void of pride and
ambition (a vertue rare in personages of such high estate) but where it
is most commendable. But sith the praise of this noble man deserueth a
large discourse, and meet for such as haue cunning how to handle the
same (sith the ornaments of his mind were both rare & admirable, the
feats of chiualrie by him commensed and atchiued valiant and fortunate,
his grauitie in counsell, and soundnesse of policie profound and
singular, all which with a traine of other excellent properties linked
togither, require a man of manifold gifts to aduance them according
to their dignitie) I refer the readers vnto maister Foxes booke of
Acts and Monuments. Onelie this I ad, that in respect of his noble
indowments, and his demeanor full of decencie, which he daily vsed, it
seemeth he might well haue giuen this pretty poesie,

    Virtute duce non sanguine nitor.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 26.]

[Sidenote: Marquesse of Suffolke made duke.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke tempering about his title to the crowne.]

In this six and twentith yeare of the reigne of this king, but in
the first of the rule of the queene, I find nothing doone worthie of
rehersall within the realme of England; but that the marquesse of
Suffolke, by great fauour of the king, & more desire of the queene, was
erected to the title and dignitie of duke of Suffolke, which he a short
time inioied. For Richard duke of Yorke being greatlie alied by his
wife to the chiefe peeres and potentates of the realme, beside his own
progenie, perceiuing the king to be no ruler, but the whole burthen of
the realme to rest in direction of the queene, & the duke of Suffolke,
began secretlie to allure his friends of the nobilitie; and priuilie
declared vnto them his title and right to the crowne, and likewise
did he to certeine wise gouernours of diuerse cities and townes.
Which attempt was so politikelie handled, and so secretlie kept, that
prouision to his purpose was readie, before his purpose was openlie
published; and his friends opened themselues, yer the contrarie part
could them espie: for in conclusion all shortlie in mischiefe burst
out, as ye may hereafter heare.

[Sidenote: 1448]

[Sidenote: The death of the bishop of Winchester & his discripti[=o].]

During these dooings, Henrie Beauford bishop of Winchester, and
called the rich cardinall, departed out of this world, & buried at
Westminster. He was son to Iohn Duke of Lancaster, descended of an
honorable linage, but borne in hast, more noble in blood than notable
in learning, hautie in stomach, and high of countenance, rich aboue
measure, but not verie liberall, disdainefull to his kin, and dreadfull
to his louers, preferring monie before friendship, manie things
beginning and few performing, sauing in malice and mischiefe; his
insatiable couetousnesse and hope of long life made him both to forget
God, his prince, and himselfe. Of the getting of his goods both by
power legantine, and spirituall briberie, I will not speake; but the
keeping of them, which he chiefelie gathered for ambitious purpose, was
both great losse to his naturall prince and natiue countrie: for his
hidden riches might haue well holpen the king, and his secret treasure
might haue relieued the communaltie, when monie was scant and charges
great.

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

[Sidenote: _Lib._ 23.]

[Of this catholike clerke such were the deeds, that with king and ech
estate else (saith Polydor) the lighter was the losse, bicause as for
his hat he was a prelate proud inough, so for a bishop was there a
better soone set in his roome. One William Patin, son and heire to
Richard his father, and eldest brother to Iohn that deceassed deane of
Chichester, and to Richard that liued and died at Baslo in Derbishire.
This William was a person by parentage borne a gentleman, for vertue
and learning first consecrate bishop of Winchester, then anon after for
wisedome and integritie chosen lord chancellor of England: wherein his
prudence made eminent, in warilie wielding the weight of that office at
those daies, which were so dangerous for all estates to liue in.

His vertuous disposition was right apparent, and it were but by
this the godlie erection of that worthie worke, Magdalene colledge
in Oxford, a plot right aptlie chosen out for studie at first, with
strength and workemanship soone after builded according, in proportion
beautifull outward, and for vse verie commodious within, sorted into
a faire mansion for the president, seuerall and meet for a man to
that office of worship and grauitie, and also into other roomes for
the fellowes, officers, and yoonger students. Not without a vertuous
remembrance of the verie tenderlings, who might appeare to be toward
and teachable; whereof part to be trained vp in the diuine science of
musike iustlie reported in a distichon, that

    Gaudiasi superum res sit mortalibus vlla,
      Integra quae referat; musica sola refert:

the vse of it commendablie serving by sweet harmonie to praise God in
church, and for delectable recreation to a gentlemanlie mind any where
else: and part of these yoong ones to be taught the grammar in a faire
schoole well appointed therefore, out of which as out of a nursserie
of it owne, for supplement certeine to keepe full the number, these
budlings as need from time to time to be dulie deriued and drawen.

Now somewhat in casting vpon this deuout mans deuise and compasse; to
consider the companie of students there, that in seuerall sciences and
sundrie professions are not a few; then their assigned studies and
exercises in them, their steps in rising & reward for diligence, from
the lowest logician to the highest degrees of doctrine in schooles,
their officers in house, their orders for gouernance in maners, in
safegard of health and helpe in sicknesse: and that chiefest is, the
reuenues certeine for prouision and maintenance of all, it may be
a question not easie to answer: whether at first in this founders
meditation vpon such a worke were a mind more magnifike, or a more
amplitude of abilitie after in so absolute a forme to performe it, or
else a profounder wisedome for perpetuitie into so perfect an order in
all points to haue fixt it.

[Sidenote: _Bale._]

It was a fashion at those daies, long also afore, & since, from a
learned spirituall man to take awaie the fathers surname (were it neuer
so worshipfull or ancient) and giue him for it the name of the towne
he was borne in: and so was Richard Notingham a learned frier minorite
in king Edward the seconds daies called of Notingham where he was
borne; Iohn Olneie a learned monke in those daies also, named of an
Iland wherein he was borne nie Glocester; of Barton in Lincolnshire one
William Barton in Richard the seconds reigne, for that time a famous
doctor and chancellor of Oxford; Water Disse, of Disse in Suffolke
a learned Carmelite frier, confessour to the duke and duchesse of
Lancaster in king Henrie the fourths reigne; Richard Hampoole of a
towne in Yorkshire, a zelous doctor, and after a vertuous heremit in
king Henrie the sixts daies.

[Sidenote: Willi[=a] Wainfleet bishop of Winchester, lord chancellor of
England, founder of Magdeline college in Oxford.]

[Sidenote: _An. Dom._ 448.]

[Sidenote: _Malmesburie._]

And after this sort manie hundreds more that had their names so
altered; as euen in like maner vnto this reuerend prelat in the prime
of his towardnesse was changed his fathers surname Paten to Wainfleet
of the towne where he was borne in Lincolnshire: a matter right
proueable aswell by the records of the house there extant, as by a
faire deed remaining among other his proper euidences, in the hands of
the worshipful maister Thomas Fanshaw esquier, the queenes maiesties
remembrancer in the escheker at Westminster. And as the names of
Germin, German, Germi, are but for one name though diuerslie wrested,
and all to remember Germanie, the countrie their ancestors came from;
and also as Iute, Iud, and Chute, are all but for the race of Iudes,
one of the three first Germane nations that came in with Horsus and
Hengist; and Caltrap, Caltrop and Calthorp was all but for Caldthorp
(that signifieth a cold towne) howeuer it be otherwise wried: euen
so Paten, Patin, Patten or Patent, is but a mention of the old Saxon
name, that trulie at first was Patan; of Pate, the sole of the foot,
and thereof Patan to signifie flat footed, as among the Latines they
were called Plautus or Plancus: so Cicero of a chiche or tare; Nasones,
Labiones and Labieni, well nosed and lipt; & manie more after that
sort in manie toongs else so deriued.

That right manie students skilful in the profoundest sciences and
learned toongs, manie venerable clerks, who in most weightie causes
with singular wisedome, successe and faith, haue serued their prince
and countrie this college hath brought foorth: hereto that manie toward
wits it still to haue, hath had the good hap (which happilie yet to it
dooth reteine) may here with modestie a litle be touched, neither to
comparison that were contentious folie, nor yet to seeke glorie that
cannot be but vaine, but onlie in storie to mind, how vnto purposes
vertuouslie deuised and wiselie pursued, Gods goodnesse alwaies giveth
cheeuing and thrift according.]

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex Fabian._ 447.]

[Sidenote: A combat vpon triall of manhood between a French and an
Englishman.]

[pilcrow] In this seuen and twentith yeare of king Henries reigne, as witnesse
the English chronicles, a knight of France called sir Lewes de Bueill
challenged an esquier of England, named Rafe Chalons, to triall of
certeine feats of warre. Herevpon (as was thought conuenient) a day
was appointed them to make proofe thereof; the place also was assigned
of their meeting, to wit, at a towne in France called Maunt or Maunce,
where the French king at the same time was personallie present. But
fortune (saith mine auther) was to Chalons so fauourable, and leaned so
much to his side, that he ran the French knight through with the point
of his fatall speare.

    Hunc illi finem lingua superba dedit.

[Sidenote: The compassion of the Englishman to his enimie.]

The English esquier seeing the infortunate euent of this triall to
fall to the shame of the challenger, was so far from reioising at his
ouerthrow, that he was touched with christian compassion, and moorned
for his enimie, for whome also he kept an obsequie as if he had beene
his own naturall brother, and descended of the same parents. For which
merciful motions of mind inwardlie working, and outwardlie appearing,
he was of the king greatlie commended. But doubtfull it is, whether the
other, if he had suruiued, and got the vpper hand, would haue had the
like reuerend care of the Englishmans dead bodie, as to haue vouchsafed
it a solemne interrement.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 27.]

[Sidenote: Sir Francis Suriennes.]

[Sidenote: Fougiers.]

As the affaires in France now were neither well looked to, nor the
gouernours there well aduised, an English capteine called sir Francis
Suriennes, surnamed the Aragonois, of the countrie where he was borne,
a man for his wit and actiuitie admitted into the order of the garter,
tooke by scaling suddenlie in the night of the euen of our ladie day
in Lent, a towne on the frontiers of Normandie, belonging to the
duke of Britaine called Fougiers, spoiling the same, and killing the
inhabitants. The duke of Britaine, being hereof aduertised, sent word
by the bishop of Reimes to the French king, beseeching him of his aid
and counsell in the matter.

The French king foorthwith sent his caruer Iohn Hauart, and Iohn
Cosinet one of the maisters of his requests to the king of England: and
to the duke of Summerset he dispatched Peter de Fonteins the maister
of his horsse. To which messengers answer was made aswell by the king
as the duke, that the fact was doone without their knowledge. And for
the truce to be kept, and not onelie restitution, but also amends to be
made to the duke of Britaine, a daie of diet was appointed to be kept
at Louuiers, where the commissioners on both parts being assembled, the
Frenchmen demanded amends, with no small recompense. The Englishmen
answered, that without offense, nothing by iustice ought to be
satisfied; affirming the dooing of sir Francis Sureinnes to be onelie
his act, without consent either of the king of England, or of the duke
of Summerset his lieutenant and regent.

[Sidenote: P[=o]t de Larch taken by the Fr[=e]chmen by a subtill
sleight.]

But whiles with long delaie they talked of this matter at Louuiers,
certeine French men by aduertisement of a wagoner of Louuiers,
vnderstanding that the towne of Pont de Larch was but slenderlie
manned; the wagoner laded his wagon and passed forward, hauing in his
companie two strong varlets clad like carpentars, with great axes
on their shoulders. And hereto le seineur de Bresse with a chosen
companie of men of armes, lodged himselfe in ambushment neere to the
gate of S. Andrew, and capteine Floquet, accompanied with sir Iames
de Cleremont, and another great companie priuilie lurked vnder a wood
toward Louuiers. When all things were appointed for the purpose, earlie
in a morning about the beginning of October, the wagoner came to the
gate, and called the porter by name, praieng him to open the gate, that
he might passe to Rone, and returne againe the same night.

The porter (which well knew the voice of his customer) tooke little
heed to the other two companions, and so opened the one gate, and sent
another fellow of his to open the formost gate. When the chariot was
on the draw-bridge betweene both the gates, the chariot-maister gaue
the porter monie, and for the nonce let one peece fall on the ground:
and while the porter stooped to take it vp, the wagoner with his dagger
stroke him in at his throat, so that he cried for no helpe, and the
two great lubbers slue the other porters, and with their axes cut the
axeltree of the wagon, so that the draw-bridge could not be shortlie
drawen vp. This doone they made a signe to capteine Floquet, which with
all speed entered the towne, slue and tooke all the Englishmen: and
amongst other, the lord Fauconbridge capteine of the said towne was
taken prisoner. The losse of this place was of no small importance,
being the verie keie and passage ouer the riuer of Seine, from France
into Normandie, being distant from Rone onelie foure leagues.

When request was made to haue it restored againe to the Englishmen,
answer was made, that if they restored vnto the duke of Britaine, the
towne of Fougiers, with condigne amends for the damages doone there,
the towne of Pont Larch should then be againe deliuered, or else not.
And shortlie after, in hope of like successe the French king assembled
an armie, and diuiding the same in three parts, got by surrender
(after sundrie assaults, and losse of diuerse of his men) the townes
of Louuiers, & Gerborie, whereof William Harper was capteine. Also the
towne, castell, and great tower of Verneueill in Perch were rendered
into the French kings hands, after twentie daies of respit granted, to
see if rescues would haue come. The French writers affirme the towne to
be taken by assault.

[Sidenote: The warres renewed befor the end of the truce.]

Thus was the warre renewed before the terme of truce fullie expired,
& the English capteins brought to their wits end, what with appeasing
dalie rumors within the townes; and what with studie how to recouer
castels lost and taken: for while they studied how to keepe and defend
one place, foure or fiue other turned to the French part. The chiefe
cause of which reuolting was, for that it was blowen abroad thorough
France, how the realme of England, after the death of the duke of
Glocester by the seuerall factions of princes was diuided in two parts;
and that William de la Poole latelie created duke of Suffolke, and
diuerse other, which were the occasion of the said duke of Glocesters
death, vexed and oppressed the poore people, so that mens minds were
not intentiue to outward affaires: but all their studie giuen to keepe
off wrongs offered at home.

[Sidenote: A rebellion in Ireland.]

The king little regarding the matter, & the queene led by euill
counsell, rather furthered such mischiefes as dailie began to grow
by ciuil discord, than sought to reforme them: so that the Normans
and Gascoignes vnderstanding in what state things stood here, turned
to the French part, as hereafter it may appeare. About the same time
also, began a new rebellion in Ireland; but Richard duke of Yorke being
thither to appease the same, so asswaged the furie of the wild and
sauage people there, that he wan him such fauour amongst them, as could
neuer be separated from him and his linage, which in the sequele of
this historie may more plainelie appeare.

[Sidenote: The English loose all in France.]

[Sidenote: Rone yeelded to the Frenchmen.]

The Frenchmen, hauing perfect vnderstanding of the vnreadinesse of
the realme of England, displaied their banners, and set foorth their
armies, and in short space got (by yeelding) Constance, Gisors, castell
Galliard, Ponteau de Mere, saint Lo, Festampe, Newcastell, Tonque,
Mauleon, Argenton, Lisieux, and diuerse other townes and places
within the countrie of Normandie. Likewise in Guien was the towne of
Maulisson rendered to the earle of Fois. These townes were not yeelded
voluntarilie by the English souldiers: but they were compelled thereto
by the inhabitants of the townes, which hauing intelligence of the
feeble estate of the realme of England, rose against the capteins,
opened the gates to the enimies, or constreined them to render vpon
composition. By which inforcement was the rich citie of Rone deliuered:
for suerlie the duke of Summerset and the earle of Shrewesburie
had well kept that citie, if they had beene no more vexed with the
citizens, than they were with their enimies.

[Sidenote: Harflue besieged.]

[Sidenote: Sir Thomas Curson.]

For after that the French king had giuen summons to the citie, the
inhabitants streightwaies did not onelie deuise which waie they might
betraie the citie, but also put on armor, and rebelled openlie against
their capteins: who perceiuing the vntruth of them, and their owne
danger, retired into the castell or palace, where (for a certeine
space) with arrowes & handguns they sore molested the vntrue citizens.
But at length, vnderstanding the great puissance of the French king
at hand, and despairing of all aid and succour, they yeelded vpon
condition; that with all their goods and armour they should safelie
depart to Caen, and that certeine townes should be deliuered by a day.
And till the same townes were rendred, the earle of Shrewesburie and
the lord Butler, sonne to the earle of Ormond, were left behind as
pledges, which were sent to the castell of Eureux, bicause they sore
feared the malice of the citizens of Rone.

[Sidenote: Harflue yeelded to the French.]

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 28.]

The Frenchmen, following the successe in hand, came to Harflue, and
fiercelie assaulted the walles: but by the high prowesse and vndanted
valiancie of the capteine, sir Thomas Curson, they were to their great
losse manfullie by him repelled, and beaten. The Frenchmen learning wit
by this great perill, left their scaling, and deuised dailie how to
batter the walles, & make the breaches reasonable for them to enter.
This siege long continued to the great losse of both parties. When
sir Thomas Curson saw no likelihood of gaine, but great appeerance
of present losse, he fell at composition with the enimies, and so
departed with all his goods. After which towne rendered, the fortresse
of Hunflue was vpon like composition yeelded. And beside these townes
surrendred in Normandie, the duke of Britaine recouered againe
Fougiers, saint Iames de Beuuron, and diuerse other.

[Sidenote: 1450]

[Sidenote: Sir Thomas Kiriell with a new band into France.]

In the meane season the king of England sent into Normandie (with a
new supplie of a thousand fiue hundred men) a right valiant capteine
called sir Thomas Kiriell, who ioining himselfe with other English
capteins recouered the townes of Lisieux and Valongnes, and hauing with
him power sufficient (as he tooke it) to keepe the fields, he departed
the twelfe of Aprill from Valongnes, meaning to passe towards Baieux,
and after to Caen. But the eighteenth daie of the same moneth, he was
incountred at a place called Formignie betwixt Carenten and Baieux,
by the earle of Cleremont, & other Frenchmen with Scots. At the first
onset, the Englishmen receiued their enimies with such manhood, that
the Frenchmen were driuen backe, and the Englishmen tooke from them two
culuerings.

[Sidenote: The Englishmen ouerthrowne at Formigne.]

But yet in the end, by the comming of the constable of France, Arthur
de Britaine earle of Richmond, who brought two hundred or twelue
score men of armes, and an eight hundred archers or demilances, the
Englishmen were discomfited, put to flight, and slaine to the number of
three thousand, seauen hundred, three score and thirteene as Enguerant
noteth, beside prisoners, of whome there were diuerse personages of
accompt, as the said sir Thomas Kiriell himselfe, sir Henrie Norberie,
sir Thomas Drew, sir Thomas Kirklie, Christopher Auberton, Arpell,
Helice, Alengour, Iennequin, Vacquier, Gobart, Caleuille, and sundrie
other. Sir Robert Veer, and sir Matthew [19]Gough that valiant
Welshman, and manie other escaped so well as they might, some to
Baieux, some to Caen, and other to other places as best they could.

[19] Or rather Goche.

[Sidenote: Caen besieged and yeelded to the French.]

After this ouerthrow obteined, the French king assembled an armie
roiall, and comming before Caen, besieged it on all sides: and after
making his approches, fiercelie assaulted the walles. But the duke of
Summerset, and the other capteins within the towne, manfullie withstood
their enimies, shewing both force and great policie in defending and
beating backe the assailants. The French king, perceiuing he could not
preuaile that waie, sent for all his great ordinance to Paris, which
being brought, he dailie shot at the wals, and did some hurt: but to
the castell which stood on a rocke, and in it a dungeon vnable to be
beaten downe, he did no harme at all.

Though the duke of Summerset was the kings lieutenant, yet sir Dauid
Hall, as capteine of this towne for his maister the duke of Yorke owner
therof, tooke vpon him the cheefe charge. Sir Robert Veer was capteine
of the castell, and sir Henrie Radford capteine of the dungeon. Dailie
the shot was great, but more terrible than hurtfull: sauing on a daie a
stone shot into the towne, fell betweene the duchesse of Summerset, and
hir children, which being amazed with this chance, besought hir husband
kneeling on hir knees, to haue mercie and compassion of his small
infants, and that they might be deliuered out of the towne in safegard.
Which intretie made with teares and submission, what eare could but
listen to, what heart but yerne at; vnlessse both eare and heart were
made of flint or marble, or hewen out of a hard rocke, and so void of
all passions, of all remorse, of all affections belonging to humanitie?

[Sidenote: The irreconciliable hate betweene the two dukes.]

The duke pitifull, mooued with the sorrow of his wife, and loue of his
children, rendered the towne against the mind of sir Dauid Hall, whose
counsell and faithfull diligence (in acquiring himselfe to answer the
trust committed to him by his maister) if others had followed; the
French had susteined more trauell and losse, yer they should haue so
easilie atteined their purpose. The conditions of the surrender were,
that the duke of Summerset and his might depart in safegard with all
their goods and substance. Sir Dauid Hall with diuerse of his trustie
freends departed to Chierburgh, and from thence sailed into Ireland to
the duke of Yorke, making relation to him of all these dooings, which
thing kindled so great a rancor in the dukes heart and stomach, that he
neuer left persecuting the duke of Summerset, vntill he had brought him
to his fatall end & confusion. Such is the nature of rancor and malice,
of wrath and anger, which furthereth the hands euen of weaklings, on
them to wreake their teene, with whome they are offended and pricked to
reuengment, as the poet saith:

    Quaslibet infirmas adiuuat ira manus.

After the obteining of Caen, the earle of Cleremont besieged the citie
of Lisieux, whereof was capteine Matthew [20]Gough with three hundred
Englishmen, who in the end deliuered that towne, vpon condition,
that he and his people might depart to Chierburgh. Then was Falais
besieged, whereof were capteins for the earle of Shrewesburie (that
was the owner) Andrew Trollop, and Thomas Cotton esquiers, who being
in despaire of all succors, agreed to deliuer it vpon two conditions.
The one was, that the earle their maister, which remained in pledge for
the performance of certeine appointments, concluded at the deliuerie of
Rone (as ye haue hard) should be set at libertie. The other, that if
they were not rescued within twelue daies, that then they and theirs
should depart with armor, and all their goods mooueable, whither it
pleased them.

[20] Goche.

[Sidenote: All Normandie lost.]

At the daie appointed, the towne was rendered, and so likewise was
the towne of Dampfront vpon the semblable agreement. Now rested
onelie English the towne of Chierburgh, whereof was capteine one
Thomas Conuille, which suerlie as long as vittels and munition
serued, defended the towne right manfullie: but without hope of
repaire, consumed, and he els destitute of all comfort and aid, vpon
a reasonable composition, yeelded the towne, and went to Calis, where
the duke of Summerset and manie other Englishmen then soiorned. Thus
was Normandie lost cleerelie out of the Englishmens hands, after it
had continued in their possession the space of thirtie yeares by the
conquest of Henrie the fift.

[Sidenote: The state of it.]

[Sidenote: The causes of the losse.]

[Sidenote: The mortall mischeefe of malice and diuision in a realme.]

In this duchie were an hundred strong townes and fortresses, able to
be kept and holden, beside them which were destroied by the warres;
and in the same is one archbishoprike, and six bishopriks. Some saie
that the Englishmen were not of puissance either to man the townes, as
they should haue beene; or to inhabit the countrie, which was the cause
they could not keepe it. Other saie, that the duke of Summerset for
his owne peculiar lucre, kept not halfe the number of souldiours for
which he was appointed and allowed, but put the wages in his purse. But
the cheefe and onelie cause vndoubtedlie, was the diuision within the
realme, euerie great man desiring rather to be reuenged on his foe at
home, than on the common enimie abroad, as by that which followeth you
may plainelie perceiue.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 29.]

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

[For whilest the French thus triumphed in Normandie, three cruell
enimies among manie (as by ciuill warre and sedition insuing appeared)
sore vrged the vtter ruine of this realme at home. One was presumption
in gouernance, by some that were most vnmeet to rule, as the queene
with hir priuie counsellors and minions; then the deadlie malice and
pride, with insatiable couetise in the states both spirituall and
temporall: and lastlie the generall grudge of the people, for the
vniuersall smart that through misgouernment euerie where they suffered;
who thus forweried with the peise of burthens too heauie for them anie
longer to beare.

[Sidenote: The comm[=o]s exclame against the duke of Suffolke.]

Heerewith perceiuing how (through want of prouident wisedome in the
gouernour) all things went to wracke, as well within the realme as
without; they began to make exclamation against the duke of Suffolke,
charging him to be the onelie cause of the deliuerie of Aniou, and
Maine, the cheefe procuror of the duke of Glocesters death, the verie
occasion of losse of Normandie, the swallower vp of the kings treasure,
the remoouer of good and vertuous councellours from about the prince,
and the aduancer of vicious persons, and of such as by their dooings
shewed themselues apparant aduersaries to the common-wealth.

[Sidenote: The parlem[=e]t adiourned fr[=o] London to Leicester, and
from thence to Westminister.]

[Sidenote: _Edw. Hall._]

The queene hereat doubting not onelie the dukes destruction, but
also hir owne confusion, caused the parlement before begun at the
Blackfriers, to be adiourned to Leicester, thinking there, by force and
rigor of law, to suppresse and subdue all the malice and euill will
conceiued against the duke & hir. At which place few of the nobilitie
would appeare: wherefore it was againe adiourned to Westminster, where
was a full appearance. In the which session the commons of the nether
house put vp to the king and the lords manie articles of treason,
misprision, and euill demeanor, against the duke of Suffolke: the
effect whereof with his answers heere insueth.




Articles proponed by the commons against the duke of Suffolke.


1 First they alleged that he had traitorouslie excited, prouoked, and
councelled Iohn earle of Dunois bastard of Orleance, Bertram lord
Presignie, William Cosinet, enimies to the king, and freends and
ambassadours to Charles, calling himselfe French king, to enter into
this realme; and to leauie warre against the king and his people, to
the intent to destroie the king and his freends, and to make Iohn his
sonne king of this realme, marieng him to Margaret, sole heire to
Iohn duke of Summerset, pretending and declaring hir to be next heire
inheritable to the crowne, for lacke of issue, of the kings bodie
lawfullie begotten.

2 Item, the said duke, being of the kings priuie and neere councell,
allured by great rewards and faire promises, made by the said earle of
Dunois, caused the king to deliuer and set at libertie, Charles duke
of Orleance, enimie to the king, and the kings noble father: which
deliuerance was prohibited by expresse words, in the last will of the
kings most victorious father.

3 Item, that before the departing of the said duke of Orleance, the
aforenamed duke of Suffolke traitorouslie fast cleauing to Charles
called the French king, counselled, prouoked, and intised the said duke
of Orleance, to mooue the same king to make warre against England, both
in France and Normandie. According to which procurement & counsell, the
said French king hath recouered the whole realme of France, and all the
duchie of Normandie, and taken prisoners the earle of Shrewesburie,
the lord Fauconbridge, and manie other valiant capteins. [pilcrow] These three
articles afornamed he denied, either for fact or thought.]

4 Further it was alleged, that he being ambassadour to the king of
England, to Charles calling himselfe the French king, promised to
Reiner king of Sicill, and to Charles d'Angiers his brother, enimies
to the king, the release of Aniou, with the deliuerance of the countie
of Maine, and the city of Maunt or Mans, without the knowledge of
the other ambassadours with him accompanied. Which promise, after
his returne, he caused to be performed, to the kings disinheritance
and loss irrecouerable, and to the strength of his enimies, and
feeblishment of the duchie of Normandie. [pilcrow] To this article he answered,
that his commission was to conclude, and doo all things according
to his discretion, for the obteining of a peace: & bicause without
deliuerie of those countries, he perceiued that the truce could not be
obteined, he agreed to the release and deliuerance of them.

5 Also they had great cause to iudge by the sequele, that the said
duke being in France in the kings seruice, and one of the priuiest of
his councell there, traitorouslie declared and opened to the capteins
and conductors of warre, apperteining to the kings enimies, the kings
counsell, purueiance of his armies, furniture of his townes, & all
other ordinances, whereby the kings enimies (instructed aforehand by
his traitorous information) haue gotten townes and fortresses, and the
king by that meanes depriued of his inheritance.

6 Item, the said duke declared to the earle of Dunois, to the lord
Presignie, and William Cosinet ambassadours for the French king lieng
in London, the priuities of the kings councell, both for the prouision
of further warre, and also for the defense of the duchie of Normandie:
by the disclosing whereof, the Frenchmen knowing the king secrets,
defeated the kings appointments, and they obteined their purpose.

7 Item, that the said duke, at such time as the king sent ambassadours
to the French king, for the intreating of peace, traitorouslie before
their comming to the French court, certified king Charles of their
commission, authoritie, and instructions: by reason whereof, neither
peace nor amitie succeeded, and the kings inheritance lost, and by his
enimies possessed.

8 Item, the said duke said openlie in the Star-chamber before the lords
of the councell, that he had as high a place in the councell-house of
the French king, as he had there: and was as well trusted there as
here, and could remooue from the French king the priuiest man of his
councell, if he would.

9 Item, when armies haue beene prepared, and souldiers readie waged to
passe ouer the sea, to deale with the kings enimies: the said duke,
corrupted by rewards of the French king, hath restreined & staid the
said armies to passe any further.

10 Item, the said duke being ambassadour for the king, comprised
not in the league (as the kings alies) neither the king of Aragon,
neither the duke of Britaine: but suffered them to be comprised on the
contrarie part. By reason whereof, the old amitie of the k. of Aragon
is estranged from this realme, and the duke of Britaine became enimie
to the same: Giles his brother, the kings sure freend, cast in strong
prison, and there lie to end his dais.

       *       *       *       *       *

All these obiections he vtterlie denied, or faintlie auoided: but
none fullie excused. Diuerse other crimes were laid to his charge, as
inriching himselfe with the kings goods and lands, gathering togither
and making a monopolie of offices, fees, wards, and farmes, by reason
whereof, the kings estate was greatlie diminished and decaied, and he
and his kin highlie exalted & inriched: with manie other points, which
bicause they be not notable nor of great force or strength, I omit and
ouerpasse.

[Sidenote: The duke of Suffolke c[=o]mitted to the Tower.]

[Sidenote: Blewbeard capteine of the rebels.]

The queene, which intierlie loued the duke, doubting some commotion and
trouble to arise, if he were let go vnpunished, caused him for a colour
to be committed to the Tower: where he remained not past a moneth,
but was againe deliuered and restored to the kings fauour, as much as
euer he was before. This dooing so much displeased the people, that
if politike prouision had not beene, great mischeefe had immediatlie
insued. For the commons in sundrie places of the realme assembled
togither in great companies, and chose to them a capteine, whom they
called Blewbeard: but yer they had attempted anie enterprise, their
leaders were apprehended; & so the matter pacified without anie hurt
committed.

After this outrage thus asswaged, the parlement was adiourned to
Leicester, whither came the king and queene in great estate, and with
them the duke of Suffolke as cheefe councellour. The commons of the
lower house, not forgetting their old grudge, besought the king, that
such persons as assented to the release of Aniou, and deliuerance of
Maine, might be dulie punished. And to be priuie to that fact, they
accused as principall, the duke of Suffolke, with Iohn bishop of
Salisburie, and sir Iames Fines, lord Saie, and diuerse others. When
the king perceiued that there was no remedie to appease the peoples
furie by anie colourable waies, shortlie to pacifie so long an hatred,
he first sequestred the lord Saie being treasuror of England, and
other the dukes adherents from their offices and roomes, and after
banished the duke of Suffolke, as the abhorred tode and common noiance
of the whole realme, for tearme of fiue yeares, meaning by this exile
to appease the malice of the people for the time, and after (when the
matter should be forgotten) to reuoke him home againe.

[Sidenote: The wretched death of the duke of Suffolke.]

But Gods iustice would not that so vngratious a person should so
escape: for when he shipped in Suffolke, intending to transport
himselfe ouer into France, he was incountered with a ship of warre,
apperteining to the duke of Excester, constable of the Tower of London,
called the Nicholas of the Tower. The capteine of that barke with small
fight entered into the dukes ship, and perceiuing his person present,
brought him to Douer road, and there on the one side of a cocke bote
caused his head to be striken off, and left his bodie with the head
lieng there on the sands. Which corps being there found by a chapleine
of his, was conueied to Wingfield college in Suffolke, and there
buried. This end had William de la Poole duke of Suffolke, as men iudge
by Gods prouidence; for that he had procured the death of that good
duke of Glocester, as before is partlie touched.

[Sidenote: Iacke Cades rebellion in Kent.]

Soone after an other disquiet befell here. Those that fauoured the
duke of Yorke, and wished the crowne vpon his head, for that (as they
iudged) he had more right thereto than he that ware it, procured a
commotion in Kent on this manner. A certeine yoong man of a goodlie
stature and right pregnant of wit, was intised to take vpon him the
name of Iohn Mortimer coosine to the duke of Yorke (although his
name was Iohn Cade, or (of some) Iohn Mend-all) [an Irishman as
Polychronicon saith] and not for a small policie, thinking by that
surname, that those which fauoured the house of the earle of March
would be assistant to him. And so in deed it came to passe (as in such
cases there is no breeder of a broile but he shall find adherents
enow, no lesse forward to further his pernicious enterprise by their
foolehardines, than himselfe was in the plot of his deuise) though in
fine (as it is the vnluckie lot of such tumults) their attempts were
withstood, and their offense dulie rewarded, as in processe of the
storie shall more at large appeare; according to the wisemans sentence:

    Saepe in magistrum scelera redeunt sua.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S._ 653.]

This capteine assembling a great companie of tall personages, assured
them, that the enterprise which he tooke in hand, was both honourable
to God and the king, and profitable to the whole realme. For if either
by force or policie they might get the king and queene into their
hands, he would cause them to be honourablie vsed, and take such order
for the punishing and reforming of the misdemeanours of their bad
councellours, that neither fifteens should hereafter be demanded, nor
once anie impositions or taxes be spoken of. The Kentish people mooued
at these persuasions & other faire promises of reformation, in good
order of battell (though not in great number) came with their capteine
vnto the plaine of Blackeheath, betweene Eltham and Greenewich, and
there kept the field more than a month, pilling the countrie about;
to whome the citie of London at that time was verie fauourable. [pilcrow] And
the said capteine (as I find recorded saith Iohn Stow) sent for such
citizens of London as it pleased him to command to repaire vnto him,
vnder letters of safe conduct, as followeth.




The safegard and signe manuell of the capteine of Kent, sent to Thomas
Cocke draper of London, by the capteine of the great assemblie in Kent.


By this our writing insealed, we grant & will permit trulie, that
Thomas Cocke of London draper, shall come in good suertie and in
safegard to our presence, without anie hurt of his person, and so auoid
from vs againe at his pleasure, with all other persons assigned at his
denomination with him comming in likewise.




The commandement by the capteine of Kent, sent vnto Thomas Cocke aboue
said.


For your instruction, first ye shall charge all Lumbards and strangers,
being merchants, Genowais, Venetians, Florentines, and others, this
daie to draw them togither, and to ordeine for vs the capteine, twelue
harnesses complet of the best fashion, foure & twentie brigandins,
twelue battel axes, twelue glaues, six horsses with sadle and bridle
completlie harnessed, and a thousand markes of readie monie. And if
this our demand be not obserued & doone, we shall haue the heads of as
manie as we can get of them.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S._ 654, 655, 656, 657, &c.]

And to the intent the cause of this glorious capteins comming thither,
might be shadowed vnder a cloke of good meaning (though his intent
nothing so) he sent vnto the king an humble supplication, affirming
that his comming was not against his grace, but against such of his
councellours, as were louers of themselues, and oppressors of the
poore commonaltie; flatterers of the king, and enimies to his honor;
suckers of his purse, and robbers of his subjects; parciall to their
freends, and extreame to their enimies: thorough bribes corrupted, and
for indifferencie dooing nothing. [pilcrow] Here, bicause a full report of
this insurrection maie passe to the knowledge of the readers; it is
necessarie to set downe the articles of the commons complaints touching
the premisses, whereof a copie was sent to the parlement then holden
at Westminster, with their bill of requests concerning abuses to be
reformed.




The complaint of the commons of Kent, and causes of their assemblie on
the Blackheath


1 Inprimis, it is openlie noised that Kent should be destroied with
a roiall power, & made a wild forrest, for the death of the duke of
Suffolke, of which the commons of Kent thereof were neuer giltie.

2 Item, the king is stirred to liue onelie on his commons, and other
men to haue the reuenues of the crowne, the which hath caused pouertie
in his excellencie, and great paiments of the people, now late to the
king granted in his parlement.

3 Item, that the lords of his roiall bloud beene put from his dailie
presence, and other meane persons of lower nature exalted and made
cheefe of his priuie councell, the which stoppeth matters of wrongs
done in the realme from his excellent audience, and maie not be
redressed as law will; but if bribes and gifts be messengers to the
hands of the said councell.

4 Item, the people of this realme be not paid of debts owing for stuffe
and purueiance taken to the vse of the kings houshold, in vndooing of
the said people, and the poore commons of the realme.

5 Item, the kings meniall seruants of houshold, and other persons,
asken dailie goods and lands, of impeached or indicted of treason, the
which the king granteth anon, yer they so indangered be conuicted.
The which causeth the receiuers thereof to inforce labours and meanes
applied to the death of such people, so appeached or indicted, by
subtill meanes, for couetise of the said grants: and the people so
impeached or indicted, though it be vntrue, maie not be committed to
the law for their deliuerance, but held still in prison, to their
vttermost vndooing & destruction, for couetise of goods.

6 Item, though diuerse of the poore people and commons of the realme,
haue neuer so great right, truth, and perfect title to their land: yet
by vntrue claime of infeoffement made vnto duierse states, gentles, and
the kings meniall seruants in maintenances against the right, the true
owners dare not hold, claime, nor pursue their right.

7 Item, it is noised by common voices, that the kings lands in France
beene aliened and put awaie from the crowne, and his lords and people
there destroied with vntrue meanes of treason; of which it is desired,
inquiries thorough all the realme to be made how and by whome; & if
such traitors maie be found giltie, them to haue execution of law
without anie pardon, in example of others.

8 Item, collectors of the fifteenth penie in Kent be greatlie vexed and
hurt, in paieng great summes of monie in the excheker, to sue out a
writ called Quorum nomina, for the alowance of the barons of the ports,
which now is desired, that hereafter in the lieu of the collectors, the
barons aforesaid maie sue it out for their ease at their owne costs.

9 Item, the shiriffes and vndershiriffes let to farme their offices
and bailiwickes, taking great suertie therefore, the which causeth
extortions doone by them and by their bailiffes to the people.

10 Item, simple and poore people that vse not hunting, be greatlie
oppressed by indictements feined & doone by the said shiriffes,
vndershiriffes, bailiffes, and other of their assent, to cause their
increase for paieng of their said farme.

11 Item, they returne in names of inquests in writing into diuerse
courts of the king not summoned nor warned, where through the people
dailie leese great summes of monie, well nigh to the vttermost of their
vndooing: and make leuie of amercements called the greene wax, more in
summes of monie than can be found due of record in the kings books.

12 Item, the ministers of the court of Douer in Kent vex and arrest
diuerse people thorough all the shire out of Castle ward, passing their
bounds and libertie vsed of old time, by diuerse subtill and vntrue
meanes and actions falselie feined, taking great fees at their lust in
great hurt of the people on all the shire of Kent.

13 Item, the people of the said shire of Kent, maie not haue their free
election in the choosing of knights of the shire: but letters beene
sent from diuerse estates to the great rulers of all the countrie, the
which imbraceth their tenants and other people by force to choose other
persons than the c[=o]mons will is.

14 Item, whereas knights of the shire should choose the king collectors
indifferentlie without any bribe taking, they haue sent now late to
diuerse persons, notifieng them to be collectors: wherevpon gifts
and bribes be taken, & so the collectors office is bought and sold
extortionouslie at the knights lust.

15 Item, the people be sore vexed in costs and labour, called to the
sessions of peace in the said shire, appearing from the furthest and
vttermost part of the west vnto the east; the which causeth to some men
fiue daies iournie: wherevpon they desire the said appearance to be
diuided into two parts; the which one part, to appeare in one place;
an other part, in an other place; in releeuing of the greeuances and
intollerable labours & vexations of the said people.




The requests by the capteine of the great assemblie in Kent.


Inprimis, desireth the capteine of the commons, the welfare of our
souereigne lord the king, and all his true lords spirituall and
temporall, desiring of our said souereigne lord, and of all the true
lords of his councell, he to take in all his demaines, that he maie
reigne like a king roiall, according as he is borne our true and
christian king annointed: and whoso will saie the contrarie, we all
will liue and die in the quarell as his true liege men.

Item, desireth the said capteine, that he will auoid all the false
progenie and affinitie of the duke of Suffolke, the which beene openlie
knowne, and they to be punished after the custome and law of this land,
and to take about his noble person the true lords of his roiall blood
of this his realme, that is to saie, the high and mightie prince the
duke of Yorke, late exiled from our said souereigne lords presence
(by the motion and stirring of the traitorous and false disposed the
duke of Suffolke and his affinitie) and the mightie princes & dukes of
Excester, Buckingham, and Norffolke, and all the earles and barons of
this land: and then shall he be the richest king christian.

Item, desireth the said capteine and commons punishment vnto the false
traitors, the which contriued and imagined the death of the high,
mightfull and excellent prince the duke of Glocester, the which is too
much to rehearse; the which duke was proclamed as traitor. Vpon the
which quarell, we purpose all to liue and die vpon that it is false.

Item, the duke of Excester, our holie father the cardinall, the noble
prince the duke of Warwike, and also the realme of France, the duchie
of Normandie, Gascoigne, and Guion, Aniou, and Maine, were deliuered
and lost by the meanes of the said traitors: and our true lords,
knights, and esquiers, and manie a good yeoman lost and sold yer they
went, the which is great pitie to heare, of the great and greeuous
losse to our souereigne lord and his realme.

Item, desireth the said capteine and commons, that all extortions
vsed dailie among the common people, might be laid downe, that is to
saie, the greene wax; the which is falselie vsed, to the perpetuall
destruction of the kings true commons of Kent. Also the kings Bench,
the which is too greefefull to the shire of Kent, without prouision
of our souereigne lord and his true councell. And also in taking of
wheat and other graines, beefe, mutton, & all other vittels, the which
is importable to the said commons, without the breefe prouision of our
said souereigne lord and his true councell, they maie no longer beare
it. And also vnto the statute of labourers, and the great extortioners,
the which is to saie the false traitors, Sleg. Cromer, Isle, and Robert
Est.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: King Henrie went against the Kentishmen with a great power.]

These billes when the councell had well perused, they did not onelie
disalow and condemne them and the authors, as proud and presumptuous;
but also persuaded the king rather to suppresse those rebels by force,
than by faire promises. Wherevpon the king remoued from Westminster
vnto Greenewich, from whence he would haue sent certeine lords with
a power to haue distressed the Kentishmen, but the men said to their
lords they would not fight against them that laboured to amend the
common-weale: wherefore the lords were driuen to leaue their purpose.
And bicause the Kentishmen cried out against the lord Saie the kings
chamberline, he was by the king committed to the Tower of London. Then
went the king againe to London, & within two dais after went against
the Kentishmen with fifteene thousand men well prepared for the war:
but the said Kentishmen fled the night before his comming into the wood
countrie neere vnto Senocke. Wherevpon the king returned againe to
London.

[Sidenote: The Staffords slaine at Senocke by Iacke Cade.]

The queene (that bare rule) being of his retrait aduertised, sent sir
Humfreie Stafford knight, and William his brother, with manie other
gentlemen, to follow the Kentishmen, thinking that they had fled: but
they were deceiued, for at the first skirmish both the Staffords were
slaine, & all their companie discomfited. The kings armie by this time
comen to Blackheath, hearing of this discomfiture, began to murmur
amongst themselues: some wishing the duke of Yorke at home to aid the
capteine his cousine: some vndutifullie coueting the ouerthrow of the
king and his councell: other openlie crieng out on the queene and hir
complices.

This rumor published abroad, caused the king and certeine of his
councell (for the appeasing thereof) to commit the lord Saie treasurer
of England to the Tower of London; and if other (against whome like
displeasure was borne) had beene present, they had beene likewise
committed. Iacke Cade vpon victorie against the Staffords apparelled
himselfe in sir Humfries brigandine set full of guilt nailes, and so in
some glorie returned againe toward London; diuerse idle and vagarant
persons out of Sussex, Surreie and other places, still increasing
his number. Thus this glorious capteine, garded with a multitude of
rusticall people, came againe to the plaine of Blackheath, & there
stronglie incamped himselfe: to whome were sent from the king, the
archbishop of Canturburie, and Humfrie duke of Buckingham, to common
with him of his greefes and requests.

These lords found him sober in talke, wise in reasoning, arrogant in
hart, and stiffe in opinion; as who that by no means would grant to
dissolue his armie, except the king in person would come to him, and
assent to the things he would require. The K. vpon the presumptuous
answers & requests of this villanous rebell, begining asmuch to
doubt his owne meniall seruants, as his vnknowen subiects (which
spared not to speake, that the capteins cause was profitable for the
common-wealth) departed in all hast to the castell of Killingworth in
Warwikeshire, leauing onlie behind him the lord Scales to keepe the
Tower of London. The Kentish capteine being aduertised of the kings
absence, came first into Southwarke, and there lodged at the white
hart, prohibiting to all his retinue, murder, rape, and robberie; by
which colour of well meaning, he the more allured to him the harts of
the common people.

[Sidenote: The lord Saie beheaded at the st[=a]dard in Cheap.]

After that, he entered into London, cut the ropes of the draw bridge,
& strooke his sword on London stone; saieng, Now is Mortimer lord of
this citie. And after a glosing declaration made to the maior touching
the cause of his thither comming he departed againe into Southwarke,
and vpon the third daie of Iulie he caused sir Iames Fines, lord Saie,
and treasuror of England, to be brought to the Guildhall, and there
to be arreigned: who being before the kings iustices put to answer,
desired to be tried by his peeres, for the longer delaie of his life.
The capteine perceiuing his dilatorie plee, by force tooke him from the
officers, and brought him to the standard in Cheape, and there (before
his confession ended) caused his head to be striken off, and pitched
it vpon an high pole, which was openlie borne before him thorough the
streets.

And not content herewith, he went to Mile end, and there apprehended
sir Iames Cromer then shiriffe of Kent, and sonne in law to the said
lord Saie, causing him likewise (without confession or excuse heard)
to be beheaded, and his head to be fixed on a pole: and with these two
heads this bloudie wretch entred into the citie againe, and as it were
in a spite caused them in euerie street to kisse togither, to the great
detestation of all the beholders. After this succeeded open rapine, and
manifest robberie in diuerse houses within the citie, and speciallie
in the house of Philip Malpas alderman of London, and diuerse other;
ouer and beside ransoming and fining of diuers notable merchants, for
the suertie of their liues and goods; as Robert Horne alderman, which
paid fiue hundred marks. He also put to execution in Southwarke diuerse
persons, some for breaking his ordinance, and other being of his old
acquaintance, lest they should bewraie his base linage, disparaging him
for his vsurped surname of Mortimer.

The maior and other the magistrates of London, perceiuing themselues
neither to be sure of goods, nor of life well warranted, determined
to repell and keepe out of their citie such a mischieuous caitife and
his wicked companie. And to be the better able so to doo, they made
the lord Scales, and that renowmed capteine Matthew [21]Gough priuie
both of their intent and enterprise, beseeching them of their helpe
and furtherance therein. The lord Scales promised them his aid, with
shooting off the artillerie in the Tower; and Matthew Gough was by him
appointed to assist the maior and Londoners in all that he might, and
so he and other capteins, appointed for defense of the citie, tooke
vpon them in the night to keepe the bridge, and would not suffer the
Kentishmen once to approch. The rebels, who neuer soundlie slept for
feare of sudden assaults, hearing that the bridge was thus kept, ran
with great hast to open that passage, where betweene both parties was a
fierce and cruell fight.

[21] Or rather Goche.

[Sidenote: The skirmish betweene the citizens and the rebels vpon
London bridge.]

Matthew [22]Gough, perceiuing the rebels to stand to their tackling
more manfullie than he thought they would haue doone, aduised his
companie not to aduance anie further toward Southwarke, till the daie
appeared; that they might see where the place of ieopardie rested, and
so to prouide for the same: but this little auailed. For the rebels
with their multitude draue backe the citizens from the stoops at the
bridge foot to the draw bridge, & began to set fire in diuerse houses.
Great ruth it was to behold the miserable state, wherein some desiring
to eschew the fire died vpon their enimies weapon; women with children
in their armes lept for feare into the riuer, other in a deadlie care
how to saue themselues, betweene fire, water, and sword, were in their
houses choked and smothered. Yet the capteins not sparing, fought on
the bridge all the night valiantlie: but in conclusion, the rebels gat
the draw bridge, and drowned manie, and slue Iohn Sutton alderman,
and Robert Heisand, a hardie citizen, with manie other, beside
Matthew [23]Gough, a man of great wit and much experience in feats of
chiualrie, the which in continuall warres had spent his time in seruice
of the king and his father.

[22] Or rather Goche.

[23] Matthew Goche famous for his acts abroad now slaine on L[=o]d[=o]
bridge.

[Sidenote: A staie by assent.]

This sore conflict indured in doubtfull wise on the bridge, till nine
of the clocke in the morning: for somtime, the Londoners were beaten
backe to saint Magnus corner: and suddenlie againe, the rebels were
repelled to the stoops in Southwarke, so that both parts being faint
and wearie, agreed to leaue off from fighting till the next daie; vpon
condition, that neither Londoners should passe into Southwarke, nor
Kentishmen into London. Vpon this abstinence, this rakehell capteine
for making him more friends, brake vp the gailes of the kings Bench and
Marshalsie, and so were manie mates set at libertie verie meet for his
matters in hand.

[Sidenote: Proclamati[=o] of pardon dispersed the rebels.]

The archbishop of Canturburie being chancellor of England, and as then
for his suertie lieng within the Tower, called to him the bishop of
Winchester, who for some safegard laie then at Haliwell. These two
prelats, seeing the furie of the Kentish people, by their late repulse,
to be somewhat asswaged, passed by the riuer of Thames from the Tower
into Southwarke, bringing with them vnder the kings great seale, a
generall pardon vnto all the offenders, and caused the same to be
openlie published. The poore people were so glad of this pardon, and so
readie to receiue it, that without bidding farewell to their capteine,
they withdrew themselues the same night euerie man towards his home.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I.S. pag. 661, 662 in Quart._]

[pilcrow] But Iacke Cade despairing of succours, and fearing the reward of his
lewd dealings, put all his pillage and goods that he had robbed, into
a barge, and sent it to Rochester by water, and himselfe went by land,
and would haue entred into the castle of Quinborow with a few men that
were left about him; but he was there let of his purpose: wherefore
he disguised in strange attire, priuilie fled into the wood countrie
beside Lewes in Sussex, hoping so to scape. The capteine & his people
being thus departed, not long after proclamations were made in diuerse
places of Kent, Sussex, and Southerie, that whosoeuer could take the
foresaid capteine aliue or dead, should haue a thousand markes for his
trauell. A copie of which proclamation, touching the apprehension of
the said Cade and his complices, hereafter followeth.




A copie of the said writ and proclamation by the king, for the taking
of the said Cade and his felowship.


Henricus Dei gratia rex Angliae & Franciae, & dominus Hiberniae, vniuersis
& singulis custodibus, &c. For so much as one Iohn Cade borne in
Ireland, which calleth himselfe Iohn Mortimer & in some writing calleth
himselfe capteine of Kent, the which Iohn Cade the last yeare tofore
his dwelling in Sussex with a knight, called sir Thomas Dagre, slue
there a woman with child, and for that cause tooke the greeth of the
church, and after for that cause forsware the kings land: the which
Iohn Cade also after this, was sworne to the French part, and dwelled
with them; which hath now of late time (to the intent to inrich
himselfe by robbing and despoiling of the kings liegemen, as it is now
openlie knowne, to bring himselfe to great and high estate) falslie
and vntruelie deceiued manie of the kings people, and vnder colour of
holie and good intents made them to assemble with him against the kings
regalitie & his lawes, & nought setting by the kings grace and pardons,
granted not onelie to him but to all the kings subiects, the which by
his deceit haue assembled with him, the which he with great reuerence
receiued on mondaie last passed, and so did all that were assembled
with him. Notwithstanding all this, he laboureth now of new to assemble
the kings people againe, and to that intent beareth them on hand, that
the kings letters of pardon granted to him and them, be not auaileable,
nor of none effect, without authoritie of parlement: whereas the
contrarie is true, as it is openlie knowne by that, that the king
granteth from time to time his charters of pardon to such as him list,
of all manner of crimes and offenses both generall and speciall.

The king therefore willeth and commandeth, that none of his subiects
giue faith nor credence to the said false informations of the said
false traitor nor accompanie with him in anie wise, nor comfort nor
susteine him nor his with vittels, nor with anie other things: but
will, whosoeuer of the kings subiects may take him, shall take him;
and that who so euer taketh him, and bringeth him quicke or dead to
the king or to his councell, shall haue a thousand markes for his
labour trulie paid him, without faile or delaie by the prouision of
the kings councell. And who so euer taketh anie of those that from
this daie foorth accompanie with him, shall haue fiue marks for his
reward, trulie to be paid in maner and forme aboue said. And ouer
this commanding all constables, ministers, and officers of the said
shire, that none of them (on paine of death) take vpon them to execute
anie commandement by word or writing sent or made vnto them by the
said Cade, calling himselfe Mortimer and capteine, be it to reare any
people, or to any other intent: but to arest and make so be arested
such, as take vpon them to bring anie such commandement by writing or
by word. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. Teste me ipso apud Westm. 10 die
Iulij, anno regni 28.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Capteine of Kent taken & beheaded.]

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. St._ 663, 664.]

After which proclamation thus published, a gentleman of Kent named
Alexander Eden awaited so his time, that he tooke the said Cade in a
garden in Sussex: so that there he was slaine at Hothfield, and brought
to London in a cart, where he was quartered; his head set on London
bridge, and his quarters sent to diuerse places to be set vp in the
shire of Kent. After this, the king himselfe came into Kent, and there
set in iudgment vpon the offendors: and if he had not mingled his
iustice with mercie, more than fiue hundred by rigor of law had beene
iustlie put to execution. Yet he punishing onelie the stubborne heads,
& disordered ringleaders, pardoned the ignorant and simple persons,
to the great reioising of all his subiects. [pilcrow] But saith another, the
king sent his commissioners into Kent, and caused inquirie to be made
of this riot in Canturburie, where for the same eight men were iudged
and executed, and in other townes of Kent and Sussex was doone the like
execution.

[Sidenote: The bishop of Salisburie murthered.]

[Sidenote: A fray in L[=o]don against the maior.]

This yeare the commons also in diuerse parts of England, as in Sussex,
Salisburie, Wiltshire, and other places, did much harme to manie
persons, among the which, on the nine and twentith of Iune, William
Ascoth bishop of Salisburie (after he had said masse at Edington) was
by his owne tenants drawne from the altar, in his albe with his stole
about his necke to the top of an hill, and there by them shamefullie
murthered, and after spoiled to the naked skin: they renting his
bloudie shirt, tooke euerie man a peece, and made boast of their
wickednesse. The daie before, his chariot was robbed, to the value of
ten thousand markes. Soldiours made a fraie against the maior of London
the same daie he tooke his charge at Westminster, at night comming from
saint Thomas of Acres, after he had beene at Paules.

The French king vnderstanding all the ciuill discord and rebellious
sturs in England, made therof his foundation, hoping to get into his
hands and possession the duchie of Aquitaine: and therevpon sent
the earles of Pontheieuure and Perigort to laie siege to the towne
of Bergerat, situate vpon the riuer of Dourdon, of which towne was
capteine Iohn Gedding, who vpon reasonable conditions rendred the
towne. But yet the lord Camois, sir George Seimor, and sir Iohn
Arundell, with diuers other valiant capteins hauing gouernance of
the countrie, manned townes, gathered people, and recomforted the
fainting harts of the Gascoignes in all that they could, and withall
sent letters ouer into England, certifieng to the kings maiestie, that
without speedie aid and readie succours, the whole countrie was like to
be conquered and woone out of the Englishmens possession.

Manie letters were sent, and manie faire answers were brought; but
releefe neither appeared, nor one man of warre was thither shipped:
by reason whereof the Frenchmen pursuing the victorie, got the
fortresses of Iansacke, and S. Foie, with diuerse other peeces of
importance thereabouts. Also, about the same time, the lord Doruall,
third sonne to the lord de la Breth, with a great number of men, as
well on horssebacke as on foot, departed from Basas, to conquer and
destroie the Ile of Medoc. Wherevpon the maior of Burdeaux issuing
out, and incountring with his enimies, was vanquished, losing six
hundred Englishmen and Gascoignes: albeit the Frenchmen gained not this
victorie with cleere hands, for there were slaine of them to the number
of eight hundred persons.

[Sidenote: 1451]

[Sidenote: The earle of Arminack an open enimie.]

After this, the bastard of Orleance, with his brother Iohn earle of
Angolesme, which had beene long prisoner in England, and manie other
valiant capteins, besieged the castell of Montguion, which to them was
rendered. Afterwards, they besieged the towne of Blaie, standing on the
riuer of Garonne, the which in conclusion by verie force was conquered
and woone. The bastard of Kendall, capteine of the castell, seeing the
towne lost, vpon certeine reasonable conditions deliuered his fortresse
to the bastard of Orleance, the French kings lieutenant. After this,
the townes of Burgh and Liborne, after fiue weekes siege, were likewise
yeelded to the Frenchmen. Then was the citie of Acques besieged by
the erle of Fois, and the vicount de Lawtrec his brother, and other
noble men. So likewise was the strong towne of Rion by the earle of
Arminacke, extreame enimie to the realme of England, for breach of the
mariage concluded betweene king Henrie and his daughter. The earle
of Ponthieuure laid siege to Chatillon in Perigort, and the earle of
Dunois inuironned with great puissance the towne of Fronsacke.

The Englishmen perceiuing in what state they stood within the towne,
couenanted with the said earle, that if the towne were not succoured,
and the Frenchmen fought with before the feast of the natiuitie of
saint Iohn Baptist next insuing; that then the towne of Fronsacke
should be yeelded to them, which was the strongest fortresse in all
that countrie, and the verie keie of Guien. Heereof were pledges
deliuered, and writings made & sealed. Which agreement once blowne
through the countrie, the citie of Burdeaux, and all other townes
(except Baion) made the like agreement. So did all the noble men and
gentlemen which were subiects and vassels to the crowne of England.
Euerie daie was looking for aid, but none came.

[Sidenote: Through dissention at home, all lost abroad.]

And whie? Euen bicause the diuelish diuision that reigned in England,
so incombred the heads of the noble men there, that the honor of
the realme was cleerelie forgotten, so that (to conclude) the daie
appointed came, but succour looked for came not. By reason whereof,
all the townes of Aquitaine (except Baion) deliuered their keies, and
became vassals to the French nation; yet the citizens of Burdeaux,
in hope of rescue, required a longer daie of battell, which was
granted. But at the daie appointed, when no releefe came, they rendred
themselues and the citie to their aduersaries, their liues and goods
saued, with licence and safe conduct to all persons which would depart
and saile into England. Then finallie was the citie of Baion besieged,
and with mines and batterie constreined to yeeld it selfe into the
Frenchmens hands.

Beside the agreements taken and made with the townes, diuerse noble
men made seuerall compositions, as Gaston de Fois, & Capdaw de Buef,
whome king Henrie the fift made earle of Longeuile, and knight of the
garter; whose ancestors were euer true to England. Which agreed, that
he and his sonne Iohn de Fois, whome king Henrie the sixt made earle
of Kendale, and also knight of the garter, should enioy all their
lands in Aquitaine, giuen to them by the kings of England, or by the
dukes of Aquitaine. And sith their intent was still to serue the king
of England, they agreed to deliuer into the custodie of the earle of
Fois, the sonne and heire of the said earle of Kendale, being of the
age of three yeares; to the intent that if he at his full age denied to
become subiect to the French king, or before that time deceassed; that
then (after the death of his father and grandfather) all the said lands
should wholie remaine to the next heire of their bloud, either male or
female, being vnder the obeisance of the French king or his heires.

[Sidenote: All lost in France.]

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex Anglorum praetijs sub Henr._ 6.]

Manie other noble men, whose hearts were good English, made like
compositions, and some came into England, and others went to Calis, and
bare great offices there: as the lord Duras, which was marshall of that
towne; and monsieur Vauclere, which was deputie there vnder the earle
of Warwike. Thus were the Englishmen cleerelie displaced and lost the
possession of all the countries, townes, castels, and places within the
realme of France; so that onelie Calis, Hammes and Guines, with the
marches thereof remained in their hands, of all those their dominions
and seigniories which they sometime held in the parties beyond the
seas. Whereby England suffered a partile but not a totall eclipse of
hir glorie, in continuall loosing & nothing gaining of the enimie. [pilcrow]
Which recouerie was of great facilitie to the French, for that where
they came, they found litle or no resistance, but rather a voluntarie
submission & yeelding as it were with holding vp of hands, yer they
came to hanidstroks. So that in such victories and conquests consisted
small renowme, sith without slaughter & bloudshed hardie enterprises
are not atchiued. Notablie therefore speaketh Anglorum praelia of these
bloudlesse and sweatlesse victories, saieng:

    Delphinus totos (nullo prohibente) per agros
    Francorum transit, prius expugnata receptans
    Oppida: perfacile est populum domueisse volentem,
    Tendentemq; manus vltro; nec clarior ornat
    Gloria vincentem fuso sine sanguine regna.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 30.]

[Sidenote: _Iohn Hooker, alias Vowell._]

[Sidenote: The king receiued into Excester.]

[This yeare the king made a generall progresse and came to the citie of
Excester, on mondaie the sixteenth of Iulie at after noone, being the
feast daie of saint Kenelme; and was receiued from place to place verie
honorablie through the whole countrie. Before he came to this citie, he
was met by all the cleargie in their degrees, some three miles, some
two miles, and some at the citie, all in their copes, censing all the
waies as they went. As soone as he came to this citie, he was first
conducted to the cathedral church in all most honourable order. When
he had doone his oblations, he was conueied and lodged in the bishops
house. During his abode here, there was a sessions kept before the duke
of Summerset, and certeine men condemned to die for treason, and had
iudgement to be executed to death.

[Sidenote: The bishop & his cleargie against the K. and the duke of
Summerset, &c. in defense of their ecclesiasticall priuilege.]

The bishop and his clergie vnderstanding hereof, with open mouth
complained vnto the king, that he caused a sessions to be kept within
his sanctuarie, contrarie to the priuilege of his church: and that
all their dooings (being doone against law) were of no effect. And
notwithstanding the king and his councell had discoursed vnto them the
iust and orderlie proceeding, the heinousnesse of the offendors, and
the necessitie of their punishment: yet all could not auaile, for holie
church nor the sanctuarie might be prophaned (as they said) with the
deciding of temporall matters. Wherevpon the king in the end yeelding
to their exclaimes, released a couple of arrant traitors, and reuersed
all his former lawfull proceedings, and so vpon the wednesdaie he
departed and returned towards London.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke maketh claime to the crowne.]

[Sidenote: Iohn Stow.]

The duke of Yorke pretending (as yee haue heard) a right to the crowne,
as heire to Lionell duke of Clarence, came this yeare out of Ireland
vnto London, in the parlement time, there to consult with his speciall
freends: as Iohn duke of Northfolke, Richard earle of Salisburie, and
the lord Richard his sonne, which after was earle of Warwike; Thomas
Courtneie earle of Deuonshire, and Edward Brooke lord Cobham. After
long deliberation and aduise taken, it was thought expedient, to keepe
their cheefe purpose secret; and that the duke should raise an armie of
men, vnder a pretext to remooue diuerse councellors about the king, and
to reuenge the manifest iniuries doone to the common-wealth by the same
rulers. Of the which as principall, the duke of Summerset was namelie
accused, both for that he was greatlie hated of the commons for the
losse of Normandie: and for that it was well knowne, that he would be
altogither against the duke of Yorke in his chalenge to be made (when
time serued) to the crowne; insomuch that his goods by the commons were
foulie despoiled and borne awaie from the Blacke friers. After which
riot, on the next morrow proclamation was made through the citie, that
no man should spoile or rob, on paine of death. But on the same daie at
the standard in Cheape was a man beheaded for dooing contrarie to the
proclamation.

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke raiseth a power, for recouerie of his
right to the crowne.]

Therefore when the duke of Yorke had thus, by aduise of his speciall
freends, framed the foundation of his long intended enterprise, he
assembled a great hoast, to the number of ten thousand able men, in
the marches of Wales; publishing openlie, that the cause of this his
gathering of people, was for the publike wealth of the realme. The
king much astonied at the matter, by aduise of his councell raised a
great power, and marched forward toward the duke. But he being thereof
aduertised, turned out of that way, which by espials he vnderstood that
the king held, and made streight toward London: and hauing knowledge
that he might not be suffered to passe through the citie, he crossed
ouer the Thames at Kingston bridge, and so kept on towards Kent,
where he knew that he had both freends & well-willers, and there on
Burnt heath, a mile from Dertford, and twelue miles from London, he
imbatelled, and incamped himselfe verie stronglie, inuironing his field
with artillerie and trenches. The king hereof aduertised, brought his
armie with all diligence vnto Blackeheath, and there pight his tents.

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: The dukes answer to the kings message.]

Whilest both these armies laie thus imbattelled, the king sent the
bishop of Winchester, and Thomas Bourchier, bishop of Elie, Richard
Wooduile, lord Riuers, & Richard Andrew, the keeper of his priuie
seale, to the duke: both to know the cause of so great a commotion,
and also to make a concord; if the requests of the duke and his
companie seemed consonant to reason. The duke hearing the message of
the bishops, answered; that his comming was neither to damnifie the
king in honour, nor in person, neither yet anie good man: but his
intent was, to remooue from him certeine euill disposed persons of his
councell, bloud-succours of the nobilitie, pollers of the cleargie, and
oppressours of the poore people.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S. pag. 666, 667, in Quart._]

Amongst these, he cheeflie named Edmund duke of Summerset, whome if
the king would commit to ward, to answer such articles as against him
in open parlement should be both proponed and proued, he promised
not onelie to dissolue his armie; but also offered himselfe (like an
obedient subiect) to come to the kings presence, and to doo him true
and faithfull seruice, according to his loiall and bounden dutie. [pilcrow]
But a further vnderstanding of the dukes meaning by this his forceable
entering of the realme (as himselfe pretended) maie appeare by certeine
letters by him written to the king, and also the kings answers vnto
the same: both which I thinke good here to set downe, as I find them
recorded.




Richard duke of Yorke his letter to king Henrie.


Please it your highnesse to conceiue, that since my departing out of
this your realme, by your commandement, and being in your seruice in
your land of Ireland, I haue beene informed, that diuerse language hath
beene said of me to your most excellent estate, which should sound to
my dishonour and reproch, and charge of my person: howbeit, that I
haue beene, and euer will be, your true liegeman and seruant. And if
there be anie man that will or dare saie the contrarie, or charge me
otherwise; I beseech your rightwisenesse to call him before your high
presence, and I will declare me for my discharge as a true knight ought
to doo. And if I doo not, as I doubt not but I shall, I beseech you to
punish me as the poorest man of your land. And if he be found vntrue in
his suggestion and information, I beseech you of your highnesse that he
be punished after his desert, in example of all other.

Please it your excellencie to know, that as well before my departing
out of this your realme, for to go into your land of Ireland, in your
full noble seruice, as since, certeine persons haue lien in wait for
to hearken vpon me, as sir Iohn Talbot knight at the castell of Holt;
sir Thomas Standleie knight in Cheshire; Pulford at Chester; Elton at
Worcester; Brooke at Glocester; and Richard, groome of your chamber at
Beaumaris: which had in charge (as I am informed) to take me and put me
into your castell of Conwaie, and to strike off the head of sir William
Oldhall knight, and to haue put in prison sir William Deuereux knight,
& sir Edmund Malso knight, withouten inlarging, vntill the time that
your highnesse had appointed their deliuerance.

Item, at such time as I was purposed for to haue arriued at your hauen
of Beaumaris, for to haue come to your noble presence to declare me
your true man and subiect, as my dutie is, my landing was stopped and
forebarred by Henrie Norice, Thomas Norice, William Buckleie, William
Grust, and Bartholomew Bould, your officers in Northwales, that I
should not land there, nor haue vittels nor refreshing for me and my
fellowship, as I haue written to your excellencie here before. So farre
foorth that Henrie Norice, deputie to the chamberlaine of Northwales,
said vnto me, that he had in commandement that I should in no wise haue
landing, refreshing, nor lodging, for men nor horsse, nor other thing
that might turne to my worship or ease: putting the blame vpon William
Saie vsher of your chamber, saieng and affirming that I am against your
intent, and as a traitor, as I am informed. And moreouer, certeine
letters were made and deliuered vnto Chester, Shrewesburie, and to
other places for to let mine entrie into the same.

Item, aboue all wrongs and iniuries aboue said doone vnto me of malice,
without anie cause, I being in your land of Ireland, in your honourable
seruice, certeine commissions were made and directed vnto diuerse
persons; which for the execution of the same, sat in certeine places,
and the iuries impanelled and charged. Vnto the which iuries certeine
persons laboured instantlie to haue me indicted of treason, to the
intent for to haue vndoone me and mine issue, and corrupted my bloud,
as it is openlie published. Beseeching your maiestie roiall, of your
righteousnesse, to doo examine these matters, and therevpon to doo
such iustice in his behalfe as the cause requireth: for mine intent is
fullie to pursue to your highnesse for the conclusion these matters.




The answer of king Henrie to the duke of Yorke.


Coosine, we haue seene the bill that ye tooke vs late, and also
vnderstand the good humble obedience that ye in your selfe shew vnto
us, as well in word as in deed: wherefore our intent is, the more
hastilie to ease you of such things as were in your said bill. Howbeit,
that at our more leasure we might answer you to your said bill, yet we
let you wit, that for the causes aforesaid, we will declare you now our
intent in these matters: sith it is that a long time among the people
hath beene vpon you many strange language, and in especiall anon after
your disordinate and vnlawful slaieng of the bishop of Chester, diuerse
and manie of the vntrue shipmen and other said (in their maner) words
against our estate, making manace to our owne person by your saiengs,
that ye should be fetched with manie thousands, and ye should take vpon
you that, which ye neither ought, nor as we doubt not, ye will not
attempt: so farre foorth that it was said to our person by diuerse, &
especiallie we remember of one Wasnes, which had like words to vs.

And also there were diuerse of such false people, that went on and
had like language in diuerse of our townes of our land, which by our
subiects were taken and dulie executed. Wherefore we sent to diuerse of
our courts and places, to hearken and to take heed if anie such maner
comming were; and if there had beene, for to resist it: but comming
into our land our true subiect as ye did, our intent was not that ye,
nor lesse of estate of our subiects, nor none of your seruants, should
not haue beene letted nor warned, but in goodlie wise receiued; howbeit
that peraduenture your sudden comming, without certeine warning, caused
our seruants to doo as they did, considering the causes aboue said. And
as to the indictement that ye spoke of, we thinke verilie, and hold for
certeine, that there was none such. And if ye may trulie prooue that
anie person was thereabouts, the matter shall be demeaned as the case
shall require: so that he shall know it is to our great displeasure.
Vpon this, for the easing of your heart in all such matters, we
declare, repute, and admit you as our true and faithful subiect, and as
our faithfull coosine.




Richard duke of Yorke to king Henrie againe.


Please it your highnesse tenderlie to consider, that great murmur and
grudging is vniuersallie in this your realme, in that iustice is not
dulie ministred to such as trespasse and offend against your lawes,
and in especiall of them that be indicted of treason, and other being
openlie noised of the same; whereby great incoueniencies haue fallen,
and great is like to fall hereafter in your said realme, which God
defend: but if by your highnesse prouision conuenable be made for
due reformation and punishment in this behalfe. Wherefore I your
humble subiect and true liegeman, Richard duke of Yorke, willing as
effectuallie as I can, and desiring the suertie and prosperitie of
your most roiall person, and the welfare of this your noble realme,
counsell and aduertise your excellencie, for the conseruation of good
tranquillitie and peaceable rule among all other subiects, for to
ordeine and prouide, that true iustice be had, against all such that
so be indicted, or openlie named: wherein I offer my selfe, and will
put my indeuour for to execute your commandement in the premises, for
the punishing of such offenders, and redresse of the said misrules, to
my might and power. And for the hastie execution hereof, like it your
highnesse, to addresse these letters of priuie seale and writs to your
officers and ministers, to doo, take, and arrest, all such persons so
noised and indicted, of what estate, degree, or condition soeuer they
be, and them to commit to the Tower of London, and to other of your
prisons, there to abide without baile or maineprise, vntill the time
they be vtterlie tried, and determined after the course of your lawes.




The answer of king Henrie to the duke of Yorke.


Coosine, as touching your bill last put vp to vs, we vnderstand well
that ye (of good heart) counsell and aduertise vs to the setting vp
of iustice, and to the speedie punishing of some persons indicted or
noised, offering your seruice to be readie at commandement in the same,
sith it is that for manie causes moouing vs to haue determined in our
soule, to stablish a sad, and a substantiall councell, giuing them more
ample authoritie and power than euer we did before this, in the which
we haue appointed you to be one. But sith it is not accustomed, sure,
nor expedient, to take a conclusion & conduct by aduise or counsell of
one person by himselfe for the conseruation, it is obserued that the
greatest and the best, the rich and the poore, in libertie, vertue, and
effect of your voices be equall. We haue therfore determined within our
selfe to send for our chancellour of England, and for other lords of
our councell, yea and all other, togither within short time ripelie to
common of these and other our great matters. In which communication,
such conclusion (by the grace of God) shall be taken, as shall sound
to his pleasure, the weale of vs and our land, as well in these matters
as in anie other.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorks reconciliation to the king.]

After all this adoo, it was so agreed vpon by aduise, for the auoiding
of bloudshed, and pacifieng of the duke and his people, that the duke
of Summerset was committed to ward, as some say; or else commanded
to keepe himselfe priuie in his owne house for a time. But it should
seeme by that which some haue written, that the duke of Yorke was
deceiued of the hope which he had, to be aided of the Kentishmen;
insomuch that when he saw himselfe ouermatched by the king in number
of people, who had got togither thrice as manie men as the duke had
there with him, the duke was the more easie to be dealt with. And so
comming to the king, and submitting himselfe by mediation of certeine
of the nobilitie, he obteined pardon of that his former presumptuous
enterprise. And within a few daies after his comming to London with the
king, he openlie in the church of S. Paule (the king being present)
receiued a solemne oth, that from thenceforth, he should no more commit
any such offence, nor attempt anie thing, either against the king,
or any other of his liege people, contrarie to the order of law and
iustice.

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke accuseth the duke of S[=u]merset.]

[Sidenote: A mutuall charge betweene the two dukes, Yorke and Summerset
of his treason.]

Howsoeuer the matter went, truth it is, that the duke of Yorke, the
first of March, dissolued his armie, brake vp his campe, & came to the
king's tent, where contrarie to his expectation, & against promise
made by the king (as other write) he found the duke of Summerset going
at large and set at libertie, whome the duke of Yorke boldlie accused
of treason, briberie, oppression, and manie other crimes. The duke of
Summerset not onelie made answer to the dukes obiections, but also
accused him of high treason, affirming, that he with his fautors and
complices had consulted togither, how to come by the scepter and regall
crowne of this realme. By meanes of which words the king remooued
streight to London, and the duke of Yorke (as prisoner) rode before
him, and so was kept a while.

The king assembled togither a great councell at Westminster to heare
the accusations of the two dukes, the one obiecting to the other manie
heinous and greeuous crimes. But the duke of Summerset, which now
conceiued in his mind the thing that shortlie followed, incessantlie
exhorted the councell, that the duke of Yorke, by compulsion or
otherwise, might be driuen to confesse his offence, that so being
attainted of treason, he might suffer execution, and his children to
be taken as aduersaries to their natiue countrie; to the intent that
by the extinction of him and his sequeale, all ciuill warre and inward
diuision might ceasse and be repressed: beseeching almightie God,
that so great an enimie to the king and his bloud, might neuer escape
punishment, nor continue long in life.

[Sidenote: Destinie cannot be auoided.]

The duke of Summerset set foorth this matter the more vehementlie,
bicause he knew perfectlie, that the duke of Yorke dailie imagined with
himselfe, how to get the crowne, and to depose and destroie both the
king and him. But destinie cannot by anie mans deuise be letted, and
manie things (to appearance) declared the duke of Yorkes innocencie in
this case. First, his free and voluntarie comming to the king, without
constreint, when he was partlie of puissance able to haue incountred
with the kings whole power. Secondlie, his humble submission, and
reasonable requests, as well on his owne behalfe, as for the poore
commons: which might argue that he sought for no souereigntie.

[Sidenote: 1452]

[Sidenote: Occasion that set the duke of Yorke free.]

Whilest the councell treated of sauing or dispatching of this duke
of Yorke, a rumor sprang through London, that Edward earle of March,
sonne and heire apparent to the saide duke, with a great armie of
Marchmen, was comming toward London: which tidings sore appalled the
queene and the whole councell. Beside this, the verie same daie came
ambassadours from the cheefe citizens and magistrats of the citie
of Burdeaux: whereof the cheefe were, the earle of Kendale, and the
lord de Lesparre; which signified to the councell, that if they would
send an armie into Gascoigne, the people of the countrie would reuolt
from the French part, and eftsoones become English. These two things
sore troubled the heads of the councell, which, least inward sedition
might hinder outward conquests, set the duke of Yorke at libertie, and
permitted him to go to his castell of Wigmore, in the marches of Wales,
by whose absence the duke of Summerset rose in such high fauour, both
with the king and queene, that his word onelie ruled, and his voice
alone was heard.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S. pag. 671, 672, in Quart._]

[pilcrow] Neuerthelesse the said duke of Yorke had first made his submission,
and tooke his oth to be true, faithfull, and obedient subiect to king
Henrie the sixt king of England, in saint Pauls church at London,
there being present the king, and most of his nobilitie, that is to
saie, the dukes of Buckingham, Northampton, and Summerset: the earls
of Warwike, Arundell, Salisburie, Shropshire, Deuonshire, Wiltshire,
Northumberland, Stafford and Dorset, vicounts of Beaumont and Welles:
barons, Fitz Warren, Sainmound, Cobham, Dowglas, and others: bishops,
the cardinall, archbishop of Yorke and Canturburie, Winchester, Elie,
and London, in these words following.




The tenor of the duke of Yorks submission to king Henrie, vnder his oth.


I Richard duke of Yorke confesse and beknow, that I am & ought to be
humble subiect and liegeman to you my souereigne lord king Henrie
the sixt, and owe therefore to beare you faith and truth, as to my
souereigne liege lord, and shall doo all daies vnto my liues end; and
shall not at anie time will or assent, that any thing attempted or
doone against your most noble person: but where so euer I shall haue
knowledge of anie such thing imagined or purposed, I shall with all
speed and diligence possible to me, make that your highnesse shall haue
knowledge thereof: and ouer that, doo all that shall be possible to me,
to the withstanding and let thereof, to the vttermost of my life. I
shall not anie thing take vpon against your roiall estate or obeisance
that is due thereto, nor suffer anie other man to doo, as farre foorth
as it shall be in my power to let it: and also shall come at your
commandement when so euer I shall be called by the same, in humble and
obeisant wise: but if I be letted by anie sickenesse or impotence of my
person, or by such other cause as shall be thought by you my souereigne
lord reasonable. I shall neuer hereafter take vpon me to gather
anie rout, nor to make anie assemblie of your people, without your
commandement or licence, or in my lawfull defense. In interpretation or
declaration of the which my lawful defence, I shall report me at all
times to your highnesse, and if the case require, to my peeres; nor any
thing attempt against anie of your subjects, of what estate, degree,
or condition that they be. But when so euer I find my selfe wronged
and agreeued, I shall sue humblie for remedie to your highnesse: and
proceed after the course of your lawes, and in none otherwise: sauing
in mine owne lawfull defense in maner aboue said, and otherwise haue to
your highnesse as an humble and true subiect ought to haue him to his
souereigne lord.

All these things aboue said I promise you trulie to obserue and keepe,
by the holie euangelists conteined in the booke that I laie my hand
herevpon, and by the holie crosse I here touch, and by the blessed
sacrament of our Lords bodie, that I shall now with his mercie receiue.
And ouer I agree me and will, that if I anie time hereafter, as by the
grace of our Lord God I neuer shall, anie thing attempt by waie of feat
or otherwise against your roiall maiestie, and obeisance that I owe
therto, or anie thing take vpon me otherwise than is aboue expressed,
I from that time foorth be vnabled, held, and taken as an vntrue and
openlie forsworne man, and vnable to all maner of worship, estate,
and degree, be it such as I now occupie, or anie other that might in
anie wise grow vnto me hereafter. And this I haue here promised and
sworne, proceedeth of mine owne desire and free voluntee, and by no
constraining or coaction. In witnesse of all the which things aboue
written, I Richard duke of Yorke (aboue named) subscribe with mine owne
hand and seale.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: An Reg. 21.]

[Sidenote: 1453.]

The councell not forgetting the offer of the Gascoignes, and that they
might now haue the citie of Burdeaux, with the countrie round about, by
request of the inhabitants, appointed the valiant capteine Iohn lord
Talbot earle of Shrewesburie, to go thither with an armie: who arriuing
in the Isle of Madre, passed foorth with his power, being scant three
thousand men, and tooke the strong towne of Fronsacke, and diuerse
other townes & fortresses. The inhabitants of Burdeaux, hearing of the
earles arriual, sent to him messengers in the darke night, requiring
him with all speed to come and receiue the citie. The earle lost
not one houre, but hasted foorth, & came before that citie, yer the
Frenchmen within vnderstood anie thing of the citizens purpose. When
they were aduertised that there was a gate set open for the Englishmen
to enter, they thought to haue escaped secretlie by a posterne: but
they were pursued, slaine, and taken by the lord de Lespar, and other
of the English armie.

[Sidenote: The French people soone wearie of the French gouernment.]

After the regaining of Burdeaux, there arriued at Blaie the bastard of
Summerset, sir Iohn Talbot, lord Lisle by his wife, sonne to the said
erle of Shrewesburie, the lord Molins, the lord Harington, the lord
Camois, sir Iohn Howard, sir Iohn Montgomerie, sir Iohn Vernon, with
two and twentie hundred men, with vittels and munitions. When the earle
was thus (according to his intent) of all things furnished, first he
fortified Burdeaux with Englishmen, and store of vittels; and after
that he rode into the countrie abroad, where he obteined cities, and
got townes without stroke or dint of sword, for the people alreadie
wearied of the French seruitude, and longing sore to return to the
English libertie, seemed to desire nothing more than to haue the earle
to receiue them into the English obeisance. Amongst other townes, the
towne and castell of Chastillon in Perigort was to him deliuered, the
which he fortified with men and ordinance verie stronglie.

In the meane time, the French king, being aduertised of all these
dooings, raised an armie to resist this inuasion made by the erle of
Shrewesburie. And first he appointed his capteins to besiege the towne
of Chastillon, to the rescue whereof the earle hasted forward, hauing
in his companie eight hundred horssemen, vnder the leading of his sonne
the lord Lisle, the lord Molins, the lord Camois, sir Edward Hull,
sir Iohn Howard, and sir Iohn Vernon. He appointed also fiue thousand
footmen, vnder the conduct of the earle of Kendall, and the lord de
Lespar, to follow him with all speed. In his waie, he tooke by fine
force a tower which the Frenchmen had taken, and slue all that he found
within it. And after by the waie, he met fiue hundred Frenchmen going a
foraging, of whome he slue the more part, and chased the other to the
campe.

[Sidenote: The valiant earle of Shrewesburie and his son manfullie
slaine.]

The Frenchmen that laie at the siege, perceiuing by those good runners
away that the earle approched, left the siege, and retired in good
order into the place which they had trenched, diched, and fortified
with ordinance. The earle aduertised how the siege was remoued, hasted
forward towards his enimies, doubting most, least they would haue
beene quite fled and gone before his comming. But they fearing the
displeasure of the French king (who was not far off) if they should
haue fled, abode the earles comming, and so receiued him: who though he
first with manfull courage, and sore fighting wan the entrie of their
campe; yet at length they compassed him about, and shooting him through
the thigh with an handgun, slue his horsse, and finally killed him
lieng on the ground, whome they durst neuer looke in the face, while he
stood on his feet.

It was said, that after he perceiued there was no remedie, but present
losse of the battell, he counselled his sonne the lord Lisle, to saue
himselfe by flight, sith the same could not redound to anie great
reproch in him, this being the first iournie in which he had beene
present. Manie words he vsed to persuade him to haue saued his life:
but nature so wrought in the son, that neither desire of life, nor
feare of death, could either cause him to shrinke, or conueie himselfe
out of the danger, and so there manfullie ended his life with his said
father. There died also the earles bastard sonne Henrie Talbot, and
sir Edward Hull elect to the order of the garter, and thirtie other
men of name and right valiant personages of the English nation. The
lord Molins was taken prisoner with threescore others. The residue of
the English people fled to Burdeaux and other places, of whome in the
flight were slaine aboue a thousand persons.

Thus at this battell of Chatillon, fought the thirteenth daie of Iulie
in this yeare, ended his life Iohn lord Talbot, and of his progenie
the first earle of Shrewesburie: after that he with much fame and
most victorie, had valiantlie made warre, and serued his prince and
countrie by the space of foure and twentie yeares, in the parties
beyond the seas, whose corps was left on ground, and after was found
by his freends, and conueied to Whitchurch in Shropshire where it was
interred. After this discomfiture diuerse lords fled to Burdeaux,
but the earle of Candall, the lords of Montferrant, of Rosaine, & of
Dangladas entered into the castell of Chatillon, which by the space of
ten daies they defended: but in the end despairing of all succours,
they rendred the fortresse, and came safe to Burdeaux.

[Sidenote: Burdeaux yielded againe to the French.]

After this, the townes of saint Million, Liborne, and all other, which
the erle of Shrewesburie had conquered, rendred themselues to the
Frenchmen, Burdeaux onelie excepted. Which citie, being the last refuge
of the English people, the French king in person besieged with all
his puissance; and in conclusion constreined both the garrisons and
inhabitants to yeeld, so that the Englishmen & Gascoignes might safelie
depart into England or into Calis, with all their substance; and that
the lords de Lesparre, Duras, and thirtie others, should neuer (vpon
paine of death) be found within anie of the French kings dominions,
which lord de Lesparre being after taken in Gascoigne disguised, was
made shorter by the head. When this composition was agreed and sealed,
the Englishmen were shortlie transported ouer into England, in the
moneth of October this present yeare.

[Sidenote: Aquitaine lost.]

[Sidenote: The dignitie and state of that dukedome.]

[Sidenote: The queene deliuered of hir son prince Edward.]

Thus was the duchie of Aquitaine, which had continued in the English
possession, from the yeare of our Lord 1155, vnto this present yeare,
which is neere hand three hundred yeares, by the mariage of Elenor
daughter and heire to William duke of Aquitaine, wife to king Henrie
the second, finallie reduced and brought againe to the French obedience
and seruitude. Within that onlie duchie be foure archbishops, foure and
twentie bishops, fifteene earledomes, two hundred and two baronies,
and aboue a thousand capteinships and baliffewikes: whereby ye may
consider, what a losse this was to the realme of England. On the
thirteenth daie of October this yeare, was the queene deliuered at
Westminster of a faire sonne, who was christened, and named Edward.

His mother susteined not a little slander and obloquie of the common
people, who had an opinion that the king was not able to get a child;
and therefore sticked not to saie, that this was not his sonne, with
manie slanderous words, greatlie sounding to the queenes dishonour;
much part perchance vntrulie. After the birth of this child, he highlie
aduanced his brethren on his mothers side; for Edmund he made earle of
Richmond, which was father to king Henrie the seuenth, and Iasper he
created erle of Penbroke, which died without issue. [pilcrow] This yeare, Iohn
Stafford archbishop of Canturburie departed this life, and Iohn Kempe
archbishop of Yorke was remoued from that see, to succeed in place of
the said Stafford, being the three score and second archbishop there,
& Iohn Booth bishop of Couentrie and Lichfield was translated to Yorke,
being the one and fiftith archbishop of that church.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. St. pag. 673._]

[Sidenote: The maior, shiriffes and aldermen, resisted and abused in a
fraie neere Clerkenwell.]

[pilcrow]On Bartholomew daie at the wrestling neere vnto Clerkenwell, a
gentleman belonging to the prior of saint Iohns, made a rumor or
tumult, for the which (by the commandement of the maior) he was
arested by Richard Allie one of the shiriffes, and deliuered to Paris
a sergeant. But such resistance was made by parts taking, that the
shiriffe was faine to craue helpe of the maior, who with his brethren
the aldermen arose from the game, and strengthened the shiriffes. And
for the rescue of the said gentleman, one named Calis, came out of
saint Iohns with a great strength of archers, to resist the maior, in
the which fraie a yeoman of saint Iohns was slaine, and manie other
sore hurt. The maior himselfe escaped hardlie, for his cap was smitten
from his head with an arrow: but the maior with his citizens put the
other to flight, sent the principall of them to Newgate, and then tooke
his place againe till the games were ended: by which time the citizens
had gathered themselues in great number, and fetched him home, neuer
maior so stronglie nor so honorablie.

[Sidenote: _Fr. Thin._]

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 32.]

[Sidenote: 1454]

[24]This yeare was Thomas Bourchier bishop of Elie (sonne to the
countesse of Stafford, and brother to Henrie Bourchier earle of Essex)
remooued to the see of Canterburie; who in the yeare after the word
became flesh and appeared in humane shape 1443, first obteined the
see of Elie (although once before he was by the king put backe from
thence after his election of the couent therevnto, and confirmation
of the pope) being translated from Worcester to the said see of Elie,
the twelfth daie of March in the said yeare 1443. This man (after that
he had remained at Elie ten yeares, three and twentie weekes, and
fiue daies) was (as is before said) in this yeare 1454 remooued to
Canturburie by Nicholas the fift then bishop of Rome. After this he
was made chancellor, which office he obteined the seauenth of March,
in the yeare 1455, being the three and thirtith yeare of king Henrie
the sixts reigne. Lastlie he was aduanced to the dignitie of cardinall
by pope Paule the second, in the yeare of our Lord 1465, of whome is
made a more liberall discourse in a [24]tretise of the liues of the
chancellors of England: a place of no small authoritie and reputation.

[24] In a tretise hereafter following.

After the warres foulie ended in forren parties, ciuill dissention
began againe at home, diuided speciallie into two factions. As K.
Henrie descended of the house of Lancaster possessed the crowne from
his grandfather king Henrie the fourth (first author of that title)
so Richard duke of Yorke, as heire to Lionell duke of Clarence, third
sonne to king Edward the third, inforced. By reason whereof, the nobles
as well as the common people were into parts diuided, to the vtter
destruction of manie a man, and to the great ruine and decaie of this
region: for while the one partie sought to destroie the other, all care
of the common-wealth was set aside, and iustice and equitie clearelie
exiled.

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke seeks the destruci[=o] of the duke of
Sommerset.]

[Sidenote: He banded himselfe with the Neuils.]

The duke of Yorke (aboue all things) first sought means how to stir
vp the malice of the people against the duke of Summerset, imagining
that he being made awaie, his purpose should the sooner take effect.
He also practised to bring the king into the hatred of the people, as
that he should not be a man apt to the gouernment of a realme, wanting
both wit and stomach sufficient to supplie such a roome. Manie of the
high estates, not liking the world, and disalowing the dooings both of
the king and his councell, were faine inough of some alteration. Which
thing the duke well vnderstanding, chiefelie sought the fauour of the
two Neuils, both named Richard, one earle of Salisburie, the other
earle of Warwike, the first being the father, and the second the sonne.

[Sidenote: The issue of Richard earle Salisburie.]

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

This earle of Salisburie was second son to Rafe Neuill earle of
Westmerland, whose daughter the duke of Yorke had maried, and the
said Richard was espoused to ladie Alice, the onelie child and sole
heire of Thomas Montacute earle of Salisburie, slaine at the siege
of Orleance (as before is declared) of which woman he begat Richard,
Iohn, and George: Richard the eldest sonne espoused Anne, the sister
and heire of the entire bloud of lord Henrie Beauchamp earle and after
duke of Warwike, in whose right and title he was created and named
earle of Warwike. [Full fraught was this nobleman with good qualities
right excellent and manie, all which a certeine naturall grace did
vnto all estates so farfoorth recommend, that with high and low he was
in singular fauour and good liking so as (vnsought for) it seemed, in
authoritie among them, he grew able to command all alone.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 33.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Summerset arrested.]

[Sidenote: 1455]

[Sidenote: The king sicke.]

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

When the duke of Yorke had fastened his chaine betweene these two
strong pillers, he with his freends wrought so effectuouslie, and
handled his businesse so politikelie, that the duke of Summerset was
arested in the queenes great chamber, and sent to the Tower of London,
where he kept his Christmasse without great solemnitie. Against whom,
soone after in open parlement were laid diuerse and heinous articles
of high treason, as well for the losse of Normandie, as for the late
mischance which happened in Guien. The king at that time was sicke
at Clarendon, and conueied to London, by reason whereof no finall
determination proceeded in this weightie cause; but all was put in
suspense, till the next assemblie of the high court of parlement. Some
doo write, that whilest the king was sicke, the duke of Yorke bare all
the rule, and gouerned as regent or viceroie, by authoritie committed
to him by the lords of the realme, then assembled in councell; he to
see to the preseruation and good gouernement of the common-wealth,
during the kings sicknesse, which was so greeuous (as it was said) that
he laie senselesse, and was not able for a time either to go or stand.

[Sidenote: The duke of Summerset set at libertie.]

[Sidenote: Made deputie of Calis.]

The duke of Yorke hauing aforehand obteined an absolution of the pope,
in discharge of his oth before taken, did now discouer his stomach
against the duke of Summerset. But when the king was amended againe,
and resumed to him his former gouernement, either of his owne mind, or
by the queenes procurement, the duke of Summerset was set at libertie;
by which doing, great enuie and displeasure grew. That notwithstanding,
the queene (which then bare the chiefe rule) caused the duke of
Summerset to be preferred to the capteineship of Calis, wherwith not
onlie the commons, but also manie of the nobilitie were greatlie
greeued and offended, saieng, that he had lost Normandie, and so would
he doo Calis.

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke assembled an armie.]

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: The king with two thousand.]

The duke of Yorke and his adherents, perceiuing that neither
exhortation nor charging him with his crimes preuailed against the
duke of Summerset, they meant to mend the matter by open war: & soone
after he being in the marches of Wales, accompanied with his speciall
friends, the earles of Salisburie, and Warwike, the lord Cobham, and
others, assembled a power, and in warlike maner marched toward London.
The king informed hereof, assembled likewise a great host, and meaning
to meet with the duke, rather in the north parts than about London,
where it was thought he had too manie friends, he accompanied with the
dukes of Summerset and Buckingham, the earles of Penbroke, Stafford,
Northumberland, Deuonshire, Dorset, and Wilshire, the lords Clifford,
Sudlie, Berneis, Roos, and others, being in all aboue two thousand men
of warre, departed from Westminster the twentith, or (as some haue) the
one and twentith of Maie, and laie the first night at Wadford.

[Sidenote: The duke with three thousand.]

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S. pag. 675, 676, 677, in Quart._]

Of whose dooings the duke of Yorke by espials hauing still
aduertisement, with all his power, being not past three thousand men
(as some write) coasted the countrie, and came to saint Albons the
third daie next insuing. The king there had pight his standard in a
place called Goselow, otherwise Sandiford, in saint Peters street: the
lord Clifford kept the barriers of the towne, to stop, that the duke
being assembled in Keie field, should not enter the towne. [pilcrow] The duke
of Yorke (saith one moderne chronographer) knowing the strength made
against him, abiding in the field aforesaid, from seuen of the clocke
in the morning vntill it was almost ten of the clocke without anie
stroke smitten on either part, by the aduise of his councell sent vnto
the king vnder these words following.




Words in writing by the duke of Yorke to the king.


Please it vnto your excellent grace, Richard duke of Yorke, to take him
as your true liege man and humble subiect; and to consider and tender
at the reuerence of God, and in the waie of charitie, the true intent
of my comming, and to be good and gratious souereigne vnto me, & all
other your true liege men, which, that with all their power and might
will be readie to liue and die with you in your right, and to doo all
things as shall like your maiestie roiall to command vs, if it be to
the worship of the crowne of England, and the welfare of this your
noble realme. Moreouer, gratious lord, please it vnto your maiestie
roiall, of your great goodnesse and rightwisenesse, to incline your
will to heare & feele the rightwise part of vs your true subiects
and liege men. First, praieng and beseeching to your souereigne,
Christ Iesus, of his high and mightie power, to giue you vertue of
prudence, and that through the praier of the glorious martyr S. Albon
giue you verie knowledge of our truths, and to know the intent of our
assembling at this time: for God that is in heauen knoweth, our intent
is rightfull and true. And therefore we praie vnto that mightie Lord in
these words: Domine sis clypeus defensionis nostrae. Wherfore gratious
lord, please it your maiestie roiall, to deliuer such as we will
accuse, and they to haue like as they haue deserued: and this doone,
you to be honorablie worshipped as most rightfull king and our true
gouernour. And if we should now at this time be promised, as afore this
time (is not vnknowen) haue beene promises broken which haue beene full
faithfullie promised, and therevpon great othes sworne, we will not
now ceasse for no such promises, nor oth, till we haue them which haue
deserued death, or else we to die therefore.




The answer by the king to the duke of Yorke.


I King Henrie charge and command, that no manner of person, of what
degree, estate or what condition soeuer he be, abide not; but that they
auoid the field, and not be so hardie to make resistance against me in
my owne realme. For I shall know what traitour dare be so bold to raise
anie people in mine owne land, wherethrough I am in great disease and
heauines. By the faith I owe vnto S. Edward, and vnto the crowne of
England, I shall destroie them euerie mothers sonne, and eke they to be
hanged, drawne, and quartered, that may be taken afterward of them, in
example to make all such traitors to beware for to make anie rising of
people within mine owne land, and so traitorouslie to abide their king
and gouernour. And for a conclusion, rather than they shall haue anie
lord, that here is with me at this time, I shall this day for their
sake in this quarell my selfe liue and die.




The words of the duke of Yorke to all gentlemen and other assembled
with him.


Sirs, the king our souereigne lord will not be reformed at our
beseeching ne praier, nor will not in no wise vnderstand the intent
wherfore we be here assembled and gathered at this time, but onelie
is in full purpose to destroie vs all. And therevpon a great oth hath
made, that is none other waie, but that he with all his power will
pursue vs; and if we be taken, to giue vs a shamefull death, leesing
our liuelod and goods, and also our heires shamed for euer. Therefore
sirs, now sith it will none otherwise be, but that we shall vtterlie
die; better it is for vs to die in the field, than cowardlie to be
put to an vtter rebuke and shamefull death, for the right of England
standeth in vs. Considering also in what perill it standeth at this
time, and for to redresse the mischeefe thereof, let euerie man helpe
to his power this daie, and in that quarell to quite vs like men, to
the crowne of England; praieng and beseeching vnto that Lord, the which
is eternall, that reigneth in the glorious kingdome celestiall, to
keepe and saue vs this daie in our right, and through the gifts of his
holie grace we may be made strong to withstand the great, abhominable,
and horrible malice of them that purpose to destroie vs and the realme
of England, and put vs to a shamefull death. Praie we therefore to the
Lord to be our comfort and our defendour, saieng these words, Domine
sis clypeus defensionis nostrae.]

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: The duke of Buckingham sent to the duke of Yorke.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Summerset burdened with all things that had
happened amisse.]

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

But another historie-writer saith, that the king, when first he heard
of the duke of Yorks approch, sent to him messengers, the duke of
Buckingham, and others to vnderstand what he meant by his comming thus
in maner of warre. The duke of Buckingham to his message was answered
by the duke of Yorke and his complices, that they were all of them
the kings faithfull liege subiects, and intended no harme to him at
all: but the cause of our comming (saie they) is not in meaning anie
hurt to his person. But let that wicked and naughtie man the duke of
Summerset be deliuered vnto vs, who hath lost Normandie, and taken no
regard to the preseruation of Gascoigne; and furthermore, hath brought
the realme vnto this miserable estate; that where it was the floure
of nations, and the princesse of prouinces [now is it haled into
desolation & spoile, not so dreadfull by malice of forren enimie, that
indeed vtterlie (as yee know) seeketh our ruine, as by the intollerable
outrages of him that so long ago & euen still appeares to haue sworne
the confusion of our king and realme.] If it therefore please the king
to deliuer that bad man into our hands, we are readie without trouble
or breach of peace, to returne into our countrie. But if the king be
not minded so to do, bicause he cannot misse him; let him vnderstand,
that we will rather die in the field, than suffer such a mischeefe
vnredressed.

[Sidenote: The first battell of saint Albons.]

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: _Edw. Hall._]

The king aduertised of this answer, more wilfull than tollerable,
appointed him rather to trie battell, than deliuer the duke of
Summerset to his enimies. Whereof they ascerteined made no longer
staie, but streightwaie sounded the trumpet to battell: or rather (as
Hall saith) while king Henrie sent foorth his ambassadours to treat
of peace at the one end of the towne, the earle of Warwike with his
Marchmen entred at the other end, and fiercelie setting on the kings
fore-ward, within a small time discomfited the same. The place where
they first brake into the towne, was about the middle of saint Peters
street. The fight for a time was right sharpe and cruell, for the duke
of Summerset, with the other lords, comming to the succours of their
companions that were put to the woorse, did what they could to beat
backe the enimies: but the duke of Yorke sent euer fresh men to succour
the wearie, and to supplie the places of them that were hurt, whereby
the kings armie was finallie brought low, and all the cheefteins of the
field slaine and beaten downe.

[Sidenote: The duke of Summerset slaine.]

[Sidenote: Thomas lord Clifford, saith _Whethamsted_.]

For there died vnder the signe of the castell, Edmund duke of
Summerset, who (as hath beene reported) was warned long before to auoid
all castels: and beside him laie Henrie the second of that name earle
of Northumberland, Humfrie earle of Stafford sonne to the duke of
Buckingham, Iohn lord Clifford, sir Barthram Antwisell knight, a Norman
borne (who forsaking his natiue countrie to continue in his loiall
obedience to king Henrie, came ouer to dwell here in England when
Normandie was lost) William Zouch, Iohn Boutreux, Rafe Bapthorp, with
his sonne William Corwin, William Cotton, Gilbert Faldinger, Reginald
Griffon, Iohn Dawes, Elice Wood, Iohn Eith, Rafe Woodward, Gilbert
Sharlock, and Rafe Willoughbie esquiers, with manie other, in all to
the number of eight thousand, as Edward Hall saith in his chronicle:
if there escaped not a fault in the impression, as 8000 for 800, sith
hundreds in verie deed would better agree with the number of the kings
whole power, which he brought with him to that battell, being not manie
aboue two thousand, as by writers appeareth.

[Sidenote: The kings part vanquished.]

Humfrie duke of Buckingham, being wounded, and Iames Butler earle
of Ormond and Wilshire, and Thomas Thorp lord cheefe baron of the
escheker, seeing fortune thus against them, left the king alone, and
with a number fled awaie. Those that thus fled, made the best shift
they could to get awaie through gardens and backesides, through shrubs,
hedges and woods, seeking places where to hide themselues, vntill
that dangerous tempest of the battell were ouerblowne. Diuerse of the
kings house also that could better skill to plaie the courtiers than
warriors, fled with the first; and those of the east parts of the
realme were likewise noted of too much lacke of courage, for their
speedie withdrawing themselues, and leauing the king in danger of his
aduersaries: who perceiuing his men thus fled from him, withdrew into a
poore mans house to saue himselfe from the shot of arrowes, that flue
about him as thicke as snow.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S. pag. 678, 679, in Quart._]

[pilcrow] This doone, saith one historien, the duke of Yorke, the earles of
Warwike, and Salisburie, came vnto the king where he was, and besought
him on their knees of grace and forgiuenesse for that they had doone
in his presence, and besought him of his highnesse to take them to
grace, and as his true liege men. The king desiring them to cease their
people, that there should be no more hurt doone, and to obeie his
commandement, did cause to be proclamed in the kings name, that all
manner of people should cease off their malice, and not to smite one
stroke more, and so ceassed the battell. And vpon the day next after,
the king and the duke of Yorke, the earles of Warwike & Salisburie,
came all to London; and were lodged in the bishops palace of London,
where they kept their Whitsuntide with great ioy and solemnitie,
concluding there to hold a parlement, the same to begin on the ninth
daie of Iulie next following.

Another historien saith, that the duke of Yorke, aduertised of the
place into the which the king was withdrawne for the safetie of
himselfe, and taking him into his power, comforted him in the best
wise he could; assuring him, that now that the common enimie of the
realme was dispatched, to wit, the duke of Summerset, he had cause
rather to reioise, than to be sorie, sith his destruction was the kings
preseruation. And for himselfe and all his adherents he vndertooke,
that they were and would remaine, during life, his most faithfull
liege people, readie in all points to serue him, as his trustie and
obedient subiects. After he had vsed such words, as wherewith best to
comfort him, he brought the king foorth of that simple house with all
due reuerence shewed toward him first to the shrine, and after to his
chamber.

[Sidenote: Battell of S. Albons on thursday the 23 of Maie.]

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 33.]

[Sidenote: Foure of th[=e] to wit, the duke of S[=u]merset, the earle
of Northumberland, and the lord Clifford, were buried in our ladie
chapell.]

[Sidenote: _Iohn Hooker alias Vowell._]

Whilest the duke of Yorke was about thus to comfort the king, the
soldiers that had the victorie now in their hands, applied the spoile,
namelie, the Northerne men, stripping not onelie those that had borne
armor against them, but also the townsmen and other, with whom they
might meet. So that it was thought, if the king had taken vp his
lodging at his first comming thither, within the abbeie, as he did not
(but in the middest of the towne, to prouide the better to resist his
enimies) the abbeie had beene spoiled also. This was the end of the
first battell at saint Albons, which was fought vpon the thursdaie next
before the feast of Penthecost, being the three and twentith day of
Maie, in this three and thirtith yeare of the kings reigne. The bodies
of the noble men were buried in the monasterie in our ladies chappell,
and the meane people in other places. This Edmund duke of Summerset
left behind him three sonnes, Henrie, Edmund and Iohn, which to the
extremitie of death tooke part with the line of king Henrie.

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[There was this yeare a great fight & fraie vpon Clift heath, distant
about two miles from Excester, betweene Thomas Courtneie earle of
Deuonshire, against William lord Bonuile of Shut, and sundrie men of
both parts were slaine. But yet the lord Bonuile preuailed & had the
victorie, who foorthwith came to this citie, and the gates before being
shut, were opened and he receiued; which thing so greeued the earle,
that he continuallie sought thencefoorth to be reuenged. But not long
after in the quarell between king Henrie the sixt, and king Edward the
fourth, he ended his daies, and was beheaded at Yorke, and was the last
of that line.]

[Sidenote: A parlement.]

The duke of Yorke, hauing gotten the victorie, remembred well, that he
had published abroad how the onelie cause of this warre was, for the
aduancement of the common-wealth, and therefore vsing all courtesie,
would not touch the kings person after anie violent sort; but with all
honour and due reuerence conueied him to London and so to Westminster.
To which place was summoned a parlement, which began the ninth daie of
Iulie, in the which session, the late duke of Glocester was openlie
declared a true subiect, both to the king and to the realme. Beside
this, it was enacted, that no person should either iudge or report
anie point of vntruth of the duke of Yorke, the earles of Salisburie
and Warwike, or of anie knight, esquier, archer, or other, for comming
in warlike araie against the king, at saint Albons; considering their
enterprise was onelie to see the kings person in safegard.

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: Collaterall.]

[Sidenote: A letter kept from the king of purpose.]

But all the blame was put vpon the duke of Summerset, Thomas Thorp,
baron of the escheker, and William Iosep esquier, the kings collaterall
companion; bicause that they, vpon malicious purpose, kept a certeine
letter from the kings knowledge, and would in no wise suffer it to be
deliuered vnto him, notwithstanding the same made to the aduancement
of some good peace, had it beene throughlie and aduisedlie read, weied
& considered. In which letter they declared, that as faithfull and
humble subiects, they required onelie, that it would please the king
(whose honor, health, suertie, and preseruation, they cheefelie wished)
not to giue credence to their aduersaries malicious suggestions, till
their comming to his presence, vnto the which they humblie besought
him that they might be admitted as his faithfull liege people, to shew
the intent and purpose of their commings; which was to none other end,
than to declare their fidelitie and allegiance towards his most roiall
person, intending to put themselues with as much diligence and trauell
in all things that might aduance his honour, health, and safegard, as
any subiect he had liuing.

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorkes comming against the king iustified.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke made protector of the realme.]

[Sidenote: The king to reigne in name but not in authoritie.]

The keeping backe of this letter from the kings sight and knowledge,
did minister matter sufficient vnto the parlement, to colour and
iustifie for well doone all transgressions committed in the late
battell and chase at saint Albons. In this parlement also, the duke of
Yorke was made protector of the realme, and the earle of Salisburie
was appointed to be lord chancellour, and had the great seale to
him deliuered, and the earle of Warwike was elected to the office
of the capteineship of Calis, and the territories of the same; and
thus the rule of the realme rested in the orders of the duke and
chancellour, and all warlike affaires remained, principallie in the
earle of Warwike. And so amongest them it was agreed, that king Henrie
should reigne still in name and dignitie, but neither in deed nor in
authoritie; not minding to destroie him, least they might suddenlie
prouoke the furie of the common people against them, bicause that
of the simple sort of people he was for his holinesse of life, and
abundant clemencie, much fauoured and highlie esteemed.

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: An act for the K. to reuoke certeine grants.]

In this parlement also it was enacted, that the king should resume,
take into his hands againe, haue and reteine into his possession,
all honours, castels, lordships, townes, villages, manours, lands,
tenements, wasts, forests, chases, rents, reuersions, fees, farmes,
seruices, issues, profits, counties, aduousons of priories, churches,
hospitals, and free chapels, and all other reuenues with their
appurtenances, the which had passed from him since the first daie
of his reigne vnto that present; either by his letters patents, or
authoritie of parlement, and manie other meanes, whether by grant,
confirmation, or release from him made in fee simple, or fee taile,
for tearme of life or yeares, to anie maner of person and persons in
England, Wales, Scotland, or the marches; in Ireland, or in the townes
of Calis, & Guisnes, & the marches there. And likewise all grants made
of such things as are aboue mentioned, being parcell of the duchie of
Lancaster; and further all grants of offices, roomes, fees, wages, or
commodities, not accustomed to belong to anie office or charge before
the said first daie of the kings reigne, were likewise reuoked.

[Sidenote: Shifting of officers.]

Diuerse other things were also conteined within this reuocation and
generall resumption; with certeine exceptions yet and prouisoes had,
as were thought conuenient, and as by the same act it dooth appeare.
Moreouer, now that the duke of Yorke and his adherents had wrested the
whole rule & gouernement into their hands; all such persons as the
king either loued, or the queene fauoured, were put beside the priuie
councell; and such put in their places, as were knowne to fauour the
house of Yorke. Also the officers were changed thoroughout the realme,
at the will and disposition of the protector, chancellour, and capteine
of Calis; so that they constituted as it were a triumuirat, ruling all
things at discretion of these three. And yet in all their rule I find
not that anie mention is made of their deferring of iustice, or of anie
polling or briberie: as was openlie prooued by such as gouerned before
their time. Onelie they were noted of diuerse spirituall persons,
and namelie of the abbat of Westminster and his moonks, for a great
offense: bicause they tooke out of the sanctuarie at Westminster, Iohn
Holland duke of Excester, all against the order taken in the last
parlement, and sent him to the castell of Pomfret.

[Sidenote: Henrie duke of Summerset.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke discharged of his office.]

[Sidenote: 1456]

But now the lord Henrie Beauford, newlie duke of Summerset by the death
of duke Edmund his father, slaine at the battell of saint Albons (as
aboue is rehearsed) and Humfrie duke of Buckingham (who then & there
lost his sonne and heire) and other of estate taking the part of king
Henrie, whose case they did much bewaile & doubt, as perceiuing whereto
the courtesie of the duke of Yorke did draw: they therefore thinking
it necessarie to purueie for a remedie yer the mischeefe happened,
consulted with the queene. By whose aduise was a great councell
called at Greenewich, where the duke of Yorke was discharged of his
protectorship, & the earle of Salisburie depriued also of his office.
[pilcrow] This sudden change amongst the nobilitie caused alterations, and
seditious attempts in the commonaltie, and in especiall within London:
whereof this was one. A yoong merchant, which before time had beene
in diuerse cities of Italie, and there forbidden by the magistrats
(as the law and maner is) to weare anie weapon, now challenged an
Italian in Cheapside for wearing a dagger, telling him it was against
his owne countrie lawes: wherto bicause the Italian answered somewhat
disdainefullie, the merchant not onelie tooke by force from him his
dagger, but also with the same brake his pate.

[Sidenote: An vprore in the citie of London.]

[Sidenote: A foule disorder.]

This Italian in great hast complained to the maior, so that at the next
court holden at the Guildhall, the merchant was sent for, and vpon
charge of his offense, he was commanded to ward. Wherevpon diuerse
other light persons within the citie, assembled togither in great
plumps, by force constreined the maior to deliuer the prisoner out
of Newgate: and not so satisfied, like mad men ran to the seuerall
houses of diuerse Venetians, Lucases, and Florentins, and them spoiled,
robbed, and rifled without reason or measure. The maior, perceiuing
this enormious dooing, assembled a number of substantiall and graue
citizens; who (not without bloudshed and maiming of sundrie) appeased
the rage, and caused the misruled people to depart to their houses. The
beginner of this vprore got him to Westminster, and there registred
himselfe for a sanctuarie man.

The queene, which now againe ruled all, being aduertised of this
vnlawfull misdemeanour, sent the dukes of Excester and Buckingham,
with other noble men to London, with a commission oier and terminer,
for the inquirie and punishment of so seditious an offense. But when
the maior, the two dukes, and the two cheefe iustices were set in the
Guildhall vpon their commission, intelligence was giuen, that a number
of light persons were approching in armor to rescue the prisoners
apprehended for the late robberie and riot, as they were caried to
their arraignement. The two dukes and the other commissioners quickelie
thense departed, and left their inquirie for that daie, though in deed
in no such danger as they doubted: for certeine discreet and sage
citizens so handled the matter, that no misorder followed of that furie.

[Sidenote: A common councell called.]

The maior on the next daie called a common councell, whereof the
number was an hundred fourescore and od, who ordeined that all wardens
of mysteries should assemble their companies in their halles, where
exhortation should be to the obseruation of peace; and if they spied
any man either readie to stirre a rumor, or make to the deliuerance of
such as were in prison, their names should be secretlie written, and
so deliuered to the maior: which policie well appeased this outrage.
Wherevpon after the commissioners sat in Guildhall, where manie of the
robbers were attainted & put to execution, beside diuerse great fines
set on the heads of diuerse merchants, & paid, for winking at the
matter. [pilcrow] This yeare Iohn Kempe archbishop of Canturburie departed this
life, & Thomas Burstlier bishop of Elie remooued to his place, being
the threescore and third archbishop of that see.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S._ 681.]

[Sidenote: 1457.]

[Sidenote: _Fabian._]

[pilcrow] In the moneth of Nouember, in the Ile of Portland not farre from the
towne of Weimouth, was seene a cocke comming out of the sea, hauing a
great crest vpon his head, and a great red beard, and legs of halfe a
yard long: he stood on the water & crowed foure times, and euerie time
turned him about, and beckened with his head, toward the north, the
south, and the west, and was of colour like a fesant, & when he had
crowed three times, he vanished awaie. And shortlie after were taken at
Erith within twelue miles of London, foure great and woonderfull fishes
whereof one was called Mors marina, the second a sword fish, the other
two were whales.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 35.]

[Sidenote: Sandwich spoiled by the French.]

The French nation, hearing of the ciuall dissention within the realme
here, and for an old grudge seeking our annoie, two nauies appointed
they to inuade the townes standing vpon the riuage of the sea. The
capteins of the one fleet was William lord Pomiers, and of the other
sir Peter Bressie, a great ruler in Normandie. These two capteins,
taking their course out of the mouth of Saine, seuered themselues the
one westward; and the other eastward, which was sir Peter Bressie,
who sailing alongst the coasts of Sussex and Kent, durst not yet take
land, but staid in the Downes: and there hauing by espiall perfect
notice that Sandwich was neither peopled nor fortified (because that a
little before, the rulers of the towne were from thense departed, for
to auoid the plague, which sore there afflicted and slue the people) he
entered the hauen, spoiled the towne, and after such poore stuffe as he
there found rifled and taken, he fearing an assemblie of the countrie,
shortlie gat him awaie.

[Sidenote: Fulnaie.]

[Sidenote: The Scots inuade England.]

[Sidenote: The lord Egremond committed to Newgate.]

[Sidenote: He made an escape.]

The lord Pomiers likewise tooke his course westward, & by night burning
certeine houses in Fulnaie with a little pillage retired into Britaine.
The Scots also (busie like flies where no flap to fraie them) entered
into Northumberland (king Iames the second being there in person) &
burned certeine poore houses, and litte cottages: but in the verie
middest of their great enterprise, they hearing of the duke of Yorkes
marching toward them with a great host, with much paine and no gaine
in all hast returned to their countrie. But now to passe ouer outward
inuasions, & to intreat of the dailie disorder amongest the nobles at
home. So was it, that a great conflict fell betweene the lord Egremond,
& the sonnes of the erle of Salisburie; in which manie persons were
slaine, & a great number hurt. The lord Egremond, seeking to get awaie
but could not, by force was taken & brought before the councell: where
the king and the queene, to shew themselues indifferent, adiudged him
to paie to the earle of Salisburie a great summe of monie; and for his
heinous offense against the lawes, was committed to Newgate in London,
out of which he escaped, to the great trouble of the shiriffes.

[Sidenote: A practise to haue intrapped the duke of Yorke.]

The queene nothing more seeking than the ouerthrow of the duke of
Yorke and his friends, and perceiuing she could attempt nothing
against him neere to London, because the duke was in more estimation
there, than either the king hir husband, or hir selfe; therefore she
caused the king to make a progresse into Warwikeshire for his health
and recreation. And so in semblance of hawking and hunting came to
Couentree, where diuerse waies were studied to fulfill the queenes
desire: for the accomplishing whereof, the duke of Yorke, the earles of
Salisburie, and Warwike (whose destructions was chieflie sought) were
sent for to Couentree by the kings letters, vnder his priuie seale,
to which place the said lords without suspicion of danger obedientlie
resorted.

But being admonished by secret friends, what was intended against them,
they by flight auoided that danger, where otherwise their liues had
beene lost without all remedie. And so without bidding anie farewell,
they departed from the court; the duke vnto Wigmoore in the marches
of Wales, the earle of Salisburie to his castell of Middleham in the
north, and the earle of Warwike sailed to Calis. The bodies of which
three noble personages though thus separated, yet their hearts knit in
one, and still went messengers & letters betwixt them, to communicat
their deuises, and giue signification of their minds and purposes.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 36.]

[Sidenote: 1458]

[Sidenote: The bishop abiured for moouing against the popes extortion.]

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

In this yeere Reginald Peacocke bishop of Chichester, abiured at Paules
crosse, all his bookes burnt, and he himselfe commanded to keepe his
owne house during his naturall life: because that he (verie well
learned, and better stomached) began to mooue questions, not priuilie
but openlie, in the vniuersities, concerning the annates, Peter pence,
and other iurisdictions & authorities, which the pope vsurped; and not
onelie put foorth such questions, but declared his mind and opinion in
the same. Some saie he held that spirituall persons by Gods law ought
to haue no temporall possessions, nor that personall tithes by Gods
law were due [nor that christian men were to beleeue in the catholike
church, nor in the communion of saints, but to beleeue that a catholike
church and a communion of saints there is] and that he held how the
vniuersall church might erre in matters of faith; and that it is not of
necessitie to beleeue all that which is ordeined by generall councels,
nor all that which they call the vniuersall church ought to be allowed
and holden of all christian people.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S. pag. 682, 683, 684, 685, 686, in Quart._]

Moreouer, that it was meet to euerie man to vnderstand the scriptures
in the true and plaine sense, & none bound to glosses of anie other
sense, vpon anie necessitie of saluation. [pilcrow] But because I find a
larger report heereof elsewhere, and as more methodicall, so also (as
it seemeth) in such forme as it was Res gesta, a deed doone, it shall
not be amisse to insert the same. This bishop was a secular doctor
of diuinitie, that had labored manie yeeres to translate the holie
scripture into English, & was accused to haue passed the bounds of
diuinitie and christian beleefe in certeine articles, of the which he
was conuict before the archbishop of Canturburie, and other bishops
and clearks, and after vtterlie abiured, reuoked, and renounced those
articles openlie at Paules crosse in his mother toong on the fourth day
of December, as followeth.




The forme of his abiuration.


In the name of the trinitie, father, sonne, and holie-ghost, I Reinold
Peacocke bishop of Chichester vnworthie, of mine owne power and will
without anie maner coaction or dread, confesse and knowledge that I
here, before this time, presuming of my naturall wit, and preferring
my iudgement and naturall reason before the new and the old testament,
and the authoritie & determination of our mother holie church, haue
held, written and taught otherwise than the holie Romane and vniuersall
church teacheth, preacheth, or obserueth. And one is against the true
catholike and apostles faith, I haue written, taught, and published
manie & diuerse perilous doctrines, books, works, and writings,
conteining heresies and errors, contrarie to the faith catholike,
and determination of holie church: and speciallie these heresies and
errours following, that is to saie in particular.

In primis, quod non est de necessitate fidei credere, quod dominus
noster Iesus Christus post mortem descendit ad inferos.

Item, quod non est de necessitate salutis credere in sanctorum
communionem.

Item, quod ecclesia vniuersalis potest errare in hijs quae sunt fidei.

Item, quod non est de necessitate salutis credere & tenere illud,
quod consilium generale & vniuersalis ecclesia statuit, approbat, seu
determinat, in fauorem fidei, & ad salutem animarum, est ab vniuersis
Christi fidelibus approbandum & tenendum.

Wherefore I miserable sinner, which here before long time haue walked
in darkenesse, and now by the mercie and infinit goodnesse of God
reduced into the right waie, and light of truth, and considering my
selfe greeuouslie haue sinned and wickedlie haue informed and infected
the people of God, returne and come againe to the vnitie of our mother
holie church, and all heresies and errors written and conteined in my
said books, works and writings, here solemnelie and openlie reuoke &
renounce. Which heresies and errors, and all other spices of heresies
I haue before this time before the most reuerend father in God, and
my good lord of Canturburie, in diuerse and lawfull forme iudiciallie
abiured, submitting my selfe, being then and also now at this time
verie contrite and penitent sinner, to the correction of the church and
of my said lord of Canturburie.

And ouer this, exhorting & requiring in the name & vertue of almightie
God, in the saluation of your soules and mind, that no man hereafter
giue faith and credence to my said pernicious doctrines, heresies and
errors; neither my said books keepe, hold, or read in anie wise; but
that they all such books, works and writings suspect of heresies,
deliuer in all goodlie hast vnto my said lord of Canturburie, or to
his commissioners and deputies, in eschewing of manie inconueniences
and great perils of soules, the which else might be cause of the
contrarie. And ouer this declaration of my conuersion and repentance,
I here openlie assent, that my said books, works, and writings, for
declaration and cause aboue rehearsed, be deputed vnto the fire, and
openlie burnt in example and terror of all other, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

After this, he was depriued of his bishoprike, hauing a certeine
pension assigned vnto him for to liue on in an abbeie, and soone after
died. His books were intituled: 1 Of christian religion, and a booke
perteining therevnto. 2 Of matrimonie. 3 Iust expressing of holie
scripture, diuided into three parts. 4 The donet of christian religion.
5 The follower of the donet. 6 The booke of faith. 7 The booke filling
the foure tables. 8 The booke of worshipping. 9 The prouoker of
christian men. 10 The booke of councell.

[Sidenote: The queenes atturnie slain.]

[Sidenote: Iusting in the Tower of London.]

In the moneth of Ianuarie died the earle of Deuonshire in the abbeie of
Abindon, poisoned (as men said) being there at that time with queene
Margaret, to appease the malice betweene the yoong lords, whose fathers
wee slaine at saint Albons, and they that held with the duke of Yorke.
The thirteenth of Aprill there was a great fraie in Fleetstreet,
betweene men of court and the inhabitants of the same street, in which
fraie the queenes atturnie was slaine. For this fact the king committed
the principall gouernours of Furniuals, Cliffords, and Barnards In to
prison in the castell of Hertford; and William Tailor alderman of that
ward, with manie other were sent to Windsor castell the seuenth of
Maie. On thursdaie in Whitsunweeke, the duke of Summerset with Anthonie
Riuers and other foure kept iustes before the queene in the Tower of
London against three esquiers of the queenes. And in like maner at
Greenewich the sundaie following.

King Henrie and his councell, perceiuing the duke of Yorke laie
still and stirred not, returned to London, and there called a great
councell, openlie declaring how the French and Scots (imboldened by the
ciuill discord within this realme) attempted to annoie the same, as
of late they had shewed apparant tokens, and likelie not ceasse vpon
occasions to doo further displeasures, till a perfect concord were
concluded betweene him and his freends, and those of the contrarie
part and confederacie. And to the intent that he would be the cheefe
author of peace, he promised of his dignitie so to interteine the duke
of Yorke and his freends, that all old grudges should be not onelie
inwardlie forgotten, but also outwardlie forgiuen, which should be
cause of perpetuall loue and assured amitie.

[Sidenote: The peeres of the realme called to a treatie.]

This deuise was of all men iudged for the best. Wherevpon diuerse
graue persons were sent to the duke of Yorke, and all other the great
estates of the realme, who since the battell of saint Albons neuer met
nor communed togither, commanding them for great causes to repaire to
the kings court without delaie. At his commandement came to London
Richard duke of Yorke, with foure hundred men, and was lodged at
Bainards castell being his owne house; and after him came the earle of
Salisburie with fiue hundred men, and was likewise lodged at his owne
house called the Herbour. Then came the dukes of Excester and Summerset
with eight hundred men, and were lodged without Temple barre; and the
earle of Northumberland, the lord Egremond, and the lord Clifford came
with fifteene hundred men, and lodged without the citie. The earle
of Warwike also came from Calis with six hundred men in red iackets,
imbrodered with white ragged staues behind and before, and was lodged
at the graie friers.

[Sidenote: The prouidence of the citie for safegard of peace.]

Thus were all those of the one part lodged within the citie, and those
of the other without, in Holborne towards Westminster, and in other
places of the suburbs, all vpon wise consideration: for that the
Yorke faction and the Lancastrians could not well haue beene mingled
without danger of discord. After that these lords were thus come vnto
London, the king and the queene shortlie followed, comming thither the
seuenteenth daie of March, and lodged in the bishops palace. Bicause
no riotous attempt or bickering should be begun betweene anie of the
parties or their retinues, the maior and aldermen of the citie kept
great watch, as well by daie as by night, riding about the citie by
Holborne, and Fleetstreet, with fiue thousand men well armed and
arraied, to see good order and peace on all sides kept.

[Sidenote: The lords are brought to agree.]

The lords which lodged within the citie held a dailie councell
at blacke friers; the other part soiourning without the walles,
assembled likewise in the chapiter house at Westminster. At length
by the diligent trauell and good exhortation of the archbishop of
Canturburie, and other prelats; both parties were persuaded to come to
communication, and so did. Where, after long debating of grieuances
on both sides, they promising to forget all old rancors, and to be
freends each to other, & both obedient to the king, were accorded by
award, wherof writings were sealed, signed, and deliuered to effect as
followeth.




The award made at Westminster on the three and twentith of March, Anno
regni regis 36.


[Sidenote: The clergie were sure in those daies to loose nothing by
these contentions howsoeuer the world went.]

First, that at the costs, charges, and expenses of the duke of Yorke,
the earles of Warwike, and Salisburie, fourtie & fiue pounds of
yearelie rent should be assured by waie of a mortisement for euer,
vnto the monasterie of S. Albons, for suffrages and obits to be
kept, and almes to be imploied for the soules of Edmund late duke of
Summerset, Henrie late erle of Northumberland, and Thomas late lord
Clifford late slaine in the battell of saint Albons, and buried in the
abbeie church, and also for the soules of all other slaine in the same
battell. The said duke of Summerset, the earle of Northumberland, and
lord Clifford, by vertue of the same award, were declared for true and
faithfull liegemen to the king, and so to be holden and reputed in the
daie of their deaths, aswell as the said duke of Yorke, the earles of
Warwike and Salisburie.

Moreouer it was decreed, that the duke of Yorke should giue to Elenor
duchesse of Summerset, and to Henrie duke of Summerset hir sonne, the
summe of fiue thousand markes of good assignements of debts, which the
king owght him for his wages, due during the time of his seruice in
Ireland, to be diuided as the king should thinke conuenient, betwixt
the brethren & sisters of the said duke of Summerset. Also that the
earle of Warwike should giue vnto the lord Clifford, the summe of a
thousand markes, in good and sufficient assignements of debts, which
the king owght him, to be distributed betwixt the said lord Clifford
his brethren and sisters.

[Sidenote: The lord Egremond.]

Also where Thomas Persie knight, lord Egremond, and Richard Persie his
brother, sonnes of the ladie Elenor countesse of Northumberland, had
been in a sessions holden within the countie of Yorke before Richard
Bingham, and Rafe Pole the kings iustices and other commissioners,
condemned vnto the earle of Salisburie in the summe of eight thousand
markes; and to the same earle, and to his wife Alice in the summe of
fiue thousand marks; and to Thomas Neuill knight, son to the said earle
of Salisburie, in the summe of a thousand marks; and to the said Thomas
and Mawd his wife, in the summe of two thousand marks; and to Iohn
Neuill knight, sonne to the said earle of Salisburie, in the summe of
eight hundred marks: for transgressions and trespasses there found to
be doone by the said lord Egremond, and Richard his brother, vnto the
said earle of Salisburie, Alice, Thomas Neuill, Mawd and Iohn Neuill,
as by the record appeered.

[Sidenote: They were shiriffes, an. 1456.]

It was ordeined, that the said earle and his sonnes should release all
the said summes of monie, and the executions thereof, and likewise
release vnto Rafe Verneie, and Iohn Steward late shiriffes of London,
vnto whose custodie the said lord Egremond had beene for the same
condemnations committed and from them escaped, all actions which they
or anie of them might haue against the said Verneie and Steward for
the same escape. Yet it was decreed by this award, that the said lord
Egremond should be bound by recognisance in the chancerie, to keepe
the peace toward the said erle and his wife, children, seruants, and
tenants.

Also were diuerse knights, esquiers, and other seruants and tenants to
the said earle of Northumberland, and to the said lord Egremond, were
by their seuerall obligations bound, by occasion of the said debates,
vnto the said duke of Yorke, earle of Salisburie, or anie of their
children, to stand to their order and gouernement; it was ordeined that
the same obligations should be deliuered to them that so stood bound,
before the feast of saint Peter ad vincula next insuing at the citie
of Yorke; or else that the parties so bound, should haue sufficient
acquitances in discharge of the same obligations.

It was further awarded, that all variances, discords, debates,
controuersies, appeales, and actions personals, that were or had beene
betwixt any of the said persons, or any of their seruants, or tenants,
should be for euer determined & ended, sauing to euerie one his title,
action and right, which he had by any euidence of arrerages of rents or
seruices, accounts, detinues, or debts due by reason of anie lawfull
contract or deed, had and made for anie reasonable considerations,
other than the variance before said.

And for the more assurance of both parties, it was ordeined that either
should release to other all maner of actions, that were meere personals
and appeales, which anie of them might haue against the other, by
reason of the variances and discords before mentioned.

Also it was decreed, that if anie action, sute or quarell chanced
betwixt anie of the seruants or tenants of anie of the parties, for
matter or title supposed to be had, occasioned or mooued before this
time; that from thenceforth, none of the said parties should mainteine,
support, or aid any of them that will so sue and mooue strife and
debate: but should rather so deale, as the matter may be brought to
peace and quietnesse.

It was further awarded, that if anie man complained, pretended, or
surmised, that this award was not kept, but in some point broken
by anie of the parties, for the which breach he would haue a Scire
facias, or some other action prosecuted in the kings name vpon anie
recognisance made to the king for the performance of this award: yet
should not the same Scire facias or action be prosecuted, till the
kings councell might be throughlie certified of the matter by the
complainant, and vpon consideration see iust cause whie the same Scire
facias, or action ought to be had and prosecuted in the kings name.

And if anie variance rose betwixt the councell of both the parties in
making of the recognisances, releases, acquittances, or other writings;
the same variance should be determined by the two lords cheefe
iustices, that should be fullie instructed of the kings intention in
this behalfe.

And besides this, it was notified and declared by the same award, that
the parties being seuerallie bound in the Chancerie in great sums to
obeie and performe this award, ordinance & iudgement made by the king;
it was the kings will and pleasure, that the same recognisances should
stand in force, and no parcels of the summes therein conteined to be
pardoned in anie wise, without the agreement and consent of the partie,
for whose assurance the same recognisance was taken.

And if anie of the said summes, or anie parcell thereof should be
recouered by action or execution taken and prosecuted in the kings
name, vpon anie of the said recognisances; the partie to whose
hinderance the award was broken, should haue the one halfe of the monie
so recouered; and the other moitie should be assigned to the treasuror
of the kings house. [pilcrow] This ordinance, award and agreement, was giuen vp
vnder the kings great seale, at the kings palace of Westminster, the
foure and twentith daie of March in the six and thirtith yeare of his
reigne.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: A solemne procession at Paules.]

[Sidenote: 1459]

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 37.]

[Sidenote: _W. P._]

For the open publishing of this ioifull agreement, there was (vpon
our ladie daie in March) a solemne procession celebrated within the
cathedrall church of saint Paule in London, at the which the king was
present in habit roiall, with his crowne on his head. Before him went
hand in hand the duke of Summerset, the earle of Salisburie, the duke
of Excester, and the earle of Warwike; and so one of the one faction,
and another of the other: and behind the king the duke of Yorke, and
the queene with great familiaritie in appeerance leading hand in hand.
[But what shall be said? As goodlie apples corrupted at core, (how
faire coated so euer they seeme) can neuer be made to become sound
againe: nor rotten walles new plastered without, can euer the more
staie their mooldering inward, till the putrified matter fret through
the crust laie all in the mire: so fared it on all parts in this
dissembled and counterfet concord.] For after this apparant peace (but
inward discord) diuerse of the nobles smallie regarding their honors,
forgot their oth, and brake their promise boldlie.

[Sidenote: The earle of Warwike assaulted.]

[Sidenote: The queenes purpose.]

Not long after this, of pretensed purpose (as it was thought) a fraie
was made vpon a yeoman of the earle of Warwiks, by one of the kings
seruants, in the which the assailant was sore hurt, but the earles
man fled. Heerevpon the kings meniall seruants, seeing their fellow
hurt, and the offendor escaped, assembled togither and watched the
earle, when he returned from the councell chamber toward his barge,
and suddenlie set on him, the yeomen with swords, the blacke gard
with spits and fierforks. After long fight, and manie of the earls
men maimed and hurt, by helpe of his freends he gat a wherrie, and
so escaped to London. The queene aduertised heerof, incontinentlie
commanded that he should be apprehended and committed to the tower,
where (if he had beene taken) he had shortlie ended his daies.

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: The earle of Warwike lord admerall.]

By this vnhappie fraie, there arose anon after such trouble and
terrible warre, that the whole realme was thereby disquieted. For
after this displeasure doone to the earle, and the queenes good mind
towards him by his secret freends reuealed; he with all diligence tooke
his iournie to Warwike, and after into Yorkeshire, where he found the
duke of Yorke, and the earle of Salisburie, declaring vnto them the
assault made vpon him by the kings seruants, and the pretensed euill
purpose of the queene. After which complaint made, he fearing to be
dispossessed of his roome at Calis, with great speed imbarked himselfe
and sailed thither. He was not onelie deputie or lieutenant of Calis,
but also high admerall of the seas, which office was to him confirmed
for the space of fiue yeares. Wherevpon, whether before his arriuall
now at Calis, or shortlie after, I cannot say; but this yeare about
the middest of summer, the said earle, hauing with him a foureteene
well appointed ships, sailed abroad to scowre the seas, and by chance
met with fiue great ships, whereof three were caraks of Genoa, and the
other two were of Spaine, bigger in heigth and length than the caraks.

[Sidenote: A rich prise.]

The earle, though he was scarse able to deale against them, yet he
valiantlie incountred them. There was a verie sore and long continued
battell fought betwixt them, for it lasted almost the space of two
daies. Yet in the end the victorie fell to the English, so that two
of those ships being forced to saue themselues by flight, the other
three were taken, which the earle brought vnto Calis, with all the
merchandize aboord the same; the value whereof in wine, oile, wax,
iron, cloth of gold, and other riches, was esteemed to the summe of
ten thousand pounds & aboue. By reason whereof, that was sold now
for twelue pense, which would not haue beene bought before for two
shillings. There were taken a great number of prisoners, beside a
thousand of the enimies slaine in fight. Of the earles part there were
fiftie slaine. The earles fame heereby increased not a little, and
manie a blessing he had for this peece of seruice.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S. pag. 686, 687._]

[Sidenote: Printing first inuented.]

[Sidenote: It rained bloud.]

[pilcrow] The noble science of Printing was about this time found in Germanie
at Magunce by one Iohn Cuthembergus a knight: one Conradus an Almaine
brought it into Rome: William Caxton of London mercer brought it into
England about the yeare 1471: and first practised the same in the
abbie of saint Peter at Westminster; after which time it was likewise
practised in the abbies of S. Augustine at Canturburie, saint Albons,
and other monasteries of England. In a little towne in Bedfordshire
there fell a bloudie raine, whereof the red drops appeered in sheets,
the which a woman had hanged out for to drie.

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 38.]

[Sidenote: The earle of Salisburie gathereth a power.]

[Sidenote: Three thousand saith _Whethamsted_.]

But now to the former purpose. After that the earle was gone ouer
to Calis, the duke of Yorke and the earle of Salisburie, falling in
consultation togither, it was at length agreed betwixt them, with
aduise of their freends, that the said earle of Salisburie with a
warlike companie should march toward the king; and signifie to him by
waie of complaint, both the manifest iniurie doone to his sonne, and
also the vncourteous breach of the sworne amitie and late agreement. In
which sute if he preuailed, he should not then let passe the occasion
giuen for reuenge of displeasures to him doone, both by the queene and
hir sinister councellors. After conclusion of this deuise, the earle of
Salisburie remooued from Middleham castell, accompanied with foure or
fiue thousand men, and tooke his waie through Lancashire, to passe that
waie towards London.

[Sidenote: The lord Audelie.]

[Sidenote: _Ex vetusto codice._]

In the meane season, the queene, assisted and ruled by the dukes of
Summerset and Buckingham, hauing a vigilant eie to all hir businesse,
imagined that the earle of Warwike had kindled this fier, to the intent
to set the crowne on the duke of Yorks head. Wherefore she appointed
Iames Twichet lord Audelie (bicause his power laie in those parties
by the which the earle of Salisburie must passe) to raise an hoast of
men with all speed, and to giue battell to the same earle, if he saw
cause and place conuenient. She had deuised a cognisance of the white
swan, which she willed all such (as she knew to beare fauor vnto hir
sonne) to weare, for a signification of their good minds and hartie
loue towards him: which cognisance she had giuen to manie gentlemen of
Chesshire, and other countries thereabout.

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: Bloreheath.]

The queene hir selfe laie the same time at Ecclesale in Staffordshire,
but the K. remained at Colleshill in Warwikeshire, whither the earle
of Salisburie meant to come, in pretense to haue communed with him for
a reformation of matters depending in controuersie betwixt himselfe,
the duke of Yorke, and others. But the queene construing that they ment
no good, neither to hir nor hir husband, requested the lord Audelie to
apprehend him, if by anie means he might. The lord Audelie (according
to his commission) assembled aboue ten thousand men of Chesshire and
Salopshire, and knowing by his espials which waie the earle kept,
approached neere to him vpon a faire plaine called Bloreheath, within
a mile of a towne called Draiton in Shropshire. The earle, perceiuing
in what ieopardie he stood, determined to abide the aduenture with
fame and honour, rather than to flie with shame and reproach; and so
incamped himselfe all the night on the side of a little brooke, not
verie brode, but somewhat deepe.

[Sidenote: The 23 of September.]

[Sidenote: Policie oft times passeth force.]

[Sidenote: The lord Audelie slaine.]

In the morning earlie, being the daie of saint Tecle, he caused his
souldiers to shoot their flights towards the lord Audelies companie,
which laie on the other side of the said water, and then he and all
his people made a signe of retreit. The lord Audelie, supposing his
aduersaries had fled in deed, caused his trumpets quicklie to blow vp,
and setting foorth his voward, speedilie passed the water. The earle
of Salisburie, which knew the sleights of warlike policie, suddenlie
returned, and set vpon the lord Audelie and his cheefe capteins, yer
the residue of his armie could passe the water. The fight was sore
and dreadfull. The earle desiring the sauing of his life, and his
aduersaries coueting his destruction, fought sore for the obteining of
their purpose: but in conclusion, the earles armie, as men not looking
for other succours nor meane to escape, but by their owne manhood, so
egerlie assaulted their foes, that they slue the lord Audelie and all
his capteins, and discomfited all the remnant of his people.

[Sidenote: The number slaine in the battell of Bloreheath.]

[Sidenote: The earle of Salisburies sonne apprehended.]

In this battell were slaine foure and twentie hundred persons, but
the greatest losse fell vpon the Chesshire men, bicause one halfe
of the shire was on the one part, and the other halfe on the other:
of which number were sir Thomas Dutton, sir Iohn Doune and sir Hugh
Venables, sir Richard Molineux, sir William Trowtbecke, sir Iohn Legh
of the Both, and sir Iohn Egerton, knights; Iohn Done, and Iohn Dutton
esquiers. But the earles two sonnes, the one called sir Iohn Neuill,
and the other sir Thomas Neuill, were sore wounded, the which soberlie
iornieng into the north countrie, were apprehended by the queenes
freends, and togither with sir Thomas Harington that was likewise
taken, were conueied to Chester; but their keepers deliuered them
shortlie after, or else had the Marchmen destroied the goales. Such
fauour bare the commons of Wales to the duke of Yorks band, that they
could not suffer anie wrong to be offered, or euill word to be spoken
against him or his freends.

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke assembleth an armie.]

After this battell at Bloreheath, the said duke of Yorke, perceiuing
the destruction of him and his freends was intended, and that his
deuises were alreadie disclosed to the king and the queene, he thought
now no longer to linger his businesse, but with all diligence to set
forward the same. And therfore sending for his cheefe freend the earle
of Salisburie, after long conference of their weightie affaires, they
determined to raise an armie, and by fine force either to win their
purpose, or end their liues in the same. Heerevpon were men foorthwith
assembled, freends sent for, and a puissant armie gathered, both
of Northerne and Welshmen, who in good order came into the marches
of Wales adioining to Shropshire, determining there to abide their
enimies, or to meet them; if occasion serued.

[Sidenote: Andrew Trollop.]

[Sidenote: Iohn Blunt.]

[Sidenote: The king raiseth an armie.]

There came to him from Calis the earle of Warwike bringing with him
from that towne a great number of expert men in martiall feates,
whereof two were capteins knowne for men of great experience and
approoued policie, as they had well declared the same in the warres of
Normandie and Guien, the one called Andrew Trollop, and the other Iohn
Blunt. The king, hauing aduertisement of the dukes dooings, sent foorth
commissioners to leuie a power in all parts of the realme, where he
thought to haue any faithfull freends or fauourers: by reason whereof
a great number of men of warre was assembled. Manie for the loue they
bare to the king resorted to his side, but more for feare of the
queenes displesure, whose frowning countenance was their vndooing, and
hir indignation their death.

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: The bishop of Salisburie sent to the duke of Yorke and
others.]

To be breefe, the king accompanied with the dukes of Summerset and
Excester, and other of the line of Lancaster, determined either by
force or by policie to bring the duke of Yorke to confusion; and
therevpon marching forward they came vnto Worcester, where as well
to refresh his people, as to take further aduise what was best to be
doone, he staied for a time. And at length it was determined, that the
K. should first send vnto the aduersaries, a messenger of good account,
as the bishop of Salisburie Richard Beauchampe, to offer vnto them
a cleere and free generall pardon of all trespasses, offenses, and
transgressions whatsoeuer; if they would giue ouer their enterprise,
and become true and obedient subiects.

[Sidenote: Their answer touching the pardon offred.]

When the bishop was come vnto them, and had declared his message,
they first withdrew themselues apart, and fell togither in councell:
and after they gaue answer by the mouth of the erle of Warwike, which
consisted in three points. First, that as concerning the pardon, they
durst not trust vnto it, considering they had diuerse pardons before,
and the same confirmed by parlement, and yet nothing auaileable to
their assurance. Secondlie, that notwithstanding such pardons, those
that were about the king, were persumptuous and vnrulie, that they
cared not at all to breake the kings commandements, nor were any thing
abashed to be noted for the breach thereof.

Thirdlie, although by law of the land, and right of the statute, euerie
lord by vertue of the kings writ, being called to the parlement, ought
safelie to come, safelie there to remaine, and safelie to depart
and returne home: this notwithstanding, the said earle of Warwike
himselfe, at a certeine councell holden at Westminster, by vertue of
the kings writ of priuie seale, being there in person, & labouring to
his knowledge to giue good aduise and councell for the profit of the
common-wealth, was yet in danger of death, if the Lord aboue had not
the better prouided for his escape, more than anie humane power or
force of the kings pardon. "For the which cause (quoth he) sith the
kings pardon maie be likened in these daies to a buckler of glasse,
or to a staffe of reed, in which is no trust, we dare not commit our
selues vnto the defense of anie such pardons." But if anie other waie
might be deuised for their suerties, wherevnto they might safelie trust
(he said) they were readie to come to his grace, and to sue for his
fauour.

[Sidenote: A letter from the lords to the king.]

The king receiuing such answer in these words, or other to the like
effect, was nothing contented therewith, and so commanded his standards
eftsoones to aduance. But yet before he came neere to the place where
they were incamped, the said lords wrote to him a letter in their owne
excuse, protesting they meant no harme in the world against his person,
as by their demeanors and proceedings it might well appeare, who had
euer fled & withdrawne themselues from place to place, from towne to
towne, from village to village, and from countie to countie. Which
might serue for an euident token, that they sought for nothing but
onelie their owne safegards & quietnesse of the realme, with so much
fauour, as in good and safe suertie they might come to his presence,
to declare certeine things which in their opinions might turne to the
wealth of the realme: and further to make answer to all things that had
beene obiected against them. And now (said they) we are here remaining
in the vttermost parts of the land (that is) in the marches towards
Wales, not farre from Ludlow, not vpon anie presumptuous meaning, but
rather in all humble lowlinesse of mind and bodie to abide his graces
comming: which they besought of God might be in some peaceable maner
and fauourable in their behalfes.

[Sidenote: A proclamation.]

The king hauing receiued this letter, and coniecturing that some bitter
meaning laie vnder so sweet a speech, c[=o]manded his armie againe
to march foorth; and comming within halfe a mile of the aduersaries
campe, pitched downe his field, and foorthwith caused proclamation to
be made, that who so euer of his aduersaries would giue ouer his lewd
begun enterprise, and repaire to his presence to sue for mercie, he
would pardon him of all offenses. This proclamation, comming to the
vnderstanding of them in the duke of Yorks hoast, caused a great number
that were there with him against the king, to get awaie & come to the
kings side. Moreouer, there rose among the residue great murmuring: so
as they seemed verie like to grow to a greeuous mutinie.

[Sidenote: Andrew Trollop forsaketh the lords.]

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

Amongst other of those that came to the kings campe, Andrew Trollop was
cheefe, who with the other Calisians, which had long serued the king,
and liued a long time by his wages, perceiuing now that they should
fight against their souereigne lord himselfe (whose true subject they
esteemed before that time the earle of Warwike euer to haue beene,
and in no wise his enimie) in the dead of the night before the daie
of the battell secretlie departed from the dukes campe, and submitted
themselues to the king, admonishing him of all things deuised against
him. Wherof part was, that the duke of Yorke by his expert capteins
appointed vpon a waie how to set vpon his enimies, & easilie to
discomfitt them; so as on the next morning he meant to haue assailed
the king and his people, yer they could haue beene readie or warie of
his comming.

[Sidenote: The estimation of Andrew Trollop.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke and his complices flee.]

But now by the going awaie thus of his capteins and people, that
purpose was disappointed. And Andrew Trollop thus departed, he was now
as much discomforted, as before by trust in him he was incouraged: for
all his councell and purpose by Andrew disclosed, he thought it better
for him & his to depart in suertie, than to abide the imminent danger.
Whervpon he with his yoonger sonne Edmund earle of Rutland, secretlie
fled into Wales, and so passed into Ireland, where he was with all ioy
and honour gladlie receiued, all the Irish offering to liue and die
with him; as if they had beene his liege subiects, and he their lord
and prince naturallie borne.

The earle of March sonne and heire apparant to the said duke,
accompanied with the earles of Salisburie and Warwike, and sir Iohn
Wenlocke, got awaie the same night, and came into Deuonshire: where,
by the meanes of Iohn Dinham esquier (which after was high treasuror
of England, in the daies of king Henrie the seauenth) they bought a
ship which cost a hundred and ten marks at Exmouth, and sailed into
Gerneseie, after came to Calis, where being let in at the posterne,
they were ioifullie welcomed of their freends, namelie of sir William
Neuill lord Fauconbridge, that was the earle of Warwikes vncle, and
brother to the earle of Salisburie, who had the towne and castell in
keeping. All these being assembled cast their heads togither, and
euerie one seuerallie had his deuise for the perfecting of their
purpose, whereto there wanted in them neither will nor hardinesse.

[Sidenote: The lords proclamed traitors.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Summerset made capteine of Calis.]

But now to returne to the king. When in the morning he was aduertised
that the duke of Yorke and his partakers were fled and gone, he caused
all his horssemen to follow them; although in vaine: for they were got
farre enough out of danger (as before ye haue heard.) The king pardoned
all the poore souldiers, sauing certeine ringleaders; of the which some
he punished and fined, and some he hanged and quartered. After this he
remooued to Ludlow, and there brake vp his host, and spoiling the towne
and castell, he sent the duchesse of Yorke with hir two yoong sonnes to
be kept in ward with the duchesse of Buckingham hir sister. This doone,
he proclamed these lords, traitors to him, enimies to their countrie,
and rebels to the crowne, confiscating their lands, goods, and offices:
and committed the gouernance of the north parts to the earle of
Northumberland, and to the lord Clifford, as to his trustie and most
faithfull freends, & of his towne of Calis he made capteine Henrie the
new duke of Summerset.

[Sidenote: Hastie heading.]

This duke reioising much in his new office, chose foorth diuerse
valiant and hardie souldiers, and with great pompe shortlie after
tooke the seas, and sailed towards Calis. But when he thought to haue
entred the hauen, the artillerie shot so hotlie, both out of the
towne, and from Risebanke, that he suffering there a sore repulse,
was faine to land at Whitsandbaie; and sent word to the capteins of
the towne to receiue him as the kings lieutenant, shewing to them his
letters patents. But neither he nor his writing was once regarded:
and so of necessitie he resorted to the castell of Guisnes, dailie
skirmishing with the garrison of Calis, more to his losse than gaine.
Diuerse of the mariners of those ships that went ouer with him, after
his arriuall, owing more good will to the earle of Warwike than to
this yoong duke, conueied their ships into the hauen of Calis, and in
them diuerse of the earle of Warwikes enimies, as Iamin Findill, Iohn
Felow, and diuerse others, the which being presented vnto the earle of
Warwike, he caused their heads foorth with to be striken off.

[Sidenote: Iohn Dinham.]

[Sidenote: The lord Riuers taken.]

[Sidenote: _Iohn Stow._]

Shortlie after, Richard lord Riuers, and sir Anthonie Wooduile his
valiant sonne that was after lord Scales, accompanied with foure
hundred warlike persons, were appointed to passe over to Guisnes,
to aid the duke of Summerset against his aduersaries, which laie
in Calis. But as they soiourned at Sandwich abiding for wind and
weather to transport them ouer, the earles of March and Warwike had
knowledge thereof, and sent Iohn Dinham with a small number of men
(but a multitude of valiant hearts) vnto the towne of Sandwich, which
suddenlie entered the same, and tooke the lord Riuers and his sonne
also in their beds, robbing houses, and spoiling ships. And beside
this, they tooke the principall ships of the kings nauie, and had them
awaie with them to Calis [one excepted called Grace de Dieu which
might not be had awaie bicause she was broken in the bottome] and
there presented them to the earle of March, of whome he was ioifullie
receiued. For though in the fight he was sore hurt & maimed in the leg,
so as he halted euer after, yet he bare himselfe so worthilie in that
enterprise, that his praise was great amongst all men.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S. pag. 692._]

[Sidenote: 1460]

[Sidenote: Sir Baldwine Fulford his enterprise.]

[pilcrow] Sir Baldwine Fulford vndertooke on paine of loosing his head, that
he would destroie the earle of Warwike: but when he had spent the king
a thousand marks in monie, he returned againe. After this good fortune
thus chanced to the lords, diuerse of the best ships taken in the hauen
of Sandwich, were well vittelled and manned, and with them the earle of
Warwike sailed into Ireland, to common with the duke of Yorke of their
great affaires and businesse. The weather and wind were so fauourable
to the earles purpose, that within lesse than thirtie daies he passed
and repassed from Calis to Dublin, and backe againe.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S. pag. 688, 689, 690, 691._]

The duke of Excester, being cheefe admerall of the sea, laie in the
west countrie, and durst not once meddle with the earle of Warwikes
nauie, as he came by; by reason of the mistrust which he had in the
capteins and mariners of his owne nauie: who by their murmuring well
shewed that they wished the earle of Warwikes good successe. [pilcrow] But here
is to be remembred, that after the great discomfiture of the lords (as
before you haue heard) and proclamation made against them as traitors,
the duke of Yorke and the earles of Salisburie and Warwike had
conference; and therevpon concluded with one assent, to write a letter
excusatorie (supposing thereby to salue vp the sore) in all their names
to the king: and so did, as followeth:




A copie of the said letter excusatorie written by the said duke and
earles.


Most Christian king, right high and mightie prince, and our most
dread souereigne lord, after as humble recommendations to your high
excellencie as will suffice. Our true intent to the prosperitie and
augmentation of your high estate, and to the common-weale of this
realme, hath beene shewed vnto your highnesse in such writing as we
make thereof. And ouer that, an indenture signed by our hands in the
church cathedrall of Worcester, comprehending the proofe of the truth
and dutie that (God knoweth) we beare to your said estate, and to the
preheminence and prerogatiue thereof, we sent vnto your good grace by
the prior of the said church, and diuerse other doctors, and among
other, by maister William Linwood doctor of diuinitie, which ministred
vnto vs seuerallie the blessed sacrament of the bodie of Iesus,
wherevpon we and euerie of vs deposed for our said truth and dutie,
according to the tenor of the said indenture.

And since that time we haue certified at large in writing and by mouth,
by Garter king of armes, not onelie to your said highnesse, but also
to the good and worthie lords being about your most noble presence,
the largenesse of our said truth and dutie, and our intent and
disposition, to search all the motions that might serue conuenientlie
to the affirmation thereof, and to our perfect suerties from such
inconuenient and vnreuerent ieopardies as we haue beene put in diuerse
times here before. Whereof we haue cause to make, and ought to make
such exclamation and complaint, not without reason, as is not vnknowen
to all the said worthie lords, and to all this land; and will offer vs
to your high presence, to the same intent, if we might so doo, with our
said suertie, which onelie causeth vs to keepe such fellowship as we
doo in our leeful manner.

And hereto we haue forborne, and auoided all things that might serue
to the effusion of christian bloud, of the dread that we haue of God,
and of your roiall maiestie: and haue also eschued to approch your
said most noble presence, for the humble obeisance and reuerence
wherein we haue, and (during our life) will haue the same. And yet
neuerthelesse we heare, that we be proclamed and defamed in our name
vnrightlie, vnlawfullie, and (sauing your high reuerence) vntrulie,
and otherwise (as God knoweth) than we haue giuen cause; knowing
certeinelie, that the blessed and noble intent of your said good grace,
and righteousnesse thereof is, to take repute; and accept your true
and lawfull subiects; and that it accordeth neither with your said
intent, nor with your will or pleasure, that we should be otherwise
taken or reputed. And ouer that, our lordships and tenants beene of
high violence robbed and spoiled, against your peace and lawes, and all
righteousnesse.

We therfore, as we suffice, beseech your said good grace, to take,
repute, and receiue therevnto our said truth and intent, which to God
is knowne, as we shew it by the said tenor of the same indenture.
And not applie your said blessednesse, ne the great righteousnesse
and equitie wherewith God hath euer indued your high nobilitie, to
the importune impatience and violence of such persons, as intend of
extreame malice to proceed (vnder the shadow of your high might and
presence) to our destruction, for such inordinate couetise (whereof
God is not pleased) as they haue to our lands, offices, and goods, not
letting or sparing therefore, to put such things in all lamentable
and too sorowfull ieopardie, as might in all wise take effect, by the
mysterie of Gods will and power.

Not hauing regard to the effusion of christian bloud, ne anie
tendernesse to the noble bloud of this land, such as serue to the
tuition and defence thereof, ne not waieng the losse of your true liege
men of your said realme, that God defend, which knoweth our intent, and
that we haue auoided there-from as farre as we may with our suerties;
not of anie dread that we haue of the said persons, but onelie of the
dread of God and of your said highnesse, and will not vse our said
defense vntill the time that we be prouoked of necessitie, whereof we
call heauen and earth vnto witnesse and record, and therein beseech
God to be our iudge, and to deliuer vs according to our said intent,
and our said truth & dutie to your said highnesse, and to the said
common-weale.

Most christian king, right high and mightie prince, and most dread
souereigne lord we beseech our blessed Lord to preserue your honour
and estate in ioy and felicitie. Written at Ludlow the tenth daie of
October: R. Yorke, R. Warwike, R. Salisburie.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: A parlement at Couentrie.]

[Sidenote: Duke of Yorke and others attainted.]

[Sidenote: Ludlow spoiled.]

During this time the king called a parlement in the citie of Couentrie,
which began the twentith of September, in the which were attainted of
high treason, Richard duke of Yorke, Edward erle of March his sonne and
heire, Richard earle of Warwike, Edmund earle of Rutland, Richard earle
of Salisburie, Iohn lord Clifford, lord Clinton, sir Thomas Harington,
sir Iohn Wenlock, Thomas Neuill & Iohn Neuill sons of the earle of
Salisburie, Iames Pickering, Iohn Coniers, Thomas Par, William Oldhall,
and Henrie Ratford knights; Iohn Bowser, Thomas Cooke, Iohn Claie,
Richard Giton, Robert Browne, Edward Bowser, Thomas Vaughan, Iohn
Roger, Richard Greie, Walter Deuoreux, Walter Hopton, Roger Kinderton,
Will. Bowes, Foulke Stafford, the lord Powis, and Alice countesse of
Salisburie, their goods and possessions escheted, and their heires
disherited vnto the ninth degree, their tenants spoiled of their goods,
maimed and slaine; the towne of Ludlow, belonging to the duke of Yorke,
was robbed to the bare wals, & the dutches of Yorke spoiled of hir
goods.

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: The kings inclination to mercie.]

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl._]

But (saith another) when the king should come to giue his consent vnto
the acts passed in the same parlement, and that the clerke of the
parlement had read that statute of the attaindor of those lords; such
was the kings modestie and great zeale vnto mercie, that he caused a
prouiso to be put in, and added vnto the same statute, that it might
be lawfull vnto him at all times fullie without authoritie of anie
other parlement, to pardon the same noble men, and restore them againe
to their former estats, degrees, and dignities in all things, so they
would come in vnto him, and in the spirit of humblenesse beseech him
of grace and fauour. [pilcrow] Wherin the king gaue euident testimonie, that
he was indued with those qualities of mind which the poet ascribed
vnto Cesar (namelie slow to punish, & sad when he was constreined to
be seuere: sith the one commended his lenitie, the other sauoured of
tyrannie) in this distichon of like termination:

[Sidenote: _Ouid. de Ponto. lib. 1._]

    Est piger ad poenas princeps, ad praemia velox,
    Cuiq; dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox.

[Sidenote: Osbert M[=o]tford esquier saith _Whethamsted_, who should
also haue gone ouer to Guines with fiue hundred souldiers to the aid of
the duke of Summerset.]

[Sidenote: The lord Fauc[=o]bridge was chiefe of this enterprise saith
_Whethamsted_.]

[Sidenote: Thirteene beheaded at once.]

Herewith also order was taken for the defense of the hauens & landing
places alongst the sea coasts. Sir Simon Montford, with a great crew
of men, was appointed to keepe the downes, and the fiue ports; and all
men passing into Flanders were vpon paine of death prohibited to passe
by Calis, least the lords there should borrow of them anie prest monie,
as they did latelie before of the merchants of the staple the summe
of eighteene thousand pounds. The lords were not ignorant of all the
kings prouisions made against them, but were ascertained dailie what
was doone euen in the kings priuie chamber: wherefore first they sent a
companie to Sandwich vnder the gouernance of the lord Fauconbridge, who
tooke the towne, & sir Simon or Osbert Montford within it, and sent him
with all his mates to Calis, where incontinentlie he with twelue of his
chiefe fellowes lost their heads on the sand before Risebanke.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S. pag. 695, 698, 694, 695, 696, 697, in
Quart._]

[pilcrow] The earles at Calis sent to the archbishop of Canturburie, and to the
commons of England at large certeine articles in writing, beginning
thus: Worshipfull sirs, we the duke of Yorke, the earles of March,
Warwike, and Salisburie, sued and offered to haue come to the king our
souereigne lords most noble presence, to haue declared there afore him
for our dutie to God and to his highnesse, and to the prosperitie and
welfare of his noble estate, and to the common-weale of all his land as
true liege men, the matters following.




Articles sent from the duke of Yorke, and the earles, to the archbishop
of Canturburie and the commons.


In primis, the great oppression, extortion, robberie, murther, and
other violences doone to Gods church, and to his ministers thereof,
against Gods and mans law.

2 Item, the pouertie and miserie that to our great heauinesse our
souereigne lord standeth in, not hauing anie liuelod of the crowne of
England whereof he may keepe his honorable houshold, which causeth the
spoiling of his said liege men by the takers of his said houshold,
which liuelod is in their hands that haue beene destroiers of his said
estate, and of the said common-weale.

3 Item, how his lawes be parciallie and vnrightfullie guided, and
that by them that should most loue and tender his said lawes, the
said oppression and extortion is most fauoured and supported; and
generallie, that all righteousnesse and iustice is exiled out of the
said land, and that no man dreadeth to offend against the said lawes.

4 Item, that it will please his said good grace to liue vpon his owne
liuelod, wherevpon his noble progenitors haue in daies heretofore liued
as honorablie and as worthilie as anie christian princes, and not to
suffer the destroiers of the said land, and of his true subiects, to
liue therevpon, and therefore to lacke the sustenances that should be
belonging to his said estate, and find his said houshold vpon his poore
commons, without paiement, which neither accordeth with Gods nor mans
law.

5 Item, how oft the said commons haue beene greatlie and maruellouslie
charged with taxes and tallages to their great impouerishing, whereof
little good hath either growne to the king or to the said land, and of
the most substance thereof the king hath left to his part not halfe so
much; and other lords and persons, enimies to the said common-weale,
haue to their owne vse, suffering all the old possessions that the king
had in France and Normandie, Aniou and Maine, Gascoine, and Guien,
woone and gotten by his father of most noble memorie, and other his
noble progenitors, to be shamefullie lost or sold.

6 Item, how they can not ceasse therewith, but now begin a new charge
of imposition and tallages vpon the said people, which neuer afore was
seene; that is to saie, euerie towneship to find men for the kings
gard, taking example therein of our enimies and aduersaries of France.
Which imposition & tallage, if it be continued to heire, heires, and
successors, will be the heauiest charge and worst example that euer
grew in England; and the foresaid subiects, and the said heires and
successors in such bondage, as their ancestors were neuer charged with.

7 Item, where the king hath now no more liuelod out of his realme
of England, but onelie the land of Ireland, and the towne of Calis,
and that no king christened hath such a land and a towne without his
realme; diuerse lords haue caused his highnesse to write letters vnder
his priuie seale, vnto his Irish enimies, which neuer king of England
did heretofore, wherby they may haue comfort to enter into the conquest
of the said land, which letters the same Irish enimies sent vnto me
the said duke of Yorke, and maruelled greatlie that anie such letters
should be to them sent, speaking therin great shame and villanie of the
said realme.

8 Item, in like wise the king by excitation and labour of the same
lords, wrote other letters to his enimies and aduersaries in other
lands, that in no wise they should shew anie fauour or good will to
the towne of Calis, whereby they had comfort inough to proceed to the
winning thereof. Considered also, that it is ordeined by the labour of
the said lords, that no where vittels nor other thing of refreshing
or defense should come out of England, to the succour or reliefe of
the said towne, to the intent that they would haue it lost, as it may
openlie appeare.

9 Item, it is deemed and ought greatlie to be deemed, that after the
same lords would put the same rule of England, if they might haue their
purpose and intent, into the hands and gouernance of the said enimies.

10 Item, how continuallie since the pitious, shamefull, and sorrowfull
murther to all England, of that noble, worthie, and christian prince
Humfreie duke of Glocester the kings true vncle, at Burie, it hath
beene laboured, studied and conspired, to haue destroied and murthered
the said duke of Yorke, and the issue that it pleased God to send
me of the roiall bloud, and also of vs the said earles of Warwike
and Salisburie, for none other cause but for the true hart that (God
knoweth) we euer haue borne, and beare to the profit of the kings
estate, to the common-weale of the same realme, and defense thereof.

11 Item, how the earles of Shrewesburie and Wilshire, and the lord
Beaumont, our mortall and extreme enimies now, and of long time past,
hauing the guiding about the most noble person of our said souereigne
lord, whose highnesse they haue restreined & kept from the libertie
& freedome that belongeth to his said estate, & the supporters &
fauourers of all the premisses, would not suffer the kings said good
grace to receiue and accept vs, as he would haue doone, if he might
haue had his owne will, into his said presence, dreading the charge
that would haue beene laid vpon them, of the miserie, destruction, and
wretchednesse of the said realme, whereof they be causes, and not the
king, which is himselfe as noble, as vertuous, as righteous and blessed
of disposition, as anie prince earthlie.

12 Item, the earles of Wilshire and Shrewesburie, and the lord
Beaumont, not satisfied nor content with the kings possessions and his
goods, stirred and excited his said highnesse to hold his parlement
at Couentrie, where an act is made by their prouocation and labour,
against vs the said duke of Yorke, my sonnes March and Rutland, and
the earles of Warwike and Salisburie, and the sonnes of the said earle
of Salisburie, and manie other knights and esquiers of diuerse matters
falselie and vntrulie imagined, as they will answer afore almightie
God in the daie of doome; the which the said earles of Shrewesburie &
Wilshire, and the lord Beaumont prouoked to be made, to the intent of
our destruction and of our issue; and that they might haue our liuelod
and goods, as they haue openlie robbed and despoiled all our places and
our tenements, and manie other true men, and now proceed to hanging
and drawing of men by tyrannie, and will therin shew the largenesse of
their violence and malice as vengeablie as they can, if no remedie be
prouided at the kings highnes, whose blessednes is neither assenting
nor knowing thereof.

We therefore, seeing all the said michiefes, hearing also that the
French king maketh in his land great assemblie of his people, which is
greatlie to be dread for manie causes, purpose yet againe with Gods
grace to offer vs to come againe to the said presence of our said
souereigne lord to open and declare vnto him there, the mischiefes
aboue declared; and in the name of the land to sue, in as reuerent
and lowlie wise as we can, to his said good grace, to haue pittie and
compassion vpon his said true subiects, and not to suffer the same
mischiefs to reigne vpon them. Requiring you in Gods behalfe, and
praieng you in our owne, therein to assist vs, dooing alwaie the dutie
of liege men in our persons to our souereigne lord, to his estate,
prerogatiue, and preheminence, and to the suertie of his most noble
person, wherevnto we haue euer beene and will be as true as anie of his
subiects aliue, whereof we call God, our ladie saint Marie, and all the
saints in heauen to witnesse.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The earle of Wilshire and other spoiled Newberie.]

[Sidenote: The earle of Wilshire stale ouer the seas.]

[Sidenote: Priuie seales for monie.]

In the meane time, the earle of Wilshire treasuror of England, the lord
Scales & the lord Hungerford went to Newberie, which belonged to the
duke of Yorke, and there made inquisition of all them that in anie wise
had fauoured the said duke; whereof some were found guiltie, and were
drawen, hanged, and quartered, and all the inhabitants of the towne
were spoiled of their goods. From thence the earle of Wilshire went to
Southampton; where, vnder colour to take the earle of Warwike, he armed
fiue great caracks of Iene with souldiers, taking vittels of the kings
price without paiment, and put a great part of his treasure into the
said caracks, and after sailed about in the sea, and at last stale into
Dutchland, sending backe againe his souldiers into England. Then were
the kings priuie seales directed to all bishops, abbats, priors, and
other states, to lend the king monie, therewith to wage souldiers to
keepe the sea coasts.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Flem._]

After the kings nauie was gained, and his capteins (as before yee haue
heard) on the sea taken; the lords lieng at Calis, being aduertised
from the lord Fauconbridge (who after the taking of Montford laie
still in Kent) that the people of that countrie and other parts were
altogither bent in their fauour [and no lesse addicted to doo them
seruice both with bodie and goods, than the Irishmen seemed to be at
their receiuing of the said duke of Yorke, and his yoonger sonne Edmund
earle of Rutland, whom they so highlie honoured, that they offered to
liue and die in their quarell] they conceiued therevpon so great hope
in their freends within the realme, that they determined to passe the
sea, and therewith entring their ships with fifteene hundred men landed
all at Sandwich.

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S. pag. 697._]

[Sidenote: The men of Kent sent to Calis for the earles.]

[But it is to be read in a late writer, that the commons of Kent
dreading the like vengeance towards them, as fell vpon them of
Newburie, sent priuilie messengers to Calis to the foresaid erles,
beseeching them in all hast possible to come to their succour.
Wherevpon the said earles sent ouer into Kent the lord Fauconbridge,
to know if their deeds would accord with their words: so that anon
the people of Kent and the other shires adioining, resorted to the
said lord Fauconbridge in great number. Wherefore when the earles knew
the willing harts of those people, they prepared to come into this
land. Against whose comming, a long ballet was fixed vpon the gates of
Canturburie, made in fauour of the duke of Yorke and the said earles,
beginning thus: In the daie of fast and spirituall affliction, the
celestiall influence of bodies transitorie, &c.

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: 1460]

Now as they passed through Kent, there came to them the lord Cobham,
Iohn Gilford, William Pech, Robert Horne, and manie other gentlemen;
so that before they approched to London, their number was esteemed
aboue fourtie thousand fighting men for the fame of their landing
being once knowen, gentlemen and yeomen resorted to them out of all
the south parts of the relme. Vpon which rumor, Thomas lord Scales, a
man in great fauour with the king & queene, accompanied with the earle
of Kendall a Gascoigne, and the lord Louell, resorted to London with a
great companie of armed men, declaring to the maior, that their repaire
onelie was to defend and keepe the citie from spoile of such traitors
as the king was credible informed were thither comming. To whom the
maior answered, that he needed no fellow helper, either to defend or
gouerne the citie to him committed in charge. With which answer the
lord Scales and his associats nothing contented, entred into the Tower,
dailie deuising waies how to grieue the citizens, whom he perceiued to
fauour rather the duke of Yorks part than the kings.

[Sidenote: Couentrie the queenes secret harbour.]

But shortlie after the earles of March and Warwike, and other of their
affinitie, came to London, and were of the maior and citizens ioiouslie
receiued, to whome resorted Thomas archbishop of Canturburie, the
bishops of London, Lincolne, Salisburie, Elie, and Excester, with manie
other prelats and religious persons: amongst whome also was the popes
legat to treat of peace, if need so required. Vpon good deliberation
and aduise had and taken amongst these lords how to go forward with
their weightie enterprise, the earles of March and Warwike, William
lord Fauconbridge, Henrie lord Bourchier, called earle of Eu, with a
great number of men which came out of Kent, Essex, Surrie, and Sussex,
to the number (as some writers affirme) of fiue and twentie thousand
persons, departed from London toward the king lieng at Couentrie, then
called the queenes secret harbour, leauing behind them to keepe the
Londoners in their promised freendship, the earle of Salisburie, the
lord Cobham, and sir Iohn Wenlocke, which tooke such order, and watched
the gates and entries on ech side so diligentlie, that no succours
might come to the lord Scales lodging in the tower; who tooke therewith
such displeasure, that he shot out his great ordinance against them
within the citie, and they likewise shot at him againe, to the hurt and
no pleasure of both parts.

[Sidenote: The queene the better capteine.]

[Sidenote: _Wethamsted._]

The king hauing knowledge of all these dooings, assembled a great
armie, and accompanied with the duke of Summerset (latelie come from
Guisnes) and the duke of Buckingham, and diuerse other great lords that
tooke his part, came to Northampton; where the queene perceiuing hir
puissance to be able to match in fight with the aduersaries, tooke vpon
hir to incourage hir freends and well-willers: for the king studied of
nothing but of peace, quietnesse, and solitarie life. When the whole
hoast of the kings part was assembled, the same issued foorth of the
towne, and passing ouer the riuer of Tine, lodged in the new field
betweene Harsington and Sandifford, stronglie fensing themselues about
with high banks, and deepe trenches. On the other part, the lords being
herewith aduanced verie neere the place where the kings people laie
without Northampton; the bishops that were there with them, by the
aduise and consent of the said lords, sent vnto the king the bishop of
Salisburie, to vnderstand his mind, and to mooue him vnto some treatie
of peace, and to admit the archbishop of Canturburie, and the other
bishops there present, to be mediatours in the matter, that some good
accord might be concluded betwixt the parties, so as an vniuersall
peace might be restored in all parts through the whole realme.

[Sidenote: The battell of Northampt[=o].]

[Sidenote: _Wethamsted._]

The bishop of Salisburie dooing this message not so circumspectlie as
had beene conuenient, returned without bringing anie towardlie answer;
but rather words of high despite and vtter defiance. For the lords that
were about the king, trusting in their warlike engines and strength of
place, in which they were incamped, though otherwise inferior in number
of men, purposed to abide the brunt of battell; and so led with the
spirit of rashnesse, sent none other answer backe againe by the bishop,
but contumelious words sounding greatlie to the reproch of their
aduersaries; who being sore offended therewith determined to seeke
reuenge with dint of sword. The earle of March as then being in the
floure of his lustie and most couragious youth, lieng betweene Toucetor
and Northampton, determined to set on the kings armie without longer
delaie: and therevpon in the night season remooued his campe toward
Northampton, and in marching forward set his men in order of battell:
whereof the vant-ward was led by the earle of Warwike, which either by
strength or stealth wan a streict which the lord Beaumont kept, going
toward the kings campe; and herewith entring freshlie with his people,
began the battell about seauen of the clocke the ninth daie of Iulie.
After him followed the earle of March with the banner of his father. [pilcrow]
Others write, that the earle of March led the fore-ward, the erle of
Warwike the middleward, and the lord Fauconbridge the rere-ward.

[Sidenote: The L. Graie of Ruthen.]

[Sidenote: _Edw. Hall._]

[Sidenote: The kings part discomfited.]

[Sidenote: The K. taken.]

Moreouer, that Edmund lord Greie of Ruthen who was on the kings side,
failed in the trust committed to him: for where the enimies could
not (without great danger) enter vpon the kings campe, by reason of
a mightie trench and rampire pight full of piles and sharpe stakes,
wherewith the campe was compassed about: the said lord Graie came with
his men, and with helping hands pulled the enimies vp, and receiued
them into the field where the battell was begun with great force &
violence. For being now entred the field, they set vpon the kings
people so fiercelie, that it seemed they ment either to obteine the
victorie, or to die for it, euen all the whole number of them. The
fight continued right fierse and cruell, with vncerteine victorie,
till the houre of nine: at which time the kings armie was discomfited,
and of the same slaine and drowned in the riuer, few lesse than ten
thousand; and the king himselfe left comfortlesse alone was taken by
the aduersaries, as a man in great miserie.

[Sidenote: The Tower deliuered to the earle of March.]

[Sidenote: The lord Scales slaine.]

At this battell fought at Northampton, were slaine Humfreie duke of
Buckingham, Iohn Talbot earle of Shrewesburie, a valiant person, and
not degenerating from his noble parents, Thomas lord Egremond, Iohn
viscont Beaumont, and sir William Lucie, which made great hast to come
to part of the fight, and at his first approch was striken in the head
with an ax. Besides these that were slaine, manie were taken prisoners,
bicause they left their horsses, alighting to fight on foot. The duke
of Summerset, and other, which narrowlie escaped, fled with the queene
and prince into the bishoprike of Durham. The earles, hauing got the
victorie in this bloudie battell, conueied the king to London, and
lodged him in the bishops palace. After whose comming to the citie, the
Tower was deliuered to the erle of March, vpon a certeine composition;
but the lord Scales suspecting the sequele of the deliuerie thereof,
tooke a wherrie priuilie, intending to haue fled to the queene; but he
was espied by diuerse watermen belonging to the earle of Warwike (which
waited for his foorth comming on the Thames) and suddenlie taken, was
shortlie slaine with manie darts & daggers, and his bodie left naked
and all bloudie at the gate of the clinke, and after was buried in the
church adioining.

[Sidenote: Thomas Thorpe.]

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S. pag. 700._]

[Sidenote: An. Reg. 39.]

Then were diuerse persons apprehended, and indited of treason, wherof
some were pardoned, and some executed. Thomas Thorpe second baron
of the escheker, was committed to the Tower, where he remained long
after, for that he was knowne to be great freend to the house of
Lancaster. [pilcrow] When queene Margaret heard that the K. was taken, she
with hir sonne, and eight persons fled to the castell of Hardlagh in
Wales, and was robbed by the waie in Lancashire of all hir goods, to
the value of ten thousand markes: from thence she went into Scotland.
Thus you see what fruits the tree of ciuill discord dooth bring foorth;
that euill tree, which whilest some haue taken paine to plant, and
some to proine and nourish, for others confusion (to whome they haue
giuen a taste of those apples which it bare, far more bitter than
coloquintida) themselues haue beene forced to take such share as befell
them by lot. For as it is not possible that a common fier, whose heat
& flame is vniuersallie spred, should spare any particular place (for
so should it not be generall) no more is it likelie that in ciuill
commotions, rebellions, insurrections, and partakings in conflicts
and pitched feelds (speciallie vnder ringleaders of great countenance
and personage, such as be the peeres and states of kingdoms) anie one
should, though perhaps his life, yet (a thousand to one) not saue
his bloud vnspilt, nor his goods vnspoiled.] During this trouble,
a parlement was summoned to begin at Westminster, in the moneth of
October next following.

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke commeth foorth of Ireland.]

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

[Sidenote: A strange demeanor of the duke of Yorke.]

In the meane time the duke of Yorke, aduertised of all these things,
sailed from Dubline towards England, and landed at the red bank neere
to the citie of Chester, with no small companie: and from Chester by
long iournies he came to the citie of London, which he entred the
fridaie before the feast of S. Edward, the Confessor, with a sword
borne naked before him, with trumpets also sounding, and accompanied
with a great traine of men of armes, and other of his freends and
seruants. At his comming to Westminster he entred the palace, and
passing foorth directlie through the great hall, staied not till he
came to the chamber, where the king and lords vsed to sit in the
parlement time, commonlie called the vpper house, or chamber of the
peeres, and being there entred, stept vp vnto the throne roiall, and
there laieng his hand vpon the cloth of estate, seemed as if he meant
to take possession of that which was his right (for he held his hand so
vpon that cloth a good pretie while) and after withdrawing his hand,
turned his face towards the people, beholding their preassing togither,
and marking what countenance they made.

[Sidenote: His bold speech.]

Whilest he thus stood and beheld the people, supposing they reioiced
to see his presence, the archbishop of Canturburie (Thomas Bourcher)
came to him, & after due salutations, asked him if he would come and
see the king. With which demand he seeming to take disdaine, answered
breefelie, and in few words thus: I remember not that I know anie
within this realme, but that it beseemeth him rather to come and see my
person, than I to go and see his. The archbishop hearing his answer,
went backe to the king, and declared what answer he had receiued of
the dukes owne mouth. After the archbishop was departed to the king
that laie in the queenes lodging, the duke also departed, and went to
the most principall lodging that the king had within all his palace,
breaking vp the lockes and doores, and so lodged himselfe therein, more
like to a king than a duke, continuing in the same lodging for a time
to the great indignation of manie, that could not in aniewise like of
such presumptuous attempts made by the duke, to thrust himselfe in
possession of the crowne, and to depose king Henrie, who had reigned
ouer them so long a time.

[Sidenote: _Edw. Hall. in Hen. 6. fol._ clxxvij, &c.]

Maister Edward Hall in his chronicle maketh mention of an oration,
which the duke of Yorke vttered, sitting in the regall seat there in
the chamber of the peeres, either at this his first comming in amongst
them, or else at some one time after, the which we haue thought good
also to set downe: though Iohn Whethamsted the abbat of saint Albons,
who liued in those daies, and by all likelihood was there present at
the parlement, maketh no further recitall of anie words, which the
duke should vtter at that time in that his booke of records, where he
intreateth of this matter. But for the oration (as maister Hall hath
written thereof) we find as followeth. [pilcrow] During the time (saith he)
of this parlement, the duke of Yorke with a bold countenance entered
into the chamber of the peeres, and sat downe in the throne roiall,
vnder the cloth of estate (which is the kings peculiar seat) and in the
presence of the nobilitie, as well spirituall as temporall (after a
pause made) he began to declare his title to the crowne, in this forme
and order as insueth.




The duke of Yorks oration made to the lords of the parlement.


My singular good lords, maruell not that I approch vnto this throne:
for I sit here as in the place to me by verie iustice lawfullie
belonging; & here I rest, as to whom this chaire of right apperteineth,
not as he which requireth of you fauour, parcialitie, or bearing, but
equall right, friendlie indifferencie, and true administration of
iustice. For I beeing the partie greeued, and complainant, can not
minister to my selfe the medicine that should helpe me (as expert
leeches & cunning surgians maie) except you be to me both faithfull
aiders & also true councellors. Nor yet this noble realme and our
naturall countrie shall neuer be vnbuckled from hir dailie feuer,
except I (as the principall physician, and you as the true and trustie
apothecaries) consult togither in making of the potion, and trie out
the cleane and pure stuffe from the corrupt and putrified drugs.

For vndoubtedlie, the root and bottome of this long festured canker is
not yet extirpate, nor the feeble foundation of this fallible building
is not yet espied, which hath beene and is the dailie destruction of
the nobilitie, and the continuall confusion of the poore communaltie
of this realme and kingdome. For all you know (or should know) that
the high and mightie prince king Richard the second, was the true and
vndoubted heire to the valiant conqueror and renowmed prince king
Edward the third, as sonne & heire to the hardie knight and couragious
capteine Edward prince of Wales, duke of Aquitaine and Cornewall,
eldest sonne to the said king Edward the third: which king was not
onelie in deed, but also of all men reputed and taken for the true and
infallible heire to the wise and politike prince king Henrie the third,
as sonne and heire to king Edward the second, sonne and heire to king
Edward the first, the very heire and first begotten sonne of the said
noble and vertuous prince king Henrie the third.

Which king Richard of that name the second, was lawfullie & iustlie
possessed of the crowne and diadem of this realme and region, till
Henrie of Derbie duke of Lancaster and Hereford, sonne to Iohn of Gant
duke of Lancaster, the fourth begotten sonne to the said king Edward
the third, and yoonger brother to my noble ancestor Lionell duke of
Clarence, the third begotten sonne of the said king Edward, by force
and violence, contrarie both to the dutie of his allegiance, and also
to his homage to him both doone and sworne, raised warre and battell
at the castle of Flint in Northwales, against the said king Richard,
and him apprehended, and imprisoned within the Tower of London: during
whose life and captiuitie, he wrongfullie vsurped and intruded vpon the
roiall power, and high estate of this realme and region, taking vpon
him the name, stile, and authoritie of king and gouernour of the same.

And not therewith satisfied, and contented, compassed and accomplished
the death and destruction of his naturall prince, and most worthie
souereigne lord, not as a common homicide and butcherlie murtherer,
but as a regicide, and destroier of his king. After whose pitious
death, and execrable murther, the right and title of the crowne, and
superioritie of this realme was lawfullie reuerted & returned to Roger
Mortimer earle of March, sonne and heire to ladie Philip the onelie
child of the aboue rehearsed Lionell duke of Clarence, vnto which
Rogers daughter called Anne, my most deerest and welbeloued moother,
I am the verie true and lineall heire, which descent all you can not
iustlie gainesay, nor yet trulie denie. Then remember this, if the
title be mine, why am I put from it? If I be true heire to the crowne
(as I am in deed) why is my right withholden? If my claime be good,
why haue I not iustice? For suerlie, learned men of great science and
knowledge say and affirme, that lineall descent, nor vsurped possession
can nothing preuaile, if continuall claime be lawfullie made, or
openlie published.

For the auoiding of which scruple and ambiguitie: Edmund earle of March
my most welbeloued vncle, in the time of the first vsurper, in deed but
not by right called king Henrie the fourth, by his coosines the earle
of Northumberland, & the lord Persie, he being then in captiuitie with
Owen Glendouer the rebell in Wales, made his title & righteous claime
to the destruction of both the noble persons. Likewise my most deerest
lord and father, so farre set foorth that right and title, that he lost
his life & worldlie ioy at the towne of Southampton, more by power
than indifferent iustice. Since whose death, I comming to my full age,
haue neuer desisted to pursue my title, and require my right, which by
meanes of sinister counsell and vniust detention, I can neither obteine
nor recouer. So that of fine force I am compelled to vse power in steed
of praier, and force in steed of request; not (as I said before) for
my priuat emolument and peculiar profit: but to restore peace, loue,
and quietnesse to this our naturall region, which euer since the first
vngodlie vsurpation of the aforenamed Henrie, vntrulie called king
Henrie the fourth, hath beene cleerelie banished, and out of the same
vniustlie exiled.

What murthers and manslaughters haue beene perpetrated and committed
within this countrie, since the beginning of that vngratious
vsurpation? What number of noble men haue beene slaine, destroied,
& executed since that unfortunate daie? It is too lamentable and
manifest. For although Henrie of Lancaster earle of Derbie tooke vpon
him the scepter and the crowne, and wrongfullie bare the name and stile
of a king; and was not much tickled with mine vncle the earle of March,
at that time being within age: yet was he neuer in suertie of himselfe,
nor had or inioied any profit & quietnesse either in mind or in bodie.
"For suerlie, a corrupt conscience neuer feeleth rest, but looketh
when the sword of vengeage will descend and strike." His sonne also
called king Henrie the fift, obteined notable victories, and immortal
praises for his noble acts doone in the realme of France: yet God (for
the offense of his vntrue parent) suddenlie touched him, vnbodieng his
soule in the flower of his youth, and in the glorie of his conquest.

And although he had a faire sonne and a yoong heire apparant: yet
was this orphan such a one (as preachers say) that God threatned to
send for a punishment to his vnrulie and vngratious people, saieng
by his prophet Esaie; "I shall giue you children to be your princes,
and infants without wisedome shall haue the gouernance of you." The
prophet lied not, if you note all things in an order: for after this
Henrie the fift (whose fame no man can iustlie reprooue or deface)
succeeded his sonne, whom all we haue called our naturall prince, and
obeied as his heire. In whose time and wrongfull reigne, I require you
diligentlie to consider, with what great torments and afflictions God
hath whipped & scourged this miserable Ile: yea with such and so manie
scourges and plagues, as no nation (the AEgyptians onelie excepted) were
euer tormented or afflicted withall. I will not speake of rebellious
murthers and oppressions, which of late haue beene doone and exercised
heere among vs. But I will declare & manifest to you, how the crowne
and glorie of this realme is by the negligence of this sillie man, and
his vnwise councell minished, defaced, and also dishonoured.

Is not Normandie, which his father gat, regained & conquered againe, by
the insolencie of him & his couetous councell? Is not the whole duchie
of Aquitaine, by two hundred and od yeares peaceablie possessed by the
kings of this realme, in one yeare and a little more, gotten out of
our hands & seigniorie? What should I speak of Aniou & Maine, or the
losse of the Ile of France, with the rich citie of Paris. Alas it is
too apparant. Neither will I molest you with the recitall of all the
particulars thereof. But now in the middest of this affliction, and
to make an end of the same: God of his ineffable goodnesse, looking
on this countrie with his eies of pitie & mercie, hath sent me in the
truth, to restore againe this decaid kingdome to his ancient fame and
old renowme whereof heere in open parlement, according to my iust &
true title, I haue and doo take possession of this roiall throne: not
putting diffidence, but firme hope in Gods grace, that by his diuine
aid, and assistance of you the peeres of this realme, I shall beautifie
& mainteine the same to the glorie of him, honour of my bloud, and to
the publike wealth as well of you all heere present, as of all the
poore commons and subiects of this kingdome and regiment.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Prodigious tokens.]

When the duke had made an end of his oration, the lords sat still
as men striken into a certeine amazednesse, neither whispering nor
speaking foorth a word, as though their mouthes had beene sowed vp.
The duke not verie well content with their silence, aduised them to
consider throughlie, and ponder the whole effect of his words and
saiengs: and so neither fullie displeased, nor yet altogither content,
departed to his lodging in the kings palace. While he was declaring
thus his title in the higher house among the peeres, there happened a
strange chance in the verie same instant amongest the commons in the
nether house. A crowne which did hang in the middle of the same, to
garnish a branch to set lights vpon, without touch of man, or blast of
wind, suddenlie fell downe. About the same time also fell downe the
crowne which stood on the top of Douer castell. Which chances where
construed to be signes, that the crowne of the realme should some waie
haue a fall.

[Sidenote: The castell of Roxburgh besieged.]

[Sidenote: The king of Scots thorough misfortune slaine.]

The lords forgot not the dukes demand, and to take some direction
therein, diuerse of them as spirituall and temporall, with manie
graue and sage persons of the commonaltie dailie assembled at the
Blackefriers, and other places, to treat of this matter, being of so
great importance. During which time the duke of Yorke, although he
and the king were both lodged in the palace of Westminster; yet would
he not for anie praiers or requests once visit the king, till some
conclusion were taken in this matter: saieng, that he was subiect to no
man, but only to God, vnder whose mercie none here superiour but he. [pilcrow]
The king of Scots, partlie incouraged thorough the ciuill discord here
in England, and partlie for the displeasure which he had conceiued for
the death of Edmund duke of Summerset his moothers brother, this yeare
besieged the castell of Roxburgh: and by the breaking of a bombard, as
the same was shot off against the castell, he chanced to be slaine. Yet
the Scots left not off their enterprise, assaulting the castell till
they gat it, and then defended it a long time after, till Richard duke
of Glocester wan it againe, and raced it.

[Sidenote: The determination of the parlement c[=o]cerning the
intailing of crowne.]

[Sidenote: _Abr. Fl. ex I. S. pag. 700, 701, &c. in Quart._]

After long debating of the matter and deliberate consultation amongest
the peeres, prelats, and commons, vpon the vigill of all saints, it was
condescended: for so much as king Henrie had beene taken as king by the
space of thirtie and eight yeares and more, that he should inioy the
name and title of king, and haue possession of the realme during his
naturall life. And if he either died, or resigned, or forfeited the
same, by breaking or going against anie point of this concord, then the
said crowne & authoritie roiall should immediatlie be deuoluted and
come to the duke of Yorke, if he then liued; or else to the next heire
of his linage. And that the duke of Yorke from thense foorth should
be protector and regent of the land. [pilcrow] This was the determination of
the parlement to & fro, tending to peace betweene the king & the duke
(which was ratified accordinglie) as by the articles insuing dooth
appeare.




The articles betwixt king Henrie and the duke of Yorke.


Blessed be Iesu, in whose hands and bountie resteth and is the peace
and vnitie betwixt princes, and the weale of euerie realme: by whose
direction (I know) agreed it is, appointed, and accorded as followeth,
betwixt the most high and most mightie prince king Henrie the sixt,
king of England and of France, and lord of Ireland, on the one partie,
and the right high & mightie prince Richard Plantagenet duke of Yorke
on the other partie: vpon certeine matters of variance mooued betwixt
them, and especiallie vpon the claime and title vnto the crownes
of England and of France, and roiall power, estate and dignitie
apperteining to the same, and lordship of Ireland, opened, shewed,
and declared by the said duke, before all the lords spirituall and
temporall, being in this present parlement.

First, where the said Richard duke of Yorke hath declared and opened
(as his aboue said) title & claime in maner as followeth.

That the right noble and woorthie prince, Henrie king of England the
third had issue, and lawfullie got Edward the first begotten sonne,
borne at Westminster, the fifteenth kalends of Iulie, in the yeare of
our Lord 1239, & Edmund his second sonne which was borne on S. Marcels
daie, the yere 1245, the which Edward, after the death of king Henrie
his father, intituled & called king Edward the first, had issue, Edward
his first begotten sonne, called (after the deceasse of his father)
king Edward the second, the which had issue, Edward the third; which
Edward the third had issue, Edward prince of Wales; William of Hatfield
his second sonne; Lionell the third, duke of Clarence; Iohn of Gant,
fourth duke of Lancaster; Edmund of Langlie fift, duke of Yorke; Thomas
of Woodstoke sixt, duke of Glocester; and William of Windsor seauenth.

The said Edward prince of Wales, which died in the life time of his
father, had issue Richard, which succeeded Edward the third his
grandsire; Richard died without issue; William of Hatfield the second
sonne of Edward the third, died without issue; Lionell the third sonne
of Edward the third, duke of Clarence, had issue Philip his daughter
and heire, which was coupled in matrimonie vnto Edmund Mortimer earle
of March, and had issue Roger Mortimer earle of March hir sonne and
heire; which Roger had issue of Edmund erle of March, Roger Mortimer,
Anne, Elianor; which Edmund, Roger, and Elianor died without issue.

And the said Anne coupled in matrimonie to Richard earle of Cambridge,
the sonne of Edmund of Langleie, the fift sonne of Henrie the third,
and had issue Richard Plantagenet, commonlie called duke of Yorke; Iohn
of Gant, the fourth sonne of Edward and the yoonger brother of the said
Lionell, had issue Henrie earle of Derbie, who incontinentlie after
that king Richard resigned the crownes of the realmes and lordship of
Ireland, vnrighteouslie entered vpon the same, then being aliue Edmund
Mortimer earle of March, sonne to Roger Mortimer earle of March, sonne
and heire of the said Philip, daughter and heire of the said Lionell,
the third sonne of the said king Edward the third, to the which Edmund
the right and title of the said crownes and lordship by law and custome
belonged. To the which Richard duke of Yorke, as sonne to Anne daughter
to Roger Mortimer earle of March, sonne and heire of the said Philip,
daughter and heire of the said Lionell, the third sonne of king Edward
the third, the right, title, dignitie roiall, and estate of the crownes
of the realmes of England and France, and the lordship of Ireland
perteineth and belongeth afore anie issue of the said Iohn of Gant, the
fourth sonne of the same king Edward.

The said title notwithstanding, and without preiudice of the said
Richard duke of Yorke, tenderlie desiring the wealth, rest, and
prosperitie of this land, and to set apart all that might be trouble to
the same, and considering the possession of the said king Henrie the
sixt, and that he hath for his time beene named, taken, and reputed
for king of England and of France, and lord of Ireland, is contented,
agreed, and consenteth, that he be had, reputed, and taken for king of
England and France, with the roiall estate, dignitie, and preheminence
belonging therevnto, and lord of Ireland during his naturall life.
And for that time, the said duke, without hurt or preiudice of his
said right, and title, shall take, worship, and honour him for his
souereigne lord.

Item, the said Richard duke of Yorke, shall promit and bind him by his
solemne oth, in maner and forme as followeth.

[Sidenote: The oth of Richard duke of Yorke.]

In the name of God Amen: I Richard duke of Yorke, promise and sweare
by the faith and truth that I owe to almightie God, that I shall neuer
consent, procure, or stirre, directlie or indirectlie, in priuie
or apert, neither (as much as in me is) shall suffer to be doone,
consented, procured, or stirred, anie thing that may sound to the
abridgement of the naturall life of king Henrie the sixt, or to the
hurt or diminishing of his reigne or dignitie roiall, by violence, or
anie other waie, against his freedome or libertie: but if any person or
persons would doo or presume anie thing to the contrarie, I shall with
all my might and power withstand it, and make it to be withstood, as
far as my power will stretch therevnto, so helpe me God and his holie
euangelists.

Item, Edward earle of March, and Edmund earle of Rutland, sonnes of the
said duke of Yorke, shall make like oth.

Item, it is accorded, appointed, and agreed that the said Richard duke
of Yorke, shall be called and reputed from hencefoorth, verie and
rightfull heire to the crownes, roiall estate, dignitie and lordship
aboue said; and after the deceasse of the said king Henrie, or when he
will laie from him the said crownes, estate, dignitie, and lordship,
the said duke and his heires shall immediatlie succeed to the said
crownes, roiall estate, dignitie and lordship.

Item, the said Richard duke of Yorke, shall haue by authoritie of this
present parlement, castels, manors, lands, and tenements, with the
wards, marriages, reliefes, seruices, fines, amercements, offices,
aduousons, fees, and other appurtenances to them belonging, what soeuer
they be, to the yearelie value of ten thousand marks, ouer all charges
and reprises; whereof fiue thousand marks shall be to his owne state,
three thousand fiue hundred marks to Edward his first begotten sonne
earle of March for his estate, and one thousand pounds to Edmund earle
of Rutland his second sonne for his yearlie sustentation, in such
consideration and such intent as shall be declared by the lords of the
kings councell.

Item, if anie person or persons imagine or compasse the death of the
said duke, and thereof probablie be attainted of open deed doone by
folkes of other condition, that it be deemed & adiuged high treason.

Item, for the more establishing of the said accord, it is appointed
and consented, that the lords spirituall and temporall, being in
this present parlement, shall make oths, to accept, take, worship,
and repute the said Richard duke of Yorke and his heires, as aboue
is rehearsed, and keepe, obserue, and strengthen (in as much as
apperteineth vnto them) all the things abouesaid, and resist to their
power, all them that would presume the contrarie, according to their
estates and degrees.

Item, the said Richard duke of Yorke, earles of March, and Rutland,
shall permit and make other to helpe, aid, and defend the said lords,
and euerie of them against all those that will quarell, or anie thing
attempt against the said lords, or anie of them, by occasion of
agreement or consenting to the said accord, or assistance giuing to the
duke and earles, or anie of them.

Item, it is agreed and appointed, that this accord, and euerie article
thereof, be opened and notified by the kings letters patents, or
otherwise, at such times and places, and in maner as it shall be
thought expedient to the said Richard duke of Yorke, with the aduise
of the lords of the kings councell. The king vnderstandeth certeinelie
the said title of the said Richard duke of Yorke, iust, lawfull,
and sufficient, by the aduise and assent of the lords spirituall
and temporall, and the commons in this parlement assembled; and by
authoritie of the same parlement declareth, approoueth, ratifieth,
confirmeth, and accepteth the said title, iust, good, lawfull, and
true, and therevnto giueth his assent and agreement of his free will
and libertie.

And ouer that, by the said aduise and authoritie declareth, intituleth,
calleth, establisheth, affirmeth, & reputeth the said Richard duke of
Yorke, verie true and rightfull heire to the crownes, roiall estate,
and dignitie of the realmes of England and of France, and of the
lordship of Ireland aforesaid; and that according to the worship and
reuerence that thereto belongeth, he be taken, accepted and reputed, in
worship & reuerence, by all the states of the said realme of England,
and of all his subiects thereof; sauing and ordeining by the same
authoritie, the king to haue the said crownes, realme, roiall estate,
dignitie, and preheminence of the same, and the said lordship of
Ireland during his life naturall.

And furthermore, by the same aduise and authoritie willeth, consenteth
and agreeth, that after his deceasse, or when it shall please his
highnesse to laie from him the said crownes, estate, dignitie,
and lordship, the said Richard duke of Yorke and his heires shall
immediatlie succeed him in the said crownes, roiall estate, dignitie,
and worship, and them then haue and inioie; anie act of parlement,
statute, or ordinance, or other thing to the contrarie made, or
interruption, or discontinuance of possession notwithstanding.

And moreouer, by the said aduise and authoritie, establisheth,
granteth, confirmeth, approueth, ratifieth, and accepteth the said
accord, and all things therein conteined, and therevnto freelie and
absolutelie assenteth, agreeth; and by the same aduise and authoritie
ordeineth and establisheth, that if anie person or persons imagine or
compasse the death of the said duke, & probablie be attainted of open
deed doone by folks of that condition, that it be deemed and adiudged
high treason.

And furthermore ordeineth and establisheth by the said aduise and
authoritie, that all statutes, ordinances, and acts of parlement, made
in the time of the said king Henrie the fourth, by the which he and the
heires of his bodie, comming of Henrie late king of England the fift,
the sonne and heire of the said king Henrie the fourth, and the heires
of king Henrie the fift, were or be inheritable to the said crownes and
realmes, or to the heritage of the same, be annulled, repealed, damned,
cancelled, void, and of none effect.

And ouer this, the king by the said aduise, assent and authoritie,
ordeineth and establisheth, that all other acts and statutes made
afore this time by act of parlement, not repealed or annulled by like
authoritie, or otherwise void, be in such force, effect, and vertue,
as they were afore the making of these ordinances; and that no letters
patents, roialx of record, nor acts iudiciall, made or doone afore this
time not repealed, reuersed, ne otherwise void by law, be preiudiced or
hurt by this present act.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke proclaimed heire apparant & protectour of
the realme.]

[Sidenote: The parlem[=e]t at Couentrie made frustrat.]

This agreement put in articles, was ingrossed, sealed, and sworne
vnto by the two parties, and also enacted in the parlement. For ioy
whereof the king, hauing in his companie the duke of Yorke, road to the
cathedrall church of saint Paule in London, and there on the day of
all saints with the crowne on his head went solemnelie in procession,
and was lodged a good space after in the bishops palace, neer to the
said church. And vpon the saturdaie next insuing, Richard duke of
Yorke was by sound of trumpet solemnelie proclamed heire apparant
to the crowne of England, and protectour of the realme. After this,
the parlement kept at Couentrie the last yeare, was declared to be a
diuelish councell, and onelie had for destruction of the nobilitie,
and was indeed no lawfull parlement: bicause they which were returned,
were neuer elected according to the due order of the law, but secretlie
named by them which desired rather the destruction than the aduancement
of the common-wealth. When these agreements were enacted, the king
dissolued his parlement, which was the last parlement that euer he
ended.

The duke of Yorke, well knowing that the queene would spurne against
all this, caused both hir and hir sonne to be sent for by the king. But
she as woont rather to rule, than to be ruled, and thereto counselled
by the dukes of Excester and Summerset not onelie denied to come, but
also assembled a great armie, intending to take the king by fine force
out of the lords hands. The protector in London hauing knowledge of
all these dooings, assigned the duke of Norffolke, and erle of Warwike
his trustie freends to be about the king, while he with the earles of
Salisburie and Rutland and a conuenient number departed out of London
the second daie of December northward, and appointed the earle of March
his eldest sonne to follow him with all his power. The duke came to
his castell of Sandall beside Wakefield on Christmasse eeuen, & there
began to make muster of his tenants and freends. The queene thereof
ascertained, determined to cope with him yer his succour were come.

Now she, hauing in hir companie the prince hir sonne, the dukes of
Excester and Summerset, the earle of Deuonshire, the lord Clifford,
the lord Ros, and in effect all the lords of the north parts, with
eighteene thousand men, or (as some write) two and twentie thousand,
marched from Yorke to Wakefield, and bad base to the duke, euen before
his castell gates. He hauing with him not fullie fiue thousand persons,
contrarie to the minds of his faithfull councellors, would needs issue
foorth to fight with his enimies. The duke of Summerset and the queenes
part, casting vpon their most aduantage, appointed the lord Clifford
to lie in one stale, and the earle of Wilshire in another, and the
duke with other to keepe the manie battell. The duke of Yorke with
his people descended downe the hill in good order and arraie, and was
suffered to passe on towards the maine battell.

[Sidenote: The battell Wakefield.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Yorke slaine.]

[Sidenote: Onelie seauen hundred southerne men saith _Whethamsted_.]

But when he was in the plaine field betweene his castell and the towne
of Wakefield, he was inuironed on euerie side, like fish in a net,
so that though he fought manfullie, yet was he within halfe an houre
slaine and dead, and his whole armie discomfited: with him died of
his trustie freends, his two bastard vncles, sir Iohn and sir Hugh
Mortimers, sir Dauie Hall, sir Hugh Hastings, sir Thomas Neuill,
William and Thomas Aparre, both brethren; and two thousand and eight
hundred others, whereof manie were yoong gentlemen, and heires of great
parentage in the south parts, whose kin reuenged their deaths within
foure moneths next, as after shall appeare.

[Sidenote: The cruell murther of the yoong earle of Rutland.]

In this conflict was wounded and taken prisoner, Richard earle of
Salisburie, sir Richard Limbricke, Rafe Stanleie, Iohn Harow, capteine
Hanson, and diuerse others. The lord Clifford, perceiuing where the
earle of Rutland was conueied out of the field (by one of his fathers
chapleins, and scholemaister to the same earle) and ouertaking him,
stabbed him to the heart with a dagger as he kneeled afore him. This
earle was but a child at that time of twelue yeares of age, whome
neither his tender yeares, nor dolorous countenance, with holding vp
both his hands for mercie (for his speach was gone for feare) could
mooue the cruell heart of the lord Clifford to take pitie vpon him, so
that he was noted of great infamie for that his vnmercifull murther
vpon that yoong gentleman.

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

But the same lord Clifford not satisfied herewith, came to the place
where the dead corpse of the duke of Yorke laie, caused his head to be
striken off, and set on it a crowne of paper, fixed it to a pole and
presented it on the queene, not lieng farre from the field, in great
despite, at which great reioising was shewed: but they laughed then
that shortlie after lamented, and were glad then of other mens deaths
that knew not their owne to be so neere at hand. [pilcrow] Some write that the
duke was taken aliue, and in derision caused to stand vpon a molehill,
on whose head they put a garland in steed of a crowne, which they had
fashioned and made of sedges or bulrushes; and hauing so crowned him
with that garland, they kneeled downe afore him (as the Iewes did vnto
Christ) in scorne, saieng to him; "Haile king without rule, haile king
without heritage, haile duke and prince without people or possessions."
And at length hauing thus scorned him with these and diuerse other the
like despitefull words, they stroke off his head, which (as yee haue
heard) they presented to the queene.

[Sidenote: A purchase of Gods cursse with the popes blessing.]

[Sidenote: The prisoners beheaded.]

[Sidenote: 1461.]

[Sidenote: The earle of March now duke of Yorke.]

Manie deemed that this miserable end chanced to the duke of Yorke, as a
due punishment for breaking his oth of allegiance vnto his souereigne
lord king Henrie: but others held him discharged thereof, bicause
he obteined a dispensation from the pope, by such suggestion as his
procurators made vnto him, whereby the same oth was adiudged void, as
that which was receiued vnaduisedlie, to the preiudice of himselfe,
and disheriting of all his posteritie. After this victorie by the
queene, the earle of Salisburie and all the prisoners were sent to
Pomfret, and there beheaded, whose heads (togither with the duke of
Yorkes head) were conueied to Yorke, and there set on poles ouer the
gate of the citie, in despite of them and their linage. The earle of
March, now after the death of his father, verie duke of Yorke, lieng at
Glocester, was woonderfullie amazed, when the sorrowfull newes of these
mishaps came vnto him: but after comfort giuen to him by his faithfull
louers and assured alies, he remooued to Shrewesburie, declaring to the
inhabitants of that towne, and to them of the other townes in those
parties the murther of his father, the ieopardie of himselfe, and the
present ruine of the common-wealth.

[Sidenote: The earle of Penbroke.]

[Sidenote: The battell of Mortimers crosse.]

[Sidenote: The cognis[=a]ce of bright sunne.]

The people on the marches of Wales, for the fauour which they bare
to the Mortimers linage, more gladlie offered him their aid and
assistance than he could desire the same; so that he had incontinentlie
a puissant armie, to the number of three and twentie thousand, readie
to go against the queene, and the murtherers of his father. But when
he was setting forward, newes was brought to him, that Iasper earle
of Penbroke halfe brother to king Henrie, and Iames Butler earle of
Ormund and Wilshire, had assembled a great number of Welsh and Irish
people to take him: he herewith quickned, retired backe and met with
his enimies in a faire plaine, neere to Mortimers crosse, not far from
Hereford east, on Candlemasse daie in the morning. At which time the
sunne (as some write) appeared to the earle of March like three sunnes,
and suddenlie ioined altogither in one. Vpon which sight he tooke such
courage, that he fiercelie setting on his enimies, put them to flight:
and for this cause men imagined, that he gaue the sunne in his full
brightnesse for his badge or cognisance. Of his enimies were left dead
on the ground three thousand and eight hundred.

[Sidenote: Owen Teuther and other taken and beheaded.]

[Sidenote: _Whethamsted._]

The earles of Penbroke and Wilshire fled, but sir Owen Teuther father
to the said earle of Penbroke (which Owen had married king Henries
mother, as yee haue heard before) with Dauid Floid, Morgan ap Reuther,
and diuerse other were taken, and beheaded at Hereford. The queene
neuer the lesse incouraged by hir late victorie, with a multitude of
northerne people, marched toward London, intending to vndoo all that
had beene ordeined in the last parlement. These northerne people, after
they were once passed ouer the riuer of Trent, spoiled and wasted the
countrie afore them, in maner as if they had beene in the land of
forren enimies. At length, they approched to saint Albons, hearing that
the duke of Northfolke, and the earle of Warwike, with other whome the
duke of Yorke had left to gouerne the king in his absence, had (by the
kings assent) assembled a great hoast, and were incamped neere to that
towne.

[Sidenote: The northern men enter into S. Albons.]

[Sidenote: They passe through it.]

Those northerne lords and other that were with the queene, made
forward, and entring into S. Albons, meant to passe through the towne,
and so to coape with their enimies; but finding a sort of archers
ranged neere to the great crosse in the market place, to defend their
passage, they were receiued with such a storme of arrowes, which came
flieng about their eares as thicke as haile, that they were quicklie
repelled backe, and with losse driuen to retire in hast vnto the west
end of the towne; where by a lane that leadeth northwards vp to saint
Peters street, they made their entrie, and had there also a sharpe
incounter against certeine bands of the kings people. But after great
slaughter on both parts, they got through, and vpon the heath that
lieth at the north end of the towne, called Barnard heath, they had a
farre greater conflict with foure or fiue thousand of the kings armie,
that seemed as they had beene auant courrers.

[Sidenote: The second battell at S. Albons.]

[Sidenote: The kings part fleeth.]

These gaue the onset so fiercelie at the beginning, that the victorie
rested doubtfull a certeine time, so that if the easterne and southerne
men had continued as they began, the field had beene theirs; but after
they had stood to it a pretie while, and perceiued none of their
fellowes from the great armie to come and assist them, they began to
faint, and turning their backes, fled amaine ouer hedge and ditch,
through thicke and thin, woods and bushes, seeking so to escape the
hands of their cruell enimies that followed them with eger minds, to
make slaughter vpon them, namelie, the northern prickers, now in the
chase pursued most hotlie, and bare downe manie, and more had doone, if
the night comming vpon, had not staied them.

When the daie was closed, those that were about the king (in number
a twentie thousand) hearing how euill their fellowes had sped, began
vtterlie to despair of the victorie, and so fell without anie long
tarriance to running awaie. By reason whereof, the nobles that were
about the king, perceiuing how the game went, and withall saw no
comfort in the king, but rather a good will and affection towards the
contrarie part, they withdrew also, leauing the king accompanied with
the lord Bonneuille, & sir Thomas Kiriell of Kent; which vpon assurance
of the kings promise, tarried still with him, and fled not. But their
trust deceiued them, for at the queenes departing from saint Albons,
they were both beheaded; though contrarie to the mind and promise of
hir husband. Sir Thomas Thorp, baron of the escheker, was also beheaded
the same daie, at Highgate, by the commons of Kent.

[Sidenote: 1916, as _Iohn Stow_ noteth.]

[Sidenote: Sir Iohn Graie slaine.]

Such was the successe of this second battell fought at S. Albons, vpon
Shrouetuesdaie, the seuenteenth of Februarie, in which were slaine
three and twentie hundred men, of whom no noble man is remembred,
saue sir Iohn Graie, which the same daie was made knight, with twelue
other, at the village of Colneie. Now after that the noble men and
other were fled, and the king left in maner alone without anie power of
men to gard his person, he was counselled by an esquier called Thomas
Hoo, a man well languaged, and well seene in the lawes, to send some
conuenient messenger to the northerne lords, aduertising them, that
he would now gladlie come vnto them (whome he knew to be his verie
freends, and had assembled themselues togither for his seruice) to the
end he might remaine with them, as before he had remained vnder the
gouernement of the southerne lords.

[Sidenote: Thomas Hoo esquier sent to the northerne lords.]

[Sidenote: _Edw. Hall._]

[Sidenote: Prince Edward made knight.]

According to the aduise and counsell of this esquier, the king thought
it good to send vnto them, and withall appointed the same esquier to
beare the message, who first went and declared the same vnto the earle
of Northumberland, and returning backe to the king, brought certeine
lords with him, who conueied the king first vnto the lord Cliffords
tent, that stood next to the place where the kings people had incamped.
This done, they went and brought the queene and hir sonne prince Edward
vnto his presence, whome he ioifullie receiued, imbracing and kissing
them in most louing wise, and yeelding hartie thanks to almightie God,
whome it had pleased thus to strengthen the forces of the northerne
men, to restore his deerlie belooued and onelie sonne againe into his
possession. Thus was the queene fortunate in hir two battels, but
vnfortunate was the king in all his enterprises: for where his person
was present, the victorie still fled from him to the contrarie part.
The queene caused the king to dub hir sonne prince Edward knight, with
thirtie other persons, which the day before fought on hir side against
his part.

[Sidenote: The northern men spoile the towne of saint Albons.]

[Sidenote: The queene sendeth to the maior of London for vittels.]

[Sidenote: Vittels sent by the maior and staid by the commons.]

This doone, they went to abbeie, where, of the abbat and moonks they
were receiued with hymnes and songs, and so brought to the high
altar, and after to the shrine, and so to the chamber in which the
king was woont to lodge. The abbat made sute that order might be
taken to restreine the northerne men from spoiling the towne: and
proclamation indeed was made to that effect, but it auailed not:
for they mainteined, that the spoile of things was granted them by
couenant, after they were once passed ouer the riuer of Trent: and so
not regarding anie proclamation or other commandement, they spared
nothing that they could laie hands vpon, if the same were meet for them
to carie awaie. The queene, hauing thus got the victorie, sent to the
maior of London, commanding him without delaie to send certeine carts,
laden with Lenton vittels, for the refreshing of hir and hir armie. The
maior incontinentlie caused carts to be laden, and would haue sent them
forward; but the commons of the citie would not suffer them to passe,
but staied them at Criplegate, notwithstanding the maior did what he
could by gentle persuasions to quiet them.

[Sidenote: The queene returneth northward.]

During which controuersie, diuerse of the northerne horssemen, came
and robbed in the suburbs of the citie, and would haue entred at
Criplegate; but they were repelled by the commoners, and three of them
slaine. Wherevpon, the maior sent the recorder to Barnet to the kings
counsell there, to excuse the matter; and the duches of Bedford, the
ladie Scales, with diuerse fathers of the spiritualtie, went to the
queene, to asswage hir displeasure conceiued against the citie. The
queene at this humble request, by aduise of hir councell, appointed
certeine lords and knights, with foure hundred tall persons, to ride to
the citie, and there to view and see the demeanor and disposition of
the people: and diuerse aldermen were appointed to meet them at Barnet,
and to conueie them to London. But what man purposeth, God disposeth.
All these deuises were shortlie altered to another forme, bicause true
report came not onelie to the queene, but also to the citie; that the
earle of March, hauing vanquished the earles of Penbroke and Wilshire,
had met with the earle of Warwike (after this last battell at saint
Albons) at Chipping Norton by Cotsold; and that they with both their
powers were coming toward London. The queene hauing little trust in
Essex, and lesse in Kent, but least of all in London, with hir husband
and sonne, departed from saint Albons, into the north countrie, where
the foundation of hir aid and refuge onelie rested.

[Sidenote: The great hope of the people conceiued of the erle of March.]

The duches of Yorke, seeing hir husband and sonne slaine, and not
knowing what should succeed of hir eldest sonnes chance, sent hir
two yonger sonnes, George and Richard, ouer the sea, to the citie of
Utrecht in Almaine, where they were of Philip duke of Burgognie well
receiued; and so remained there, till their brother Edward had got the
crowne and gouernement of the realme. The earles of March and Warwike,
hauing perfect knowlege that the king & queene, with their adherents,
were departed from S. Albons, rode straight to London, entring there
with a great number of men of warre, the first weeke of Lent. Whose
c[=o]ming thither was no sooner knowne, but that the people resorted
out of Kent, Essex, and other the counties adioining, in great numbers,
to see, aid, and comfort this lustie prince and flower of chiualrie,
in whome the hope of their ioy and trust of their quietnesse onelie
consisted.

[Sidenote: The earle of March elected king.]

This prudent yoong prince, minding to take time when time serued,
called a great councell, both of the lords spirituall and temporall,
and to them repeated the title and right that he had to the crowne,
rehearsing also the articles concluded betweene king Henrie and his
father, by their writings signed and sealed, and also confirmed by
act of parlement; the breaches whereof he neither forgat, nor left
vndeclared. After the lords had considered of this matter, they
determined by authoritie of the said councell, that because king Henrie
had doone contrarie to the ordinances in the last parlement concluded,
and was insufficient of himselfe to rule the realme, he was therfore to
be depriued of all kinglie estate: and incontinentlie was Edward earle
of March, sonne and heire to Richard duke of Yorke, by the lords in
the said councell assembled, named, elected, and admitted for king and
gouernour of the realme.

[Sidenote: The lord Fauconbridge.]

On which daie, the people of the earles part, being in their muster in
S. Iohns field, and a great number of the substantiall citizens there
assembled, to behold their order; the lord Fauconbridge, who tooke
the musters, wiselie anon declared to the people the offenses and
breaches of the late agreement, committed by king Henrie the sixt; and
demanded of the people, whether they would haue him to rule and reigne
anie longer ouer them? To whome they with whole voice answered; Naie,
naie. Then he asked them, if they would serue, loue, honour, and obeie
the erle of March, as their onlie king and souereigne lord: To which
question they answered; Yea, yea: crieng (king Edward) with manie great
shouts & clapping of hands in assent and gladnesse of the same.

[Sidenote: The earle of March taketh vpon him as king.]

The lords were shortlie aduertised of the louing consent which the
commons frankelie and freelie had giuen. Whervpon incontinentlie,
they all with a conuenient number of the most substantiall commons
repaired to the erle at Bainards castell, making iust and true report
of their election and admission, and the louing assent of the commons.
The earle, after long pausing, first thanked God of his great grace
and benefit towards him shewed; then the lords and commons for their
fauour and fidelitie: notwithstanding, like a wise prince, he alleged
his insufficiencie for so great a roome and weightie burthen, as lacke
of knowledge, want of experience, and diuerse other qualities to a
gouernour appertaining. But yet in conclusion, being persuaded by the
archbishop of Canturburie, the bishop of Excester, and other lords
then present, he agreed to their petition, and tooke vpon him the
charge of the kingdome, as forfeited to him by breach of the couenants
established in parlement:

[Sidenote: _Abr. Flem._]

[pilcrow] Thus farre touching the tragicall state of this land vnder the rent
regiment of king Henrie, who (besides the bare title of roialtie and
naked name of king) had little appertaining to the port of a prince.
For whereas the dignitie of princedome standeth in souereigntie;
there were of his nobles that imbecilled his prerogatiue by sundrie
practises, speciallie by maine force; as seeking either to suppresse,
or to exile, or to obscure, or to make him awaie: otherwise what should
be the meaning of all those foughten fields from time to time, most
miserablie falling out both to prince, peere, and people? As at saint
Albons, at Bloreheath, at Northampton, at Banberie, at Barnet, & at
Wakefield; to the effusion of much bloud, and pulling on of manie a
plage, which otherwise might haue beene auoided. All which battels,
togither with those that were tried betweene Edward the fourth, after
his inthronization; and Henrie the sixt after his extermination (as at
Exham, Doncaster, and Teukesburie) are remembred by Anglorum praelia in
good order of pithie poetrie, as followeth:

    Nobilitata inter plures haec sunt loca caede,
    Albani fanum, Blorum, borealis & Ampton,
    Banbrecum campis, Barnettum collibus haerens,
    [25]Experrectorum pagus, fanumq; secundo
    Albani, propior Scoticis confinibus Exam,
    Contiguoq; istis habitantes rure coloni,
    Moerentes hodie, quoties proscindit arator
    Arua propinqua locis dentale reuellere terra
    Semisepulta virum sulcis Cerealibus ossa:
    Moesta execrantur planctu ciuile duellum,
    Quo periere hominum plus centum millia caesa,
    Nobile Todcastrum clades accepta coegit
    Millibus enectis ter denis nomen habere.
    Vltima postremae locus est Teuxburia pugnae,
    Oppidulis his accedens certissima testis,
    Bello intestino fluuios fluxisse cruoris

[25] _Wakefield._

But now before we proceed anie further, sith the reigne of king Henrie
maie seeme here to take end, we will specifie some such learned men as
liued in his time. Iohn Leland, surnamed the elder (in respect of the
other Iohn Leland, that painefull antiquarie of our time) wrote diuerse
treatises, for the instruction of grammarians; Iohn Hainton, a Carmelit
or white frier (as they called them) of Lincolne; Robert Colman, a
Franciscane frier of Norwich, and chancellor of the vniuersitie of
Oxenford; William White a priest of Kent, professing the doctrine of
Wickliffe, and forsaking the order of the Romane church, married a
wife, but continued his office of preaching, till at length, in the
yeare 1428, he was apprehended, and by William bishop of Norwich, and
the doctors of the friers mendicants, charged with thirtie articles,
which he mainteined, contrarie to the doctrine of the Romane church,
and in September the same yeare suffered death by fire.

[Sidenote: Peter Basset wrote king Henrie the fift his life.]

Alexander Carpentar, a learned man, set foorth a booke called
Destructorium vitiorum, wherein he inueieth against the prelats of the
church of that time, for their crueltie vsed, in persecuting the poore
and godlie christians; Richard Kendall, an excellent grammarian; Iohn
Bate, warden of the white friers in Yorke, but borne in the borders of
Wales, an excellent philosopher, and a diuine, he was also seene in the
Greeke toong, a thing rare in those daies; Peter Basset, esquier of
the priuie chamber to king Henrie the fift, whose life he wrote; Iohn
Pole a priest, that wrote the life of saint Walburgh, daughter to one
Richard, a noble man of this realme of England, which Walburgh (as he
affirmeth) builded our ladie church in Antwerpe; Thomas Ismaelit, a
monke of Sion; Walter Hilton, a Chartreaux monke also of Shiene, either
of those wrote certeine treatises full of superstition, as Iohn Bale
noteth.

[Sidenote: _Fabian and Caxton._]

Thomas Walden so called of the towne where he was borne, but his
fathers surname was Netter, a white frier of London, and the three
and twentith prouinciall gouernour of his order, a man vndoubtedlie
learned, and thoroughlie furnished with cunning of the schooles, but a
sore enimie to them that professed the doctrine of Wickliffe, writing
sundrie great volumes and treatises against them, he died at Rone in
Normandie, the second of Nouember, in the yeare one thousand foure
hundred and thirtie; Richard Ullerston, borne in Lancashire, wrote
diuerse treatises of diuinitie; Peter Clearke, a student in Oxenford,
and a defendor of Wickliffes doctrine, wherevpon when he feared
persecution here in England, he fled into Boheme, but yet at length he
was apprehended by the imperialists, and died for it, as some write,
but in what order, is not expressed.

Robert Hounslow, a religious man of an house in Hounslow beside London,
whereof he tooke his surname; Thomas Walsingham, borne in Norffolke,
in a towne there of the same name, but professed a monke in the abbeie
of saint Albons, a diligent historiographer; Iohn Tilneie, a white
frier of Yermouth, but a student in Cambridge, and prooued an excellent
diuine; Richard Fleming, a doctor of diuinitie in Oxenford, of whome
more at large before, pag. 169. Iohn Low borne in Worcestershire, an
Augustine frier, a doctor of diuinitie, and prouinciall in England of
his order, and by king Henrie the sixt, made first bishop of saint
Asaph, and after remooued from thense to Rochester; Thomas Ringsted the
yoonger, not the same that was bishop, but a doctor of the law, and
vicar of Mildenhall in Suffolke, a notable preacher, and wrote diuerse
treatises.

Iohn Felton, a doctor of diuinitie of Magdalen college in Oxenford;
Nicholas Botlesham, a Carmelit frier borne in Cambridgeshire, and
student first in the vniuersitie of Cambridge, and after in Paris,
where he proceeded doctor of diuinitie; Thomas Rudburne, a monke of
Winchester, and an historiographer; Iohn Holbrooke, borne in Surrie, a
great philosopher, and well seene in the mathematiks; Peter Paine, an
earnest professor of Wickliffes doctrine, and fearing persecution here
in England, fled into Boheme, where he remained in great estimation for
his great learning & no lesse wisedome; Nicholas Upton, a ciuilian,
wrote of heraldrie, of colours in armorie, and of the dutie of
chiualrie; William Beckeleie, a Carmelit frier of Sandwich, & warden
of the house there, a diuine, and professed degree of schoole in
Cambridge; Iohn Torpe, a Carmelit frier of Norwich.

Iohn Capgraue borne in Kent, an Augustine frier, proceeded doctor of
diuinitie in Oxenford, was admitted prouinciall of his order, and
prooued (without controuersie) the best learned of anie of that order
of friers here in England, as Iohn Bale affirmeth, he wrote manie
notable volumes, and finallie departed this life at Lin in Norffolke,
the twelfth of August, in the yere 1464, which was in the fourth
yeare of king Edward the fourth; Humfrie duke of Glocester, earle of
Penbroke, and lord chamberlaine of England, also protector of the
realme, during the minoritie of his nephue king Henrie the sixt, was
both a great fauourer of learned men, and also verie well learned
himselfe, namelie in astrologie, whereof (beside other things) he wrote
a speciall treatise intituled, Tabula directionum.

Iohn Wethamsted, otherwise called Frumentarius, was abbat of saint
Albons, and highlie in fauor with the good duke of Glocester last
remembred, he wrote diuerse treatises, and among others, a booke as it
were of the records of things, chancing whilest he was abbat, which
booke I haue seene, and partlie in some parcell of this kings time
haue also followed; Roger Onleie, borne in the west countrie (as Bale
thinketh) was accused of treason, for practising with the ladie Eleanor
Cobham, by sorcerie to make the king awaie, and was thereof condemned,
and died for it, though he were innocent thereof, as some haue
thought, he wrote a treatise intituled, Contra vulgi superstitiones,
also another De sua innocentia; Nicholas Cantlow, a Welshman borne,
descended of an ancient familie in Southwales, as by Bale it should
appeare, he became a frier Carmelit in Bristow; Henrie Wichingham, a
Carmelit frier of Norwich, a notable diuine, a great preacher, and
wrote also sundrie treatises of diuinitie.

Iohn Lidgate, a monke of Burie, an excellent poet, and chiefe in
his time in that facultie, of all other that practised the same
within this land, he trauelled thorough France and Italie to learne
the languages and sciences, how greatlie he profited in atteining
to knowlege, the workes which he wrote doo sufficientlie testifie;
Nicholas Hostresham, an excellent physician; Iohn Blackeneie, a
religious man, of the order of the Trinitie intituled, De redemptione
captiuorum, and prior of an house of the same order, at Ingham in
Norffolke, he was surnamed Blackeneie, of the towne where he was borne;
Thomas Beckington, bishop of Bath, wrote against the law Salique, by
which law the Frenchmen would seclude the princes of this realme from
their title vnto the crowne of France; Iohn Baringham, a Carmelite
frier of Gippeswich in Suffolke; Dauid Bois, borne in Wales, and a
frier Carmelit, professed in Glocester, a doctor of diuinitie.

Iohn Brome, an Augustine frier; Michaell Trigurie, a Cornishman borne,
whome for his excellencie and learning, king Henrie the fift appointed
to be gouernour of that schoole or vniuersitie, which he instituted
in the citie of Caen in Normandie, after he had brought it vnder his
subiection; Iohn Amundisham, a moonke of saint Albons; Oswald Anglicus,
a moonke of the Chartreux order; Iohn Keningale, a Carmelit frier of
Norwich; Peter De sancta fide, a Carmelit also of Norwich; Reginald
Pecocke, bishop of Chichester, of whome ye haue heard before, he was
borne in Wales, and student in Oriall college in Oxenford, where he
proceeded doctor of diuinitie, he wrote manie treatises touching the
christian religion; Iohn surnamed Burie of the towne where he was
borne, an Augustine frier in the towne of Clare in Suffolke.

Robert Fleming, a man perfect in the Greeke and Latine toong [among
whose works some haue beene seene vnder these titles: namelie,
Lucubrationum Tiburtinarm lib. 1. a dictionarie in Greeke and Latine,
and a worke in verse of sundrie kinds, this man was of most fame in
the yeare of our Lord 1470, which was in the tenth yeare of Edward the
fourth, though he were not obscure also in the daies of this Henrie
the sixt;] Thomas Gascoigne, borne at Hunfleete in Yorkeshire, of that
worshipfull familie of the Gascoignes there, a doctor of diuinitie, and
chancellor of the vniuersitie of Oxenford; William Stapilhart, borne in
Kent, but by profession a white frier in London; Robert Fimingham borne
in Norffolke a Franciscan frier in Norwich; Nicholas Montacute, an
historiographer; Iohn Chandler, chancellor of Welles; William Botoner,
descended of a good house, a knight by degree, and borne in Bristow,
verie studious in antiquities, and other sciences.

Iohn Stow, a monke of Norwich, but student in Oxenford, where he
proceeded doctor of diuinitie; Thomas Langleie, a monke of Hulme;
Nicholas Bungeie, borne in a towne of Norffolke of that name, wrote
an historie, called Adunationes chronicorum; Henrie Beauford bishop
of Winchester, base sonne to Iohn duke of Lancaster, of whome before
we haue made sufficient mention, made cardinall by pope Martine the
fourth, in the yeare 1426; Adam Homlington, a Carmelit frier; William
Coppinger, maister of the vniuersitie of Oxenford; Thomas Stacie,
an expert mathematician, and no lesse skilfull in astronomie; Iohn
Talaugerne, a moonke of Worcester; William Sutton, an astrologian;
Robert Balsacke, wrote a booke intituled De re militari, that is to
saie, of warre or chiualrie, so that (as is thought) he was both a good
souldier, and a painefull student of good letters.

Thomas Dando, a Carmelit frier of Marleburgh, he wrote the life of
Alphred king of west Saxons; William Graie, borne of the noble house
of the Graies of Codnor, he went to atteine to some excellencie
of learning in Italie, where he heard that noble clearke Guarinus
Veronensis read in Ferrara, he was preferred to the bishoprike of Elie,
in the yeere 1454, by pope Nicholas the fift, when Thomas Bourchier
was translated from thense to Canturburie; Iohn Kempe, archbishop of
Yorke, and after remooued from thense to Canturburie (as before ye haue
heard) he was made cardinall of S. Albin, by pope Eugenie the fourth;
Adam Molins (as Bale calleth him) keeper of the kings priuie seale,
excellentlie learned, in time of the ciuill warre betwixt king Henrie,
and the duke of Yorke, in which he lost his head.

Thomas Chillenden, a doctor both of the law ciuill and canon, became
at length a moonke in Canturburie; Robert Bale, surnamed the elder,
excellentlie learned in the lawes of the realme, recorder of London,
gathered as it were a chronicle of the customes, lawes, foundations,
changes, restoring magistrats, offices, orders, and publike assemblies
of the citie of London, with other matters, touching the perfect
description of the same citie; he wrote other works also touching
the state of the same citie, and the acts of king Edward the third;
he departed this life in the yeare of our Lord 1461, euen about the
beginning of the reigne of king Edward the fourth, vnto whome we will
now againe returne.

         Thus farre the tragicall historie of Henrie the sixt
                       depriued of his roialtie.




    Transcriber's Notes:


    Simple spelling, grammar, and typographical errors were
    corrected.

    Punctuation normalized.

    Anachronistic and non-standard spellings retained as printed.

    The author's usage of accents was inconsistent. Specifically
    accented "ee" is far more prevalent than "ee" even for the same
    word. Changed all instances of "ee" to "ee"

    Italics markup is enclosed in _underscores_.

    Page 271 Sidenote references the obviously incorrect year 1916.

                     Symbols for Diacritical Marks
        (In the table below, the "x" represents a letter with a
                          diacritical mark.)
  diacritical mark             sample      above        below
  macron (straight line)         -         [=x]         [x=]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Chronicles of England, Scotland and
Ireland (3 of 6): England (3 of 9), by Raphael Holinshed

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRONICLES OF ENGLAND ***

***** This file should be named 46672.txt or 46672.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/6/7/46672/

Produced by Richard Tonsing, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

