Project Gutenberg's Caudebec in America, by William Louis Cuddeback

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Caudebec in America
       A Record of the Descendants of Jacques Caudebec 1700 to 1920

Author: William Louis Cuddeback

Release Date: August 26, 2014 [EBook #46692]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAUDEBEC IN AMERICA ***




Produced by Roger Burch, from scans obtained from the Internet Archive.




[Frontispiece: Caudebec Coat-of-Arms]

THE "CAUDEBEC" COAT-OF-ARMS

* * * * *

The Caudebec Coat-of-Arms is a pointed, oval azure, two metal shield,
with an ("or") gold embattled mural crown or crest.

Across the face of the shield area charges: three argent finned smelts
naiant, placed one above the other.

Near the point of the shield is an "argent" (silver) daisy.

From this, a wreath of "or" (gold) encircles the shield, reaching
nearly the crest.

On the sinister side of the shield, this wreath is a laurel branch,
on the dexter side, an olive branch.  (In heraldry, dexter (right)
and sinister (left), denote the right and left sides respectively, of
the shield in the position as the wearer views it, and not as viewed
by a distant observer). On some of the Caudebec Coat-of-Arms, the
laurel and the olive branches are crossed at or near the shield
point, and are tied by a bow of ribbon.

The azure (sky blue), the royal color of the Bourbons, predominates
in French shields, and denotes justice and loyalty.

The "argent" denotes purity.

The "or" denotes stability and worth.

The smelts were peculiarly and pleasingly flavored fish, with pale
green back, and silvery white lower part.

It has been said that the presence of fish on Coat-of-Arms, denoted
a predominant occupation of an early period.

The olive and laurel denote peace and victory.

Crests were originally a device indicative of high honor, and were
worn upon a helm.  Later they were placed upon and attached to the
shield. It's form and marking indicate a knight.

The emblems of the family later became the emblems of the town of
Caudebec.




[Illustration: WILLIAN LOUIS CUDDEBACK, M.D.]




CAUDEBEC IN AMERICA

A RECORD OF THE DECENDENTS OF JACQUES CAUDEBEC, 1700 to 1920

BY WILLIAM LOUIS CUDDEBACK, M.D.

* * * * *

ILLUSTRATED

* * * * *

  NEW YORK
  TOBIAS A. WRIGHT
  PRINTER AND PUBLISHER
  1919




  TO THE
  MEMORY OF MY DEVOTED WIFE
  ALICE DIMMICK MALVEN CUDDEBACK
  FOR ME FOR MORE THAN THIRTY-FIVE YEARS
  A HOMEMAKER IN ITS FULLEST SENSE,
  A SHARER IN MY LIFE'S JOYS,
  TRIALS AND SORROWS.




  "OUR LIVES ARE WAVES THAT COME UP OUT OF THE OCEAN OF ETERNITY, BREAK
  UPON THE BEACH OF EARTH AND LAPSE BACK TO THE OCEAN OF ETERNITY. SOME
  ARE SUNLIT, SOME RUN IN STORM AND RAIN; ONE IS A QUIET RIPPLE,
  ANOTHER IS A THUNDEROUS BREAKER, AND ONCE IN MANY CENTURIES COMES A
  GREAT TIDAL WAVE THAT SWEEPS OVER A CONTINENT, BUT ALL GO BACK TO THE
  SEA AND LIE EQUALLY LEVEL THERE."




  "MAN IS A HUNTING ANIMAL," SOME HUNTING FOXES,
  OTHERS FAME OR FORTUNE, SOME IN THE WORLD OF
  NATURE, SOME OF MIND, SOME SEEK THE ROOTS
  OF WORDS AND THE ORIGIN OF THINGS. I AM FOND
  OF HUNTING OUT A PEDIGREE. WITH THIS COMES A
  PRIDE OF ANCESTRY AND PEOPLE, AND AN INTEREST
  WHICH MAY LURE THE READER, AND PERHAPS CAUSE
  HIM TO CONTINUE THIS "GENEALOGICAL CHASE."




CONTENTS
* * * * *
 List of Illustrations
 Genealogical Chart of the Cuddeback Family
 Introduction
 Pioneer Knoll--Home of the First Settler
 Deeds, Lands, Papers, Etc.
 Pioneer Days
 The Cuddeback Patent Dissolved
 First Generation
 Second Generation--1700-1780 [Lineage Paragraphs 2-10]
 Third Generation--1730-1800 [Lineage Paragraphs 11-36]
 Fourth Generation--1770-1840 [Lineage Paragraphs 37-88]
 Fifth Generation--1810-1890 [Lineage Paragraphs 89-237]
 Sixth Generation--1820-1900 [Lineage Paragraphs 238-308]
 Seventh Generation--1840-1920 [Lineage Paragraphs 309-330]
 Eighth Generation--1860 to date [Lineage Paragraphs 331-332]
 Pedigrees of Allied Families
 Caudebec in Normandy, France
 Index




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

 The Caudebec "Coat of Arms"
 William Louis Cuddeback, M.D.
 Chart of Our French-Dutch-German-Norse-English-Scotch Ancestors, as
  arranged by W. L. Cuddeback, 1906
 Pioneer Knoll of 1695
 Pioneer Knoll, West Slope
 Pioneer Knoll, Northwest Slope
 Spring Brook, skirting East Slope of Pioneer Knoll
 Pioneer Knoll, Northeast Slope
 Maps--Lots of Land Belonging to William Coddebeck and others
  [_sic_--does not appear in book]
 Cuddeback Stone House and Nearby Log House
 Colonel Peter Cuddeback 1795-1892
 Map--Division of Land
 Home of Col. William A. Cuddeback, 1822, Cuddebackville, N. Y.
 Approach to Cuddebackville, from Middletown, N. Y.
 Approach to Cuddebackville from Port Jervis, N. Y.
 Cuddeback Homes of 1800, Cuddebackville, N. Y.
 Caudebec Inn, Cuddebackville, N. Y.
 Home of Col. Peter Cuddeback, Huguenot, N. Y.
 Home of Elting Cuddeback 1816-1898, Deerpark, N. Y.
 Simon Westfall's House in Deerpark
 Gumaer Stone House
 Westfall Homestead, New Jersey
 Elting Homestead, (formerly Van Auken Fort,) N. Y.
 Van Fleet Homestead, Deerpark
 Home of Levi Van Etten, Deerpark, N. Y.
 A Group of Grandparents at Home of Elting Cuddeback 1880
 Home of Col. Peter P. Swartwout, Huguenot, N. Y.  [_sic_--does not
  appear in book]
 Elting Cuddeback, at 40 Years
 Elting Cuddeback, as 80 Years
 Cuddebackville, America
 Traditional Ancestral Home
 Caudebec, France
 Caudebec, France
 Market Place, Caudebec
 View. Entrance to the Church, Caudebec
 Street Scene, Caudebec, France
 Caudebec, France, along River Front




[Illustration: Chart of Our French-Dutch-German-Norse-English-Scotch
Ancestors, as arranged by W. L. Cuddeback, 1906 (six pages)]




INTRODUCTION

* * * * *

It has been my pleasure and diversion during a period of many years
to collect and tabulate data concerning the descendants of Jacques
Caudebec.

This has led to a study of the almost interminable network of
relationship existing between the old families throughout the
Minisink region; to the tracing of the immigration from this region
into many of the states, and the development of families in almost
every State in the Union.

The emigrant and the frontiersman of the early generations have been
succeeded by the farmer, the merchant and the mechanic; later, by
those in every branch of human activity and industry. A people of
high ideals, honest, intelligent, home-making and law abiding, have
ever been exerting an influence uplifting and for the preservation of
liberty and freedom.

Much of this early history is derived from the writings of Peter E.
Gumaer. Much of the subsequent history was given me by my father,
Elting Cuddeback, whose remembrance of these people was accurate,
extensive and reaching back to the times of Peter E. Gumaer. Local
records have been searched. Also those in Kingston, Albany and New
York and Central New York counties. Records have been obtained from
the writings of W. H. Nearpass, while extensive family records have
been furnished by Mrs. Jennie Titsworth Wright of Sussex, N. J., Mrs.
Mary V. Lawton of Skaneateles, N. Y., Mrs. Jane Cuddeback Johnson of
Port Jervis, N. Y., Dr. Samuel Outwater of Lockport, N. Y., Mrs.
Simeon Cuddeback of Milford, Pa., Mr. and Mrs. Egbert Cuddeback of
Skaneateles, N. Y., and Mrs. Martha M. Griswold of Adrian, Michigan.

I deem myself fortunate to have known and learned from those of
earlier generations many facts pertaining to the early history of the
family. A physician comes to know the country, the people and the
families with an intimacy unknown in other relations.

Forty-one years of the practice of my profession among neighbors,
relatives and friends of my boyhood have impressed me with the
desirability of a record of our people and of our family. Families
scatter. Homes disintegrate. Houses disappear. Among the saddest of
my experiences are visits to localities where there is now little or
no vestige of the lives or of the drama of life enacted in the old
homesteads of bygone years. Many, many times in this study, I have
been impressed with the truth of the verses, Psalms 103, verses
15 and 16: "As for man, his days are as grass; as a flower of the
field, so he flourisheth: For the wind passeth over it, and it is
gone; and the place thereof shall know it no more."

As a heritage for those who may hereafter bear the name Cuddeback,
for allied families, and for all who may note the development of
American families, this ideal development of free men in a free
country is presented. These interminglings of people of various
nationalities--these Americans, will everywhere be a mighty force for
the uplifting of the nation.

That such a people may be enabled to turn to a record of ancestors,
and to delight to know from whence they came is sufficient
compensation for many hours and days of investigation and
collaboration.

     William L. Cuddeback, M.D.

Port Jervis, N. Y.




PIONEER KNOLL-HOME OF THE FIRST SETTLER


Between the ranges of the Appalachian Mountains as they extend
northward into New York State, lies the Valley of the Neversink
river and of the Bashas Kill. From these the water flows into the
Delaware River at Port Jervis.

The Kitatiny mountains of New Jersey becomes the Shawangunk range in
New York and form the southeastern border of the valley. The Blue
Ridge mountains of Pennsylvania extend northeasterly into New York,
form the northwesterly border of the valley, and extend into the foot
hills of the Catskills. Between these mountain ranges lies the valley
of the Neversink, the Meckheckemeck of the early days, two hundred
to four hundred feet below their crests. It is from one to two miles
wide. It is said to have been part of the bed of a vast lake
extending to the Hudson before the erosion of the mountain which
resulted in the formation of the Delaware Water Gap. At a point near
the junction of the Neversink with the Bashas Kill there is a level
tract of land extending the width of the valley for about three miles.

The early settlers trailed down the valley from Kingston and came
upon this flat land covered with a tall heavy grass (Rheet Grass)
about 1690 and tarried there. About 1696 they purchased these lands
from the Indians, and settled among them. On Oct. 14th, 1697, a
patent for 1200 acres covering this fiat land was granted to Jacob
Caudebec, Peter Gumaer, Thomas, Bernarbas, and Anthony Swartwout and
their associates. This "Cuddeback" patent is described as "at
Maghakameck, beginning at the west bounds of lands called Napeneck,
etc., . . . to a small run of water called by the Indians
'Assawaghkemeck,' etc., (a small stream flowing into east side of the
Neversink opposite Huguenot) and so along the said run of water and
the lands of Mansjwor, the Indian."

This included the level fertile low lands from near Cuddebackville
to Huguenot, and was later called the "Peenpack flats." Near the
center of this "Caudebec patent" there is a knoll extending
longitudinally of the valley, which tradition gives as the location
of the homes of the first settlers. It is oval, about three hundred
yards long, fifty yards wide, and elevated above the surrounding low
lands approximately twenty feet.

[Illustration: Pioneer Knoll of 1695.]

[Illustration: Pioneer Knoll, West Slope.]

[Illustration: Pioneer Knoll, Northwest Slope.]

[Illustration: Spring Brook, skirting East Slope of Pioneer Knoll.]

[Illustration: Pioneer Knoll, Northeast Slope.]

This pioneer knoll, today grass-grown and a pasture, gives evidence
of its former occupancy. Depressions indicate the location of these
log houses. At its most southerly point, a larger, longer depression
surrounded by fragments of a stone foundation now covered by earth
and sod, indicates the location of an old fort erected at a later
date. About twenty yards east of this knoll is a large brook of the
clearest spring water, while on its eastern slope is located the
remnant of the spring which furnished them water. The accompanying
maps and views show these points, and also show that these pioneers
built their houses in the most approved manner of their day. The
depressions indicative of their cellars are near each other on
different sides, on the brow of the knoll. Between them is the
slightly elevated rounded top of the knoll. Access to and
communication with neighbors from houses thus located could have been
easy, quick and continuous.




DEEDS, LAND, PAPERS ETC.


The following transcripts from the public records at Kingston, New
York and Albany are of value as records of the life and the struggles
of these early colonists. The deeds from the Indians covering a large
acreage, extending in the Meckheckemeck valley from Naponeck nearly
to the Delaware, was made to others besides those named in the
Caudebec patent. This was a cause of differences between owners of
adjoining patents and led to disturbances between the Indians and the
pioneers.

(1) Deed of lands from the Indians.

(2) Petition: Jacob Caudebec and others to Col. Benjamin Fletcher,
Governor, for patent for 1200 acres at Waghkomack, which was granted
October 14th, 1695.

(3) Petition: dated May 14th, 1697, of Thomas Swartod and others to
Governor Fletcher for protection of their patent lands, etc.

(4) Petition dated October 18th, 1699, of Bernard Swartwout and
others to Governor Fletcher for protection in the peaceable enjoyment
of their lands.

(5) Deed dated February 12th, 1725, Jacob Codebec to his three eldest
sons of his seventh interest in the Caudebec patent.

DEED FROM THE INDIANS.

Know all men by these presents that we Achparreny, Orreguan, Harmon
Hekan, Tadepaa, Sansanan, Wackheeck, Toorakawa, Paghetenson,
Koerderson, Tindemopigton, Namesjarout, Maberotgaroposon, Tonnespaam,
Mossingsinck, Capiskeham Indians sendeth greeting. Whereas we the
said Achparreny, Orreguan, Harmon Heckan, Tadepaa, etc., for and in
consideration of fifty pounds current money, five gunns five
blancoats five coats of strouds five coats of Duffels five laps five
shirts five pistols five knives five axis five hats five pr of
stockings five drawin knives five swords fifty pounds of powder two
ancors Rum forty barrels of lead fifty needles fifty ailds fifty
fishin hooks eight Barrolls strong beere and six fine coats to them
in hand payd before the ensealing and delivery of these presents by
Jacob Rutse, Gerrit Aartss, Jacob Aartss, Dan Honan, Coenraet
Elmendorp, Thomas Swartwout Dick vanderburgh Anthony Swartwout Jacob
Coddebeck Johannis Westphalen, Charles Westphalen, Simon Westphalen
the widow of Thomas Quick Barnardus Swartwout Peter Guimair
Elyas Und Cornelis Switts Hendrick Janson, Hendrick Decker Cornelius
Clase, Cornelius De Duyster have bargained sold assigned and sett
over unto said Jacob Rutse Gerrit Aartss, Jacob Aartss, Dan^iel Honan,
Thomas Swartwout and the rest of the partners that have obtained a
grant from his Excell. and council for Menissing Waggackemeck. All
that certain tract or parcell of land, situate lying and being in the
bounds of Menissing & Waggackemeck beginning at the west bound of the
land called Naponach to a small run of water called by the indian
name Assawagkemeek and soe alongst said run of water and the land of
Hansjoor the indian.

To have and to hold the said tract of land unto the said Jacob Rutse
Gerrit Aartss Dan Honan Thomas Swartwout and the rest of the partners
as above s^d Theire heirs and assigns for ever The said Achparreny
Orreguan, Hannon Hekan, Tadipaa &c doth the further covenant promise
and engage to warrand and defend the said Jacob Rutse, Gerritt
Aartss, Jacob Aartss, Dan^iel Honan, Thomas Swartwout and the rest of
the partners for the said land against all manner of Indyans that
shall claim the same.

In testimony whereof we have hereunto sett our hands

In Kingstowne this 8th day of June 1696.

  Achparreny, X his mark Orreguan,
  X his mark Harmon Hekan,
   X his mark
  Tadepaa, X his mark
  Sansanan, X his mark
  Wackheeck, X his mark
  Toorakawa, X his mark
  Paghetenson, X his mark
  Koerdereson, X his mark
  Tindemopigton, X his mark
  Namesjarout, X his mark
  Mabertogaroposon, X his mark
  Tonnespaam, X his mark
  Mossingsinck, X his mark
  Capiskeham, X his mark
 Signed in the presence of

  Roeloft Swartwout / Tonnespaam, X his mark
                    /
  W. D. Meyer / Paghetesson, X his mark

 In presence of Dirk Schopmoos
    Justice of peace
A true Copy &c. J. Wottingham Clerk.


LAND PAPERS

In Office of Secretary of State at Albany. Vol. 2.
     Page 266:

Petition of Jacob Codeber Thomas Swart & others praying a patent for
a tract of land in Ulster County being a part of a tract called
Waghaghkemeck.

To Coll Benjamin Fletcher, General & Governor of New York &c.

Thomas Gumbl Jacob Coddeber, Thomas, Anthony & Barnardus Swartwout,
James Tys David Jamisson Showoth

That there is a . . . land called Waghaghkomock in Elster . . . the
sixth first petitioners had a lyine on . . . hundred acres for the
improvement but . . . uttssen & Company who has a poss . . . the
Minissink fort so it is that . . . Waghkomeck is purchased of the
indians . . . the first grant

Therefore . . . have a patent for the same to . . .ever as to oath
(other?) un equal favor . . . so 1200 acres in the . . . most . . .
under a mo . . . Ecell . . . and . . . pray . . . thony Swartwout
. . . Paire Gumare . . . out . . . David Jamisson . . . eck . . .
Thomas Swartwout.

(The ". . ." indicate that it is impossible to read the lines or
make out the words on the original paper owing to its extreme age.)


LAND PAPERS

In Office of Secretary of State at Albany. Vol. 2. Page 235. May
14th, 1697:

Petition of Thomas Swartod & others to have Jacob Rutson & Company
restrained from unlawfully obstructing them in perfecting their title
to 1200 acros of land, lying at a certain place called by the indian
Waghgaghemek.

    Col. Benjamin Fletcher
      Captain in Chieffe of y^e
      Province of New York and
      Provinces depending thereon
      Vice Admiral of y^e same

  May 14th 1697

    The humble petition of
    Thomas Swartwod Peter Gumard
    Anthony Swartod Bernard Swartod
    Eliashia &c James Codebecke

I humbly sheweth

That your Excellenceys petitioners have y^e favor of Liene or grant
to purchase to y^e quantity of 1200 acres of land in Elster County at
a certain place called by y^e indians Waghgagkemek, which your
Excell^ys pet^rs have discovered at their great charges and travaille,
That pursuant thereunto y^e pet^rs have made an agreement with y^e
native proprietors for y^e said land and have got y^e boundry laid
out by y^e indians by sundry mark'd trees and have paid some part of
y^e consideration; but have not obtained a deed from y^e indians who
have agreed to perform and execute the same.

That some months afterwards Jacob Rutsen and company did obtain your
excellencey's favor of a liene or grant for purchasing of . . . akers
of land at y^e Minissing distant from y^e petitioners land.

That the said Jacob Rutsen and company have surreptitiously . . .
persuaded them not to make the deed . . . your Excell^ys pet^rs
humbly pray your excellency will give some directions to Jacob Rutsen
and company not to place unlawful obstructions to the just
proceedings of your excell^ys petitioners, there being vacant land
enough to be purchased in y^e said county, if not at the place which
they did assigne in their petition to your excellency and for which
y^e have y^e grant.

And your Excellency's petitioners in duty bound shall ever pray &c.
      J. Codebec.

* * * * *

Another patent was granted May 26th, 1697, to Arent Schuyler for 1000
acres of land. This included the lands in and about Port Jervis and
extended up the Neversink Valley about half way to Huguenot.

Another patent (the Minisink Patent) was granted August 28th, 1704,
and included all the lands in this vicinity not included in the
preceding patents.


LAND PAPERS

At Albany. Vol. 2. Page 275. Oct. 18th, 1699

Petition of Barnardus Swartwout on behalf of himself & others, the
owners of sundry lands at Waghahkemek, near Menissincks complaining
ill-treatment by indians who were instigated to the same by Jacob
Rutsen & company and praying that they may be protected in the
peaceable enjoyment of their possessions.

To the Hon^ble John Nasan Esq Leu Govonor & commander in chief of
provice of New York &c and the Hon^ble ^council of the land

The humble petition of Barnardus Swartwout in behalf of himself and
copartners in a new Settlement at Waghahkowock now the Minissinks.

Showoth

That on the 14th day of October 1695 the petitioners had lycense to
purchase 1200 acres of vacant land at a place called Waghaghkamock,
which being understood by Col& Rutsen and others who were desirous of
the same lands which the petitioners had by (charge?) and pains
discovered found a petition to the Governor and Council afterwards,
to wit: The 9th of January 1695-6 for a lysence to purchase 400 acres
at great little Minissinks Under color of which lysense being upwards
of 20 in number, by large gifts to the Indians and other indirect
(works?) (debauches?) them to (bad?) faith to the petitioners, to
sell the same lands to them, of which complaint was made to the
Governor & Council, & an order thereupon granted that (it approving
the petitioners lysense) was prior to the date of that of Rutsen &
Compa. and the name of the place certain, and (still) it is of ill
consequence to have indirect dealings with the Indians.

That Rutsen and company do desist from any pretensions to purchase
the land mentioned in the lysense of the petitions upon penalty of
answering the same. Upon which order afterwards to wit the 28th day
of May 1696 Rutsen & company prays the Governor & council not to have
ill thoughts of them, and allege that the land that the petitioners
lay claim to by lysense is not called Waghgaghemeck which being ready
and considered in Council, an order issued upon petitioners that
Swartwout and company pursuant to their (wish?) should purchase 1200
acres at Waghgaghkemmack and afterwards the other company their 4000
acres. Notwithstanding all which though Rutsen & company ventured
still privly to (soist?) with the indians and obstruct the lawful
purchase until the middle of the year 1697, when the petitioners to
obtain their rights (forms?) of them verbally (consutod?) to make a
joint purchase with the other company which being done they thereupon
on the 14th of Oct. 1697 obtained his (mahos?) patent for the 1200
acres and betook themselves to the improvement thereof (and?)
(company?) to all right and the former orders without any patent or
first giving (way?) to the petitioners peacably to enjoy their 1200
acres. Many of the other company (purpose?) appointed by and under
them satt down upon the s^d land forcibly that it being far from the
other Christian settlement & mountain (whethr?) in the county of
Elster or Orange the forests could not be removed by the indians that
now Shely-irr-tin through months of Aug. and Sept. left and (devvey?)
other times. The indians chiefly Asawanta Pindamnius, Karhkolano
Sansa and Nashingloan with many others though pretended owners of the
land to the petitioners unknown being stirred up freely by the s'd
other company have fallen upon the s'd Barnardus Swartwout and his
brother another partner and have beaten bruised and badly kicked so
that of their lives they did really despair, and robbed plundered and
carried away their goods haply and have destroyed their cattel, have
(put fire?) often into their houses to burn them in which violent
practices those other company, their wives came to look on and render
the indians & (hindor?) from killing of them. But the men kept out of
the wy which is of very pernicious ( . . . ) and may end in an Indian
warr if life should be taken on any other part which your petitioners
would strenuously avoid, and therefore humbly pray that said indians
may be sent for and made to disclose who they are that put them upon
this violence (sound?) prudent (va^rd?) be taken to prevent future
mischief that such punishment may be enforced to their good.

That the quiet & peaceable possession of their estates to the end
that justice & right may take place according to your honorable great
wisdom and prudence. This y^e pet^rs as in duty shall pray &c.


MORTGAGE--JACOB CODEBEC TO PETER GUYMARD.

To all Christian people to whom this present writing shall or may
come.

Jacob Codebec of Wackackhameck in the county of ulster and province
of New York sendeth greeting.

Now know ye that the said Jacob Codebec, for divers good causes and
considerations him thereunto moving but more and especially for and
in consideration of the sum of one hundred and seventy pounds currant
money of the province of New York to him in hand paid before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents by Peter Guymard of the same
place. The receipt whereof he the said Jacob Codebec doth hereby
acknowledge and thereof and therefrom and of and from every part &
parcell therof doe acquitt exhonerate release and forever discharge
the said Peter Guymard his heirs administrators and executors by
these presents.

It Ave given granted bargained and sold released ratified and
confirmed, and by these presents doe fully freely clearly and
absolutely give grant bargain & sell release ratify and confirm unto
the said Peter Guymard, his heirs & assignes for ever all that
certain tract or parcell of land lying and being in Wachachkameck.
Being the one just seventh part of the 1200 acres of land granted by
patent to David Jamison Thos Swartwout, John Mattison and company by
Gouvenour Benjamin Fletcher as by said patent may more fully and at
large appear.

So have and to hold the said seventh part of the said 1200 acres of
land with all and singular the priviledges the reditaments and
appurtanences thereunto belonging or in any way appurtaining
unto the said Peter Guymard his heirs and assigns and to the only
proper use benefit and behoof of him the said Peter Guymard his heirs
and assignes forever.

Provided always and upon this condition and it is the true intent and
meaning of these presents that if the above named Jacob Codebec his
heirs executors and administrators or assignes the just and full sum
of 170 pounds current money aforesaid on or before the 14th day of
February which will be in the year of our Lord 1729 with the yearly
interest of 8 p cent per anum.

Then and in such case this present deed of bargains and sale to be
utterly void and of none effect Otherwise to stand and abide in full
force power and virtue. In testimony whereof I have hereunto put my
hand and seal this 14th day of February in the 12th year of his
magesties Reigne

     Annaq Dom 1725/6
         J. Codebec SS

  Sealed and delivered
  in the presence of us
  Jn^o Crooke Jun
  Joseph Wheeler
  Barnardus A C Swartwout, X his mark

Ulster ^Co. This is to certify that on the 16 day of Feb. in the 12th
year of his magesties Reigne Annoq Dom 1725/6 appeared before me
Abraham Gaasbeek Chambers Esq one of the judges of the inferior court
of common pleas for said county.

Jn^o Crooke June one of the witnesses to this deed and being sworn on
the Holy Evangelist declares that he saw the within named Jacob
Codebec execute the same as his voluntary act and deed, and that he
saw Joseph Wheeler & Barnardus Swartwout sign the same as witnesses
and that he signed the same as a witness; and having carefully
examined the same & finds no erarures nor interliniations in the same
and allows the same to be entered on siad county Record.

vera Copia      A Gaasbeek Chambers

      Gil Livingston Clk.
   From County Clerk's office Kingston.


DEED OF JACOB C. TO HIS SONS.

To all Christian People to whom this present writing shall or may
come Jacob Codebec of Wagachkameck in the county of Ulster and
Province of New York In America Sendeth Greeting Now know y^e that the
said Jacob Codebec for divers good causes and and considerations him
thereunto moving, but more & especially for and in consideration of
the sum of 170 pounds currant money of the province of New York to
him in hand paid or secured to be paid by his three eldest children.
That is to say the three eldest sons by name Benjamin William and
Jacobus, the receipt whereof he the said Jacob Codebec doth hereby
acknowledge and thereof and therefrom and of and from every part &
parcell thereof doth acquit exhonerate release and forever discharge
the said Benjamin William and Jacobus Codebec their heirs executors
and administrators and every of them firmly by these presents have
given granted bargained sold released ratified confirmed and by these
presents doe fully freely clearly and absolutely give grant bargaine
& sell release ratify & confirm unto the said Benjamin William &
Jacobus Codebec their heirs and assignes for ever all that certain
tract or parcell of land situate being and lying in the county of
ulster at Wackachkemeck being one just seventh part of 1200 acres of
land.

Said Jacob Codebec stands entitled (?) and possessor? by virtue of a
patent from Governor Benjamin Fletcher. Relation thereunto had may
more fully & at large appear.

So have & to hold said just seventh part of 1200 acres of land as it
is devided & undivided with all and singular the appurtenances
thereunto belonging or in any ways appurtaining unto them the said
Benjamin William and Jacob Codebec their heirs and assignes and to
the only proper use benefit and behoof of them the said Benjamin
William & Jacob Codebec their heirs executors and administrators and
assignes that whereas the said Jacob Codebec has mortgaged the above
said land unto Peter Guymard the 14th inst for the consideration of
the above said. Now if the above said Benjamin Codebec William
Codebec and Jacob Codebec do pay and release said mortgage with the
interest and what said land shall be balanced appraised by three men
(indifferently chosen) to be worth more than said money Said Benjamin
William & Jacob Codebec shall pay the releasing said mortgage and
interest that that money or overplush shall be devided amongst all my
natural children by name Benjamin William Jacobus Marytie Elsie
Helena Abraham En Naomie In equal shares.

The said Benjamin William and Jacob paying the yearly quit due upon
said lands then this deed of bargaine and saile to be in full power
and virtue.

In testimony whereof the said Jacob Codebec has hereunto set his hand
and affisced his seale this 15 day of February in the 12 year of his
majesties Reigne Annoq Dom 1725/6.

The word (the 14th inst) was interhned between the 26th & 27th lines
before execution of the presents.

     J Codebec SS
 Sealed and delivered in the presence of us
     Joseph Wheeler
     Jno Crooke June
     Jacobus Swartwout Jr.




PIONEER DAYS


These sturdy young people, ambitious, enterprising, accustomed to and
delighting in the hardships of frontier life, found in this valley
and at this place an ideal spot for their purpose. They determined to
place themselves and their families beyond the realms of oppression
and persecution, to live as free as the air they breathed, at a point
relatively near, where their Huguenot countrymen had settled at
Esopus and New Paltz. Game was abundant. Fish were in the streams in
quantities. The soil was fertile, productive and easy of cultivation.
The native inhabitants were kindly disposed and peaceable. Could
anything be more alluring to these after their experience in their
native land? Tradition relates that they were happy and contented in
these new homes for many years. They were governed by a Christian
sentiment and duty. Honor for honest industry abounded. Every person
was comforted and ennobled by a "peaceful, pure and stimulating
atmosphere of personal and religious freedom."

The typical pioneer's home has been described as a log house on
sloping ground, on the brow of a hill, facing and overlooking the
level meadow land, from which a path led up to its front door, which
was about in the middle of the front of the house. Small high windows
are on either side of it. Directly opposite the front is the back
door, larger, wider and level with the ground. It opens against the
sloping ground so that wood may be carried or rolled in or that the
huge back log--the foundation for the fire--may be drawn in by a
horse for the great wide fireplace which fills up one end of the
single room--the "fire room"--the general living room. Across the
ends of the house, logs surround the great stone chimney and are
morticed in with the side logs. Between and around these clay and
earth fill in the crevices.

Before the days when leaded window glass was first imported from
England, thick oiled paper formed their semi-opaque windows.
Sun-dials and hour glasses marked the time.

The ceilings were low, the stairs were short and steep. Ladders led
to sleeping rooms above. The small cellars contained family supplies
to supplement the food furnished by hunting and fishing, in which the
Indian residents joined most willingly.

Indian trails widened to foot paths, as every one walked. Later
travel by horseback was the custom, and pack horses carried their
baggage, food and household effects--canoes and boats were of some
service. For light, a bundle of yellow pine knots was burned in a
corner of the large fireplace. This "candle wood" would be fastened
there between flat stones. Later oil obtained from different sources
was burned, as also tallow in betty lamps or brown bettys (shallow
pewter or metal dishes two or three inches in diameter with
projecting nose over which the wick hangs).

Phoebe lamps were similar but had a second shallow saucer to catch
the drip. Later candles were made by dipping, afterwards by moulds.
The pale brittle green bayberry candles from the taller shrub or
candleberry tree gave most fragrant odor, while later, the brighter
better light of the spermaceti candles was of service.

In the latter part of the 17th century, during the active lives of
the second and third generations, the lands of the patent were
allotted to individual ownership. The several owners then built
substantial stone houses at nearby points in the valley. The "Gumaer
stone house" of the present day was built. The "Cuddeback stone
house," now standing, near the log house by the highway, near a small
run of water just south of Port Clinton and about one mile due north
of pioneers knoll, was built by Jacob Caudebec and his sons.

This has been occupied by six generations of the Cuddeback family. It
is still firm and substantial and a comfortable home. The Swartwout's
possessed Seneyaghquan.

These stone houses, generally irregularly rectangular, were most
substantially built. Entrance was usually through a large double
door, horizontally divided, opening into a large "fire room" at one
end, while at the other end of the house was a smaller room, used as
a dining room or a "state bed room," where a "Slawbank" or a "half
headed bed" was ever ready for the visitor.

[Illustration: Cuddeback Stone House and Nearby Log House.]

The large heavy "lug pole" was replaced later by the light moveable
iron crane with its iron hooks, pots and kettles in the great broad
fireplace. Andirons and creepers were later added to the household
equipment. The ceilings showed great logs and rafters rough hewn and
supporting a board floor or roof with its heavy bark covering.

The attic, beside providing sleeping apartments, had near the
chimney, a room with an opening to chimney and place to smoke bacon,
ham and beef; also a room for grains, storage, etc.

The large deep cellars contained bins for potatoes, apples, turnips,
beets, etc., barrels for salted beef, pork, game and fish--tubs of
sausage, headcheese, etc., and firkins of butter, eggs--shelves
filled with fruit, etc., barrels for cider, vinegar, etc.

In the earlier years, the tables were of boards and the dishes,
platters, etc., were mostly of wood, so were the trenches, the
borols, the tankards, the spoons of laurel wood and the plates of
birch bark. Bottles and drinking cups and noggins of leather and
sometimes of the thin hard shell of the gourd of horn. Later pewter
dishes were substituted. Food was plentiful. Wild native fruits were
in abundance, as huckleberries, strawberries, blackberries, grapes
and cranberries. Wild turkey abounded in flocks. Wild geese and ducks
by the thousands, and pigeons in flocks to obscure the light, and
here were also pheasants, partridge, quail, snipe. These, with the
products of the soil made life worth living, and secured the settlers
comfort and prosperity.

The Indians, friendly and helpful, taught the planting and the
raising of Indian corn, their "gunney wheat" or "turkey wheat"--a
native American food--the grinding and the cooking of it and the
preparation of many kinds of most nutritious foods from it, samp
porridge, suppawn, new samp, succotash, using their handmade mills,
their stump and sapling mortar also. They had great fear however of
windmills. They were also most helpful in killing, securing and
preserving game and fish for winter use. In turn, they learned to
secure wild honey. With wonder they called the bees "English flies";
called the maples "sugar trees" as they boiled the sap and gathered
the sugar.

They joined in the winter sports and pastimes as fox hunting,
squirrel killing, bear bayting, and for a generation lived most
peaceably with the settlers.

For about sixty years, friendly and peaceable relations existed with
the Indians. The French and Indian war beginning about 1755 changed
this. The Indians under French influence withdrew from this region,
became hostile, made life perilous--property uncertain, and committed
many acts of treachery. Afterwards a few of them returned and
remained in the valley until the revolution, when the absence of many
of the men and the influence of the cunning Brandt turned them again
to be enemies of the whites and led to the invasion of 1777 and 1779.

In 1777 the Committee of Safety directed that three forts be built in
the "peenpack" neighborhood. The central one near the house of
Ezekiel Gumaer was near by the Pioneer's knoll. Surrounding the stone
house, on the open land a "picket fort" a stockade was built. Rows of
tree trunks, stakes, etc., were planted upright enclosing several
acres, an area sufficient to accommodate the nearby families. Around
this fort with Capt. Abram Cuddeback in command, many exciting
adventures occurred during the revolution. Gumaer states, "that the
fort sheltered eleven families, aggregating one hundred and thirteen
persons during the greater portion of the years 1778-9."

William Cuddeback, the father of Capt. Abram, was there with his
family. He was an old man and died soon after the revolution. His
son, Benjamin Cuddeback, was at Fort DeWitt, near the present
Neversink highway bridge, at the time of the raid and was in charge
of its defense. After the invasion, he returned to the "Cuddeback
Stone House," "Fort Cuddeback," with his family, where he died about
1782 presumably of typhoid fever.

The upper was the neighborhood of Meckheckemeck, while the lower
neighborhood embracing the valley from Huguenot, south to the
Delaware river was called "Little Minisink Neighborhood." Its forts
were--Westfall, Decker, near the Delaware and Van Auken, the latter
being east of the Neversink where the stone houses afforded the
protection.

After the revolution, more attention was paid to agriculture. The
small farms were again cultivated to a greater extent. Timbers were
rafted down the Neversink and Delaware to market. Saw mills and grist
mills were built in the valley. The cultivation of flax and hemp
constituted a large part of their labor. The manufacture of cloth and
clothing was a household occupation and year end employment for both
the men and the women of the families. The sowing, the cultivation,
the gathering of the flax which must be pulled, dried and ripped and
spread into a "stook" in the field. This was followed by the cleaning,
the drying and the tying in bundles. The new grown hemp must be
pounded, swingled, carded and dried, then swingled, pounded and
hetcheled until the fibers were assorted, spread and drawn ready for
spinning. The raising of sheep, the shearing, the assorting of
fleeces, the carding of the wool--the colorings of "golden rod
green"--the "pokeberry crimson"--the "sassafras orange yellow"--the
hickory-oak bark or indigo as fancy may decide. The skeins bleached,
washed, dyed and dried were wound on bobbins for the loom. Then came
the knitting, the weaving, and the making of the clothing,--broom
corn brooms supplanted birch splint brooms. Such constant employment
invariably leads to habits of economy, to adaptability and
resourcefulness which makes for independence and strength.

This mutual dependence and assistance resulting from their situation
made a "neighborhood" feeling whereby each shared in the profits, the
pleasures and the luxuries of the others. They joined together in
their work and in generous welcome to the kinsfolks. With such
environments, to a people, strong, vigorous, enterprising, voluntary
exiles for conscience's and their religious sake, these develop
strong characteristics in families, more marked in some individuals.

Gumaer notes this development in the earlier generation. He says,
"religious reading meetings were held in the peenpack neighborhood,"
also "the services of an officer were unnecessary in that
neighborhood during the first sixty or seventy years of the
settlement. They had the honesty and the prudence to adjust all
matters relating to their mutual dealings." When roused by fear and
danger they became sturdy energetic soldiers who knew only
independence and self-reliance. The extent of this is shown by the
military records. In the second regiment of Ulster County militia, in
the company of which Captain Abram Cuddeback commanded we find among
the enlisted men six of the name of Cuddeback--William, Peter, James,
Benjamin, Abraham, Sr., Abraham, Jr., five of the name of Swartwout
and several names of each of the families of the region. With such
inheritance, with such discipline, with such surroundings, with
nature as a firm, kind, unyielding teacher, impress of character was
early discernible with these people. These families developed traits
of character and physical stature which has been most noticeable in
members of succeeding generations.

"William Cuddeback, though uneducated, was versed in the scriptures,
was characterized as a wise man in his time." Each succeeding
generation developed its leaders in the religious, business and
social matters of their day, of sterling uprightness and integrity,
among a people gentle, modest, retiring, with strong religious
convictions, with sympathy and helpfulness toward each other and a
fidelity to duty.

Gumaer states, "I have sat many a long winter evening and many an
hour in the day time to hear the conversations and arguments of a few
of the individuals of the second generation. Many of these
communications and remarks were entertaining and instructive as to
what had transpired in this valley, and as to the lives of the
people." Gumaer also states from knowledge gained in this way he
considers "that Col. Peter Cuddeback had the general resemblance to
the early members of the family." His picture herewith presented may
be considered as indicative of the features and general physique of
the family.

[Illustration: Colonel Peter Cuddeback 1795-1892.]

The family life was the community life of the early generations.
Remnants of this have continued in some localities where the husking
bee, the quilting party or the apple cut afford opportunities for the
family to gather and to rehearse tales of the early trials, fortunes
and successes. This family visiting, when all of the family were
included, with its free hearty welcome, and its unreserved and
unstinted hospitality indicated the fellowship of the family as a
group and as the unit in the community and is in marked contrast to
the twentieth century methods where the individual is the unit.

After the revolution, the state lands of Central New York were opened
to settlers. Many of the younger men of the third generation
emigrated to that portion of the state and became pioneers on the
"Holland purchase" and the military lands of the state where their
families have continued to reside.

Later the descendants in the fourth generation, farmers and those of
allied pursuits, became owners of nearly all of the most fertile
bottom lands in the valley. They were jealous of their ownership of
these paternal farms, and guarded them from outside ownership and
intrusion. This spirit developed also in the members of those
families in western New York where they located. Near Skaneateles,
through one section, farm after farm for miles in extent was the
property of a Cuddeback, at Owasco, at Moravia. In Niles township,
at Twelve Corners, the same conditions existed. Farm after farm was
the property of a Van Etten, Westfall, Van Fleet or Cuddeback, or a
relative of one of them in the third or fourth generation, from
Deerpark ancestry.

Similar conditions to a limited extent existed in other sections as
in Wayne County, N. Y., Seneca County, N. Y., Niagara County, N. Y.,
Wayne and Bradford Counties, Pa., near Adrian, Mich., and in Iowa.

In 1745 Roelof Elting bequeathed to his daughter, Jacomyntje Codebec,
certain sums of money--to others lands, which if they sold, they must
first offer to their brothers and sisters at the same price a
stranger would pay.

In this development of families of succeeding generations in
different localities we see illustrated the migratory element of our
people.

These sturdy young emigrants of the middle of the seventeenth century
settled and established their homes near Kingston, N. Y., about 1650
and reared their families there. As their children reached maturity
and began life for themselves, some of them with others, later
emigrants, sought adjacent locations for their homes. The
Meckheckemeck settlement was formed just previous to 1700. Lands were
purchased and the Cuddeback patent was obtained. Here a new
generation grew to manhood. Youth again active, restless and alert
sought other locations. From 1730 to 1750 the lands along the
Delaware, both in New Jersey and in Pennsylvania were attractive. The
younger of the families of Cuddeback, Depuy, Shimer and Hornbeck
established homes there. Records show that some of the Swartwouts of
the third generation, natives of Meckheckemeck, then called
"Pin-peck," or "Peenpack," removed to this section.

As the next generation grew to manhood many of them seeking homes
crossed over into the valley of Susquehanna into the southern central
New York counties. This movement was quite extensive just after the
revolution, when influenced by the DeWitts, surveyors, quite a colony
from Peenpack established themselves in the "lake country" of central
New York.

Again in each succeeding generation similar developments occurred.
Soon after 1800 the active, restless young people from Central New
York emigrated to Michigan and to Ohio accompanied by relatives and
friends from the older settlements on the Delaware and Susquehanna.

These migrations have continued. The more alert or venturesome of
each generation have sought new locations to establish their homes.
They are now in every state of the Union some who are direct lineal
descendants of the emigrant Jacques Caudebec and in the older
locations the network of relationship is intricate and closely woven.

The lands in the valley continued to be most productive during the
first half of the nineteenth century. Substantial stately houses were
built. Large barns and out buildings were erected. The thrift and
prosperity of the farmers continued. The social life centered about
the church and the homes--a broad hospitality prevailed of which the
family was the unit.

During the lives of the fifth and sixth generations, conditions have
changed materially. The varied pursuits of the twentieth century
gives occupation as varied and diverse as their homes are distant
from one another and from the ancestral home of the family. The
exhaustion of the soil, the attraction of the productive western farm
lands, the migration to the cities, all have tended to diminish the
population and the representatives of the family throughout this
entire region of country. It is a fact, however, more than eighty per
cent, of the lands of the Caudebec patent remains today in the
possession of owners whose ancestry may be traced to a patentee.

The first attempt to build a grist mill in the valley was made by
Jacob Caudebec and his sons, near the Caudebec stone house. The small
run of water over the steep declivity just east of the house
furnished the power, the rough stone blocks, the mill stones, were
obtained from the Indians. Grains for both the settlers and the
Indians were ground there for many years, substituting this for hand
pounding with pestle in mortar and for the sapling and stump mortar.

Later other and better mill sites were located in the valley. One of
which was the mill site of Henry Decker on the old dam brook. "Ouwe
Dam Kill"--a dam across the spring brook about one mile northeast of
Port Jervis, overflowed a long, low marshy tract of land extending
toward Huguenot, stored water for power purposes for a mill located
at that point.

Remnants of this dam are visible today just west of the Huguenot
highway where it crosses the railroad as both cross the stream near
Port Jervis. Also foundation stone of the old log house, the mill
house are still visible about twenty-five feet east of the present
dwelling. This property became the property of Benjamin Cuddeback
about 1800. The present dwelling built by Benjamin Cuddeback about
1814 stands today typical of its time in shape, size and structure.
Later it was the home of Elting Cuddeback for eighty years and of his
son, the writer, during his youth.

Jacob Caudebec and Peter Gumaer were French Huguenot refugees.
Caudebec came from Caudebec-en-Caux--a thriving agricultural and
manufacturing town on the Seine in Normandy, France.

These refugees, Caudebec and Gumaer, fled in 1685 to England or
Holland, thence to Maryland, in America, later to New Amsterdam,
thence to Oesopus and Wylt Wyck (Kingston), N. Y.

Jacob Caudebec was born about 1666 in Normandy of a family of
prosperous merchants. In his flight he became separated from his
people. He was unable afterwards to find trace of his own family or
sisters or to recover any of their property. Although the following
story is found among the writings of Peter Gumaer: "Now I have
understood that it had been concluded on between Cuddeback and two of
his sisters that he and Gumaer would go to a certain place in England
or Holland (I am not certain which) and that after a certain time
these two sisters would embark for the same place and bring money to
enter into a mercantile business at the place of their destination;
and that Cuddeback and Gumaer after being landed at this place waited
for these two sisters till after the time for their arrival had
elapsed; and giving up all hopes of their coming embarked for America
and were landed in the State of Maryland; which passage exhausted the
last of their money. Cuddeback had information afterwards, that his
sisters after some length of time had arrived and entered into a
mercantile business; and he was chagrined in consequence of their
having all the money. It was said that after they had arrived
Cuddeback corresponded with them by letters and would often remind
them of their injustice in keeping to themselves all the property;
which I have understood they offered to share with him if he would
come and live with them or they would take and do well by one of his
children if he would send one of them." Ruttenber states that Peter
Gumaer and Jacob Caudebec were the younger members of the families of
Abraham Guimar and James Caudebec. He soon adapted himself to the
different conditions of life of the new world. He found employment
with Benjamin Provost, a trader of New York and Oesopus. He came to
this valley in 1690. On October 21st, 1695, he married in New York
City Margarette Provost, a daughter of his employer, Benjamin
Provost, and Elsje Aelberts who had been married in New York
Nov. 5th, 1671.

Jacob Caudebec is quoted as having said that "by leaving France he
had been deprived of many enjoyments but he had the satisfaction of
leaving his posterity in a country of good land, easily acquired." He
is characterized as of a penetrating mind, persuasive in business, of
speculative disposition, and most tender towards his family. He
retained his mental faculties and physical vigor almost until his
last hour. Three of his sons became farmers on the peenpack flats,
the lands of the patent. On February 15th, 1726, he deeded a
one-seventh interest in the patent to his three sons, Benjamin,
William and Jacob, who agreed to pay certain moneys equally to all
his children. One son and four sons-in-law became farmers near
Shepekunk, in northern New Jersey along the Delaware. In 1715 the
name of Jacob Koddeback appears as member of a foot company of Ulster
County militia, under the command of Col. Jacob Rutsen. On September
1st, 1689, J. Caudebec, a native of France, took oath of allegiance
to King William and Queen Mary.

[Illustration: Map--Division of Land.]





THE CUDDEBACK PATENT DISSOLVED.


The ownership of the lands of the Cuddeback patent were in the names
of the patentees and allotted as indicated in the chart.

The dissolution of the community ownership of the lands of the patent
was accomplished by an eight party deed of its owners on February
13th, 1768, when Captain Johannas Westbrook, Peter Gemare, Benjamin
Cuddeback and William Cuddeback, Geradus Van Inwegen, Benjamin Depuy,
Jacob Rutsen DeWitt, Abraham Cuddeback and Phillipus Swartwout, as
joint-owners of the 1200 acre patent, deeded to each of their
assignes, as individuals, their holdings. William Cuddeback received
deed for one-eighth part. William and Benjamin Cuddeback received
one-eighth part, which they redeeded to their father, Jacob
Cuddeback, and also received deed for

  lot No. 5 of 1st division of the patent
  "   No. 6    2nd    "       "      "
  "   No. 5    5th    "       "      "
  "   No. 3    6th    "       "      "
  "   No. 5    7th    "       "      "
  "   No. 2    8th    "       "      "
and also for 12 acres of land with all edifices, barns, barracks,
fencing and implements.

No record is found that either John Tyse or David Jamison lived in
the valley. It is believed that Tyse was an older man and was a
resident of Oesopus where records show the baptism of three of his
children about 1680.

David Jamison became the attorney general of the Province of New York
in 1720.

Thomas and Bernardus Swartwout removed down the Delaware valley into
New Jersey at Smithfield or Walpack, where many of their descendants
have continued to live, and today are quite numerous. Some have
changed the spelling to Swartwood. Anthony Swartwout died about 1700.
His widow with her children and second husband, Harmonas Van Inwegen,
continued to live on the lands of the patent.

For more than thirty years, the patriarch of Peenpack, Jacob Caudebec
was the sole remaining one of the original patentees to continue to
live on the patent and in the Meckheckemeck settlement. His fellow
countryman and refugee, Peter Gumaer, died previous to 1732. His will
dated September 24th, 1726, was probated at Kingston, N. Y., October
4th, 1732.





FIRST GENERATION

[Transcriber's Note: Numerals above or before an entry indicate
a lineage paragraph where that person is mentioned. The same number
is used in the index to locate an entry. Superscript numbers after a
name indicate that person's generation, with Jacob (Jacques) Caudebec
assumed as the first generation of the family. Name spellings are
those used in the original book.]

1

JACOB CAUDEBEC,^1 b. about 1666 in Normandy, d. after 1767, m. Oct.
21, 1695, at New York City, Margaretta Provost. Children (Caudebec).

 Benjamin,^2 bap. Feb. 19, 1699, at Kingston, d. about 1779,
  unmarried. He was an Ulster Co. Militiaman in 1738, a signer of
  revolutionary pledge in 1775.
 2 Maria, bap. Aug. 2, 1696, at Kingston, m. (1) Aug. 20, 1716,
  Jurian Westfall, m. (2) William Cole.
 3 Elsie, bap. Oct. 19, 1701, m. June 11, 1727, Harmonas, (Herman)
  Van Gorden.
 4 William, bap. June 2, 1704, in New York, d. about 1778,   m. Apr.
  8, 1733, at Kingston, Jemima Elting.
 5 Jacob, bap. July 7, 1706, in New York, m. Jannetje Westbrook.
 6 James (Jacobus), bap. July 7, 1706, in New York, d. about 1735,
  m. Neltje Decker.
 7 Eleanor, m. Evert (Ebert) Hornbeck.
  Magdalena, bap. Jan. 31, 1712, at Kingston.
 8 Dinah, bap. Jan. 19, 1714, d. about 1778, m. May 31, 1738, Abraham
  Louw.
 9 Abraham, bap. Aug. 19, 1716, d. Aug. 18, 1796, m. May 29, 1751,
  Esther Swartwout.
 10 Naomi, bap. Jan. 16, 1726, in Rochester, m. May 11, 1757,
  Lodewyke Hornbeck.

David William Provost, of a French Huguenot family, came from near
Rouen in Normandy, in 1638, to New Amsterdam. His son, Benjamin
Provost, b. at Hartford, Conn., bap. July 17, 1646, m. June 11, 1666,
Sara Barents of Haerlem, Holland, afterwards m. Nov. 5, 1671, Elsje
Alberts of New York, whose dau. Margaretta, bap. Sept. 16, 1673, m.
Oct. 21, 1695, Jacob Codebec.

Benjamin Provost was named in treaty of peace with the Indians at
Kingston, Feb. 11, 1679, was on May 1, 1687, by letters patent
constituted one of the trustees of Kingston and continued as such
until 1690. He d. at Peenpack, July 16, 1720, and was buried there,
where his grave may be seen today in the burying ground on a knoll
near by Pioneer knoll. His sons-in-law, Jacob Codebec, Anthony
DeMill, who m. Maria Provost, Sept. 26, 1706, and his son, David
Provost, on May 8, 1725, petitioned for letters of administration on
his estate.

David Provost, Jr., was Mayor of New York in 1698-99, having served
as alderman, chamberlain, and treasurer of the city.




SECOND GENERATION

LIVING APPROXIMATELY 1700 to 1780


2

MARIA^2 CODEBEC (Jacob^1), bap. Aug. 2, 1696, at Kingston, m. Aug.
20, 1716, at Minisink, Jurian Westfall, b. April 27, 1684, d. about
1731, son of Johannes Juriaans Westphael, m. Jan. 26, 1683, Marytje
Cool. He was a grandson of Jurian Westphael and Marytje Hansen, who
came to Ulster Co., in 1657. They lived in Northern New Jersey until
his death, when Maria m. William Cole. They resided in Sandyston,
N. J., where she died about 1796. Children (Westfall):

 11 Benjamin,^3 bap. Jan. 28, 1718, m. Annettie Van Aken.
 Margrietjen, bap. Jan. 16, 1720, in Rochester.
 12 Marretjen, bap. Jan. 31, 1720, m. Jan Van Etten.
 13 Daniel, bap. Sept. 21, 1723, m. Maria Westbrook.

Children (Cole):

 Lena, bap. May 29, 1739.
 Maria, bap. Feb. 7, 1741.
 Petrus, bap. Oct. 31, 1739.
 Wilhelmus, bap. Aug. 18, 1741.
 William, bap. Dec. 23, 1744.
 Lena, bap. Jan 7,1746.
 Wilhelmus, bap. May 10, 1747.

3

ELSIE^2 CODEBEC (Jacob^1), bap. Oct. 19, 1701, at Kingston, m. June
11, 1727, at Raysester (Rochester), Ulster Co., Harmonas (Herman)
Van Gorden, bap. July 12, 1696, son of Alberts (Gysbert) Van Gorden
and Rachael Rosenkrans, bap. Aug. 21, 1663, daughter of Harmon
Hendrick Rosenkranz, d. in Rochester, 1697, and Magdalena Dircks, who
were m. Mar. 3, 1657, in New York City. Harmonas was grandson of the
emigrant Albert Gyberson Van Gorden, who m. Aeltje Wiggers of
Geldersland, Holland, and who came to America before 1660. They were
farmers near the flat rocks (Shipekunk) in N. J., where Elsie d.
about 1780. Children (Van Gorden):

 14 Margaret,^3 bap. June 18, 1734, m. Jacobus Van Aakin.
 15 Elizabeth, bap. May 19, 1736.
 Elias, bap. Aug. 23, 1737.
 16 Benjamin, bap. Oct. 31, 1739, m.
 17 Daniel, bap. Feb. 7, 1742, m. Hannah Westbrook.
 Jannetje.
 Elsie.

4

WILLIAM^2 CAUDEBEC (Jacob^1), bap. June 21, 1704, in New York, d.
about 1778, m. April 8, 1733, at Kingston, Jemima Elting, bap. Mar.
17, 1706, dau. of Roelof Elting, who was bap. Oct. 27, 1678; m. in
1704, Sarah Dubois, dau. of Abraham Dubois, the patentee, both of old
Paltz and of Huguenot descent. William owned and occupied the home
farm, living in the Cuddeback stone house. Gumaer states "that he
was six feet tall, coarse boned, muscular and of great strength,
physically and mentally." He was an Ulster Co. Militiaman in 1738 and
although over seventy years old, he with his sons signed the
Revolutionary pledge in 1775. Children (Caudebec):

 18 Sarah,^3 bap. May 4, 1737, d. about 1807, m. Daniel Van Fleet.
 19 Abraham, bap. Oct. 31, 1738, m. Feb. 12, 1759, Esther Gumaer.
 Roeloff Elting, bap. Jan. 20, 1745, d. about 1795. He never married.
  Had a hand to hand encounter with an Indian in 1779 as related by
  Historian Eager, when each was glad to get away from the other.
 20 Benjamin, bap. June 21, 1747, d. about 1787, m. Catherine Van
  Fleet.
 James.

5

JACOB^2 CODEBEC (Jacob^1), bap. July 7, 1706, in New York, m.
Jannetje Westbrook. Child:

 Heyltje,^3 b. Feb. 20, 1769, bap. May 12, 1769, according to Church
  Records.

6

JAMES (JACOBUS)^2 CAUDEBEC (Jacob^1), bap. July 7, 1706, in New York,
d. about 1735; m. Neeltje Decker. They owned and occupied a farm in
Shepekunk, New Jersey. "His widow, Neeltje Decker Codebec (Koddebeck)
m. (2) July 2, 1749. Joseph Walloon, b. in Niew Englandt." Children
(Caudebec):

 21 James^3 bap. April 23, 1744, m. Neyltje Westbrook.
 Hendricus, "Codebec (Kuddebeck)," bap. June 29, 1746.

7

ELEANOR^2 CODEBEC (Jacob^1), m. Evert (Ebert) Hornbeck, of Ultser
Co., farmer living in Northern New Jersey (Shipekunk) on the Capt.
Benjamin Hornbeck farm. She lived to be about seventy years of age.
Children (Hornbeck):

 22 James,^3 m. Margaret Ennes.
 23 Joseph, bap. June 18, 1734, m. Lydia Westbrook.
 24 Benjamin, bap. June 20, 1747, m. Rebecca Wells.
 25 Evert, bap. May 29, 1739, m. Esther Cuddeback, see under No. 19.
 26 Maria, bap. Aug. 23, 1743, m. James (Jacobus) Rosencrantz.
 27 Margaret, bap. Aug. 26, 1736, m. Isaac Van Auken,
 28 Lydia, bap. Oct. 17, 1746, m. John Jacob Westbrook.
 29 Eleanor (Lena), bap. Jan. 12, 1746, m. Daniel Ennes.
 Elizabeth, bap. Jan. 12, 1746.
 Abraham, bap. Jan. 14, 1753.

8

DINAH^2 CODEBEC (Jacob^1), bap. Jan. 19, 1714, at "Mennissing," d.
about 1778, m. May 31, 1738, at Minisink, Abraham Louw, of Rochester,
son of Tys (Matthys) Louw, of Rochester, Ulster Co., and Jannetje Van
Haring, grandson of the emigrant, Pieter Cornelisse Louwe, who came
from Holstein, Holland, Feb., 1659, in the ship _Faith_ and m.
Oct. 27, 1668, Elizabeth Blanchaw, who came from Artoise, France, in
1660. Abraham was a blacksmith and farmer at Shipekunk many years.
Children (Louw):

 30 Jane,^3 bap. June 17, 1740, m. Jacob Van Etten. Jacobus, bap.
  April 23, 1744.
 31 Sarah, bap. June 15, 1746, m. (1) Moses De Puy, m. (2) Jonathan
  Stanton.
 32 Margaret, bap. Oct. 9, 1748, m. Capt. Martynas Westbrook.
 33 Naomi, bap. June 21, 1747, m. Ezekiel Gumaer.

9

ABRAHAM^2 CODEBEC (Jacob^1), bap. Aug. 19, 1716, d. Aug. 18, 1796, m.
May 29, 1751, Esther Swartwout, dau. of Major James (Jacobus)
Swartwout and Annie Gumaer, of Peenpack and granddaughter of Anthony
Swartwout and of Peter Gumaer. She was born 1733 and d. April 11,
1798. They lived until quite old on their farm at Peenpack, when they
removed to be with their children near Skaneateles, N. Y. Abraham was
an Ulster Co. Militiaman in 1738. Children (Codebec):

 Jacobus,^3 bap. Feb. 2, 1752.
 Petrus, bap. Nov. 25, 1753.
 34 Abram A., b. March 11, 1754.
 Manual, bap. May 12, 1754.
 35 Peter, bap. Nov. 28, 1757.
 36 James, bap. Jan. 28, 1759.
 Philip, d. when a young man.
 Annatje, bap. June 16, 1754.
 Esther.

10

NAOMI^2 CODEBEC (Jacob^1), bap. Jan. 16, 1726, in Rochester, m. May
11, 1757, at Kingston, Lodewyke Hornbeck, son of Judge Jacob Hornbeck
of Rochester, a widower of Ulster Co., whose first wife was a dau. of
the emigrant Peter Gumaer. They lived at Rochester, where she d.
about 1796. Children (Hornbeck):

 Henry.^3
 Maria, bap. Sept. 28, 1760.




THIRD GENERATION


LIVING APPROXIMATELY 1730 to 1800


11

BENJAMIN^3 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 Maria^2), b. in Menissink, bap. Jan.
28, 1718, m. Annetje Van Aken. Children (Westfall):

 Maria,^4 bap. Feb. 7, 1741.
 Cornelis Van Aken, bap. Oct. 18, 1743.
 Sara, bap. Aug. 14, 1745.
 Jury, bap. Mar. 29, 1747.
 Marya, bap. June 21, 1747.
 Margriet, bap. Jan. 29, 1749.
 Jacobus, bap. Feb. 24, 1751.
 Cornelis Van Aken, bap. Oct. 7, 1753.
 Lizabeth, bap. April 14, 1756.
 Rusje, bap. Jan. 28, 1759.

12

MARRETJEN (MARYTJEN)^3 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 Maria^2), m. Jan Van Etten,
son of Jacob Van Etten and Jannetje Westbrook, grandson of Jan Van
Etten and Jannetje Roosa, greatgrandson of Jacob Janson Van Etten and
Annetje Adriance. He settled near Easton, Pa., about 1760. Children
(Van Etten):

 37 Jan,^4 bap. April 17, 1720, m. Margaret Westfall.
 38 Magdalen A, b. 1721, m. Rev. Johannes Casparus Freyenmoet.
 Cornelis, b. 1723, bap. Jan. 19, 1724, m. Mar. 26, 1746, Heyltje
  Westbrook, dau. Johannes and Antje Rosa Westbrook.
 Jane, b. 1728.
 39 Johannes, b. 1730, m. (1) Maria Gonsales, m. (2) Rachel Williams
  Decker.
 Sarah, b. 1736.
 Richard, b. 1739.
 Daniel, bap. July 25, 1742.

13

DANIEL^3 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 Maria^2), bap. Sept. 21, 1723, m. Maria
Westbrook, dau. of Johannes Westbrook. Child (Westfall):

 40 Altje,^4 m. Jonathan Clark.

14

MARGRIET^3 VAN GORDEN, (Jacob,^1 Elsie^2), bap. June 18, 1734, m.
Jacobus Van Aakin. Farmers, Smithfield, N. J. Children (Van Aakin):

 Harmanus,^4 bap. Sept. 22, 1762.
 Elssie, bap. Dec. 8, 1766.
 Elizabeth, bap. June 8, 1777.

15

ELIZABETH^3 VAN GORDEN, (Jacob,^1 Elsie^2), bap. May 19, 1736, m.
Sept. 16, 1758, Wilhelmus Van Fredenburgh of Shepekunk, son of Aaron
Van Fredenburgh, b. 1709 and Sarah Rosenkrans, a great, great
granddaughter of Aneke Jans. Farmer, New Jersey. Aaron Vredenburg
was son of Willems Vredenburg, bap. at New Amsterdam, Dec. 20, 1673,
who m. Heyltje Van Etten, Nov. 12, 1699, at Kingston, whose parents
were Willem Isaacsen Van Vredenburg, who came to America in 1658 and
Appolonia Barents. Children (Van Fredenburgh):

 Elsie,^4 bap. Jan. 27, 1759.
 Aaron, bap. April 20, 1760, m. Sarah Van Auken. Farmer, N. J.
 Catrina, bap. April 28, 1764.
 Benjamin, bap. April 13, 1767, m. (1) Oct. 6, 1796, Mary Case,
  Montague, N. J., and had children: (1) Absalom, b. Feb. 16, 1802,
  d. 1870, Minnesota, m. Hannah Rolyea Ammerman and had 12 children;
  (2) Aaron, b. Mar. 7, 1807, d. Dec, 1869, Sparrowbush, m. May 11,
  1839, Maria A. Dewitt, dau. of Aaron and had 6 children; (3)
  Elizabeth, b. Oct. 9, 1798, d. Nov. 5, 1876, Port Gracio, Mich., m.
  Benjamin Cole Van Aken, b. Sept. 8, 1782, d. Nov. 7, 1871, and had
  8 children; (4) Loranch, m. Peter Roloson; (5) Mary Conkhng, b.
  Sept. 12, 1812, m. James Van Sickle; (6) Glorana, b. May 5, 1816.
  Benjamin Van Gordon m. for his second wife, Mrs. Kelsey, and had
  (7) David; (8) Katherine, m. David Longcer, of Sussex Co., N.J.
 Daniel, m. Lena Hopkins.
 Hezekiel.
 Joshua, bap. Oct. 17, 1773.

16

BENJAMIN^3 VAN GORDEN (Jacob,^1 Elsie^2), bap. Oct. 31, 1739, m.
Elizabeth Van De Mark. Farmer, Shepekunk, N. J. Children (Van
Gorden):

 Elizabeth.^4

17

DANIEL^3 VAN GORDEN (Jacob,^1 Elsie^2), bap. Feb. 7, 1742, m. Hannah
Westbrook, dau. of Tjerck Westbrook, of Westbrookville. Farmer, New
Jersey. Children (Van Gorden):

 Mary,^4 b. July 15, 1773.
 Elsie, b. Feb. 18, 1775.
 Eleanor, b. April 23, 1777.
 41 Martine, ("Tine"), m. Jane Van Gorden Geege.
 Sarah, b. April 14, 1781.
 Abraham, ("Brom"), b. April 14, 1781.
 42 Levi, b. May 17, 1783, m. Amy____

18

SARAH^3 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William^2), bap. May 4, 1737, in
"Menessing," d. about 1807, m. Dec. 8, 1752, Daniel Van Fleet, bap.
Feb. 4, 1738, son of John Van Fleet and Jane Swartwout, grandson of
Jan Van Vliet and great grandson of Ariaen Gerretsen Van Vliet, the
emigrant who came to America from Utrecht in the ship _Faith,_ in
Mar., 1662, m. Judith Hossey of Kingston. They owned and occupied the
Ezekiel Gumaer farm, the present Godeffrey farm. Children (Van
Fleet):

 Solomon.^4
 Sarah.
 William.
 Thomas.
 Jacomyntje.
 Magerie, b. Aug, 31, 1768.
 Abram, bap. Oct. 1, 1768.

19

ABRAHAM^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William^2), bap. Oct. 31, 1738, in
Minisink, d. Aug. 25, 1817, m. Feb. 12, 1759, Esther Gumaer, b. Jan.
2, 1730, dau. of Peter Gumaer, the emigrant who m. Esther Hasbrouck,
April 18, 1692, Abraham was a farmer, owning and occupying one-half
of his father's farm (Cuddebackville). He was a large man, weighing
over 200 pounds, was over 6 feet tall, a mechanical genius of great
dexterity, a weaver, shoemaker, tailor and a great marksman. He was a
captain of militia during the Revolution, was in the battle at
Lackawaxen and was very active in the defense of the settlers at the
time of the Indian raids. He was in command at Fort Gumaer at the
time of Brandt's invasion. He served at Fort Montgomery in guarding
the chain across, the Hudson and as a member of the Committee of
Safety throughout the Meckheckemeck Valley. He was a signer of the
Revolutionary pledge in 1775. After the Revolution, he returned to
his farm where he died. Children (Cuddeback):

 43 William Abram,^4 b. Nov. 5, 1759, d. Jan. 27, 1846, m. Charlotte
  Van Inwegen.
 Peter G., b. Feb. 26, 1761, m. July 7, 1793, Elizabeth Helm and
  removed to Onondaga Co., where their people are still prosperous
  farmers.
 44 Jacob G., b. April 1, 1763, d. July 8, 1826, m. Blandina Van
  Etten.
 45 Cornelius, b. Feb. 2, 1772, d. Aug. 20, 1841, m. (1)
  Sarah Van Etten, m. (2) Margery Van Auken.
 Esther, b. April 29, 1765, m. Evert Hornbeck, see No. 25.
 46 Jemima, b. Feb. 4, 1768, d. May 16, 1852, m. David Westfall.



20

BENJAMIN^3 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William^2), bap. June 21, 1747, d.
about 1787, became the owner of one-half his father's farm and
occupied the "Cuddeback Stone House" just south of Port Clinton, m.
1767, Catherine Van Fleet, bap. April 23, 1744, dau. of John Van
Fleet and Jane (Jesyntje) Swartwout and a granddaughter of Anthony
Swartwout. He served in the company of militia of which his brother
Abraham was Captain. He was in charge at Fort Dewitt at the time of
Brandt's raid, was a signer of the Revolutionary pledge in 1775 and
was a member of the Committee of Safety. Children (Cuddeback):

 Jesyns,^4 bap. Sept. 24, 1768, at Mackhackemeck.
 47 William, b. Aug. 30, 1768, d. July 4, 1845, m. Annatje (Salith)
  (Hannah) Van Inwegen.
 48 Henry, b. Mar. 23, 1771, d. Oct. 30, 1860, m. Esther Gumaer.
  Levi.
 49 Benjamin, b. Oct., 1779, d. July 25, 1870, m. Blandina Van Etten.
 50 Jemima, b. Aug. 10, 1773, d. June 9, 1861, m. Anthony Van Etten.
 51 Cynthia (Syntche), b. Sept. 10, 1777, d. Aug. 20, 1837, m. Simon
  Westfall.

21

JAMES^3 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 James^2), bap. April 23, 1744, m. Neyltje
Westbrook. He was a hunter, trapper and farmer. Settled in Wantage
township in 1770, where he accumulated a large tract of land, later
purchased large tract on Holland Purchase, where his children located
and where he died. This branch of the family omitted one "d" in
spelling the name. They moved to Niagara Co., N. Y., to be with their
children, who had emigrated to that locality. Children (Cudeback):

 52 John,^4 b. 1779, m. Roxana Siebold.
 53 James, m. Elizabeth Cox.
 54 Richard, m. Ruth Cox.
 55 Eleanor, m. Samuel Shelley.
 56 Mary Westbrook, m. Samuel Adams.
 57 ____, m. James Wilson.

22

JAMES^3 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor^2), m. Margaret Ennes, dau. of
William Ennes. A farmer of New Jersey. Children (Hornbeck):

 Evert.^4
 Elizabeth Ennes, bap. April 23, 1772.
 Lena, bap. Dec. 23, 1780.

23

JOSEPH^3 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor^2), bap. June 18, 1734, in
Menessing "by Dominie Mancius," m. Lydia Westbrook, dau. of Jacob
Westbrook of Shepekunk. Children (Hornbeck):

 58 Jacob,^4 m. Greetje Enness.
 59 Benjamin, m. Mary Shimer.
 60 Saffrein, m. ____ Decker.
 61 Lydia, m. James Bennett.

24

BENJAMIN^3 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor^2), bap. June 20, 1747, m.
Rebecca Wells. Children (Hornbeck):

 Joseph,^4 bap. Oct. 29, 1780.
 Jacob, bap. Feb. 23, 1780, Pike Co., Pa.
 Sarah, bap. Nov. 25, 1776.

25

EVERT^3 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor^2), bap. May 29, 1739, m. Esther
Cuddeback, dau. of Capt. Abraham Cuddeback, No. 19. Farmer, New
Jersey, and afterwards on the Joseph Cuddeback farm in Deerpark.
Owned and occupied the farm adjoining and north of her brother Jacob
Cuddeback on the highway to Huguenot. Children (Hornbeck):

 Joseph,^4 bap. Feb. i6, 1785.
 62 Jacob, m. Sally Benedict.
 Abraham, bap. June 22, 1783, farmer, Cayuga Co., N. Y.
 63 Benjamin, m. Rebecca Weiss.
 64 Cornelius.
 Eleanor.
 65 Jemima, m. Daniel Enness.

26

MARIA^3 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor^2), bap. Aug. 23, 1743, m. Apr. 19,
1770, James (Jacobus) Rosencrantz, b. April 20, 1745, farmer in
Pennsylvania, at whose home (Theesacht, later Rosetown), Thomas
Quick, the Indian slayer, died. James Rosencrantz was son of Herman,
bap. Mar. 28, 1703, m. April 29, 1725, Arriantje Osterhout, bap.
Sept. 29, 1706, lived in Penn., grandson of Derrick Rosenkrans, who
m. Jan. 3, 1697, Wyntje Kierstede. A great grandson of Herman
Hendricksen Rosen-kranz, who came from Bergen, Norway, to Ulster Co.,
N. Y., 1660, m. Mar. 3, 1667, Magdaleine (Dirks) Caper. Children
(Rosencrantz):

 Betsey,^4 b. 1771, m. Manuel Brink.
 Lena, b. 1773, m. Feb. 17, 1791, Martyne Cole, had son Jacobus, who
  had son, Judge Martin Cole.
 66 Catherine, b. 1775, m. (1) Daniel Decker, m. (2) Crissie Bull.
 Roanna (Choney), m. Alexander (Sender) Enness.
 67 Diana, b. 1779, m. John B. Quick.

27

MARGARET^3 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor^2), bap. Aug. 26, 1736, m. Isaac
Van Auken, farmer. New Jersey. Children (Van Auken):

 Joseph,^4 bap. Feb. 12, 1758.
 James (Jacobus), bap. April 8, 1764.
 68 Evert (Everitt), m. Sarah Westbrook.
 Seletie, bap. Oct. 17, 1773.
 Madeline, bap. Nov. 25, 1776.
 Grietje, bap. June 23, 1778.

28

LYDIA^3 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor^2), bap. Oct. 17, 1743, m. John
Jacob Westbrook, farmer, New Jersey, son of Johannes Westbrook, an
original settler of Montague and large land owner on the Delaware, d.
1755. Children (Westbrook):

 Catherine,^4 b. July 15, 1767.
 69 Jane, b. Nov., 1757, d. Dec. 15, 1837, m. Levi Van Etten.
 70 Maria, m. Cornelius Westbrook, Montague, N. J.
 71 John I., m. ____.
 72 Solomon, b. Oct. 6, 1762, d. Mar, 30, 1824, m. Margaret De Witt.
 73 Saffrein, m. Blandina Westbrook.

29

ELEANOR (LENA)^3 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor^2), bap. Jan. 12, 1746, m.
Daniel Ennes, blacksmith and farmer in New Jersey, son of William
Ennes, b. in Marbletown, Jan. 12, 1712, m. June 19, 1745, Elizabeth
Quick, dau. of Thomas Quick, grandson of William Ennes and Cornelia
Viervant. Children (Ennes):

 James.^4
 Cobus, bap. April 13, 1767.
 Elizabeth, bap. Feb. 5, 1769, m. July 7, 1788, Thomas Van Etten.
 Sally Ann.
 74 Alexander.

30

 JANE^3 LOUW (Jacob,^1 Dinah^2), bap. June 17, 1740, m. Jacob Van
  Etten, son of John, farmers in Pennsylvania, near the Delaware.
  Children (Van Etten):

 Dinah.^4
 Margaret.
 Sarah.

31

SARAH^3 LOUW (Jacob,^1 Dinah^2), bap. June 15, 1746, m. (1) Moses
DePuy, who was drowned in the Neversink River, m. (2) Jonathan
Stanton and lived at Wurtsboro, N. Y. Children (De Puy):

 Benjamin.^4
 Abraham, bap. June 1, 1777.
 Martynas, bap. Oct. 29, 1780.

Children (Stanton):

 William, farmer, Wurtsboro.
 Moses, farmer, Wurtsboro.

32

MARGARET^3 LOUW (Jacob,^1 Dinah^2), bap. Oct. 9, 1748, m. Capt.
Martynas Westbrook. They owned and occupied a farm in Northern New
Jersey. Martynus Westbrook was the son of Abraham Westbrook and Maria
Helm, a grandson of Johannes Westbrook, who m. Altje Roosa, Dec. 19,
1715, whose father Johannes, b. Albany, Oct. 9, 1665, m. May 12,
1687, Magdalena Janse Dekker, and came to Sandyston, 1731. His
grandfather was Anthony and his great grandfather Jan Westbrook came
from Holland. Children (Westbrook):

 75 Mary,^4 b. Oct., 1774, m. Judge Daniel W. Dingman.
 76 Abraham, b. Nov. 15, 1775, m. Nancy Ann Buckley.

33

NAOMI^3 LOUW (Jacob,^1 Dinah^2), bap. June 21, 1747, m. June 29,
1770, Ezekiel Gumaer, b. Dec. 29, 1742, son of Peter Gumaer, b. Nov.
15, 1708, and Charity De Witt, b. 1710, d. Nov. 12, 1756, grandson of
Peter Gumaer, who April 18, 1692, m. Esther Hasbrouck. They owned and
occupied the Gumaer homestead farm and built the present Gumaer stone
house. Children (Gumaer):

 77 Peter E.,^4 b. May 28, 1771, d. Dec. 18, 1869, m. Esther
  Cuddeback, see under No. 44.
 Abraham, bap. April 20, 1774.

34

ABRAM A.^3 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham^2), b. Mar. 11, 1754, d. Oct.
22, 1831, m. Jane De Witt, d. Feb. 22, 1836, dau. of Jacob R. De
Witt. When a young man he went as a surveyor to the Holland
Purchase in Western N. Y., and afterwards in July, 1794, with his
wife and children settled in the town of Skaneateles, on the west
shore of the lake, about one-half mile south of the present village
of Skaneateles. Their descendants became farmers about Skaneateles.
Children (Cuddeback):

 78 Hester,^4 b. Dec. 26, 1785, m. Richard Conkhng.
 79 Isaiah, b. Oct. 29, 1787, m. (1) ____ Courtright, m. (2) Rachel
  Cole, m. (3) Maria Smith.
 80 Jacob, b. Jan. 27, 1789, m. (1) Elizabeth De Witt, m. (2)
  Catherine Spurbeck.
 James, b. Oct. 20, 1789.
 81 Egbert, b. Dec. 7, 1792, m. Maria Gumaer.
 Philip, b. May 23, 1794.
 82 Moses, b. Jan. 13, 1795, m. Helen Spurbeck.
 Hannah.
 83 Levi, b. April 29, 1799, m. Rudy Foote.
 84 Dewitt, b. July 20, 1801, m. Sarah Peckham.
 85 Simeon, b. July it, 1803, m. Angelica Wycoff.
 Abram, b. Feb. 5, 1805.
 Louisa, b. April 11, 1808.

35

PETER^3 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham^2), bap. Nov. 28, 1757, m.
Margaret De Witt, dau. of Jacob R. De Witt and Jane De Puy and
granddaughter of Moses Depuy of Rochester and of Egbert De Witt of
Neponaugh. Peter was a surveyor and farmer, who emigrated to Holland
Purchase. Children (Cuddeback):

 86 Moses,^4 bap. Sept. 6, 1781, m. Mary Tenure.
 Esther, m. ____ Stone. Lived at Owasco, N. Y.
 87 Peter, m. ____ Stevens.
 88 Abram, m. Hannah De Witt.

36

JAMES^3 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham^2), bap. Jan. 28, 1759, m.
Esyntje Van Fleet, dau. of John Van Fleet. Child (Cuddeback):

 Gerardus Swartwout,^4 bap. Sept. 6, 1781.




FOURTH GENERATION


LIVING APPROXIMATELY 1770 to 1840


37

JAN^4 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Maria,^2 Marretjen^3), bap. April 17, 1720,
m. Margaret Westfall. Children (Van Etten):

 Helena,^5 b. 1738, m. Benj. Enness and had (1) Benjamin, bap. Aug.
  19, 1787.
 Jacob, b. 1740.
 Daniel, b. 1742.
 Catherine, b. 1744.
 Maria, b. 1746.
 Simeon, b. 1748.
 Margaret, b. 1748, m. Jacob Wilson and had, (1) Thomas, bap. Aug.
 18, 1782, (2) Mireon, bap. June 8, 1784.
 Samuel, b. 1750.
 Margreeta, b. 1752.

38

MAGDALENA^4 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Maria,^2 Marretjen ^3), b. 1721, m.
July 23, 1742, Rev. Johannes Casparus Freyenmoet, d. 1778 at
Kinderhook. Children (Freyenmoet):

 Dorothea,^5 bap. April 23, 1743.
 Antje, bap. July 13, 1746.
 Heyltje, bap. July 17, 1748.
 Maria, bap. Dec. 30, 1750.
 Heyltje, bap. Feb. 3, 1754.

39

JOHANNES^4 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Maria,^2 Marretjen^3), b. 1730, m. (1)
1750, Maria Gonsales, m. (2) about 1779, Rachel Williams Decker.
Settled in Pike Co., about 1760. Children, by first marriage (Van
Etten):

 Magdalena,^5 b. 1751. Manuel, b. 1754. Rymerick, b. 1756.
 89 Johannes, Jr., b. 1759, m. Mariah Rosenkrans.
 90 James, b. 1763, m. Sarah Rosenkrans. Elizabeth, b. 1762.
 Catherine, b. 1771. Simeon, b. 1776.

Children, by second marriage (Van Etten):

 91 Daniel,^5 b. 1780, m. Catherine Decker.
 92 Cornelius, b. 1782, d. 1869, m. Anna Smith.
 93 Solomon, b. 1789, m. Catherine Rosenkrans.
 94 Dorothy, m. John Lattimore.

40

ALTJE^4 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 Maria,^2 Daniel^3), m. Jonathan Clark.
Children (Clark):

 Abraham,^5 bap. Nov. 1, 1780.
 Isaac, m. ____ Youngs and had (1) James Y., m. Mary ____, their
  child was William C. Clark, who m. Hannah A. Martin and had
  Martin Clark of Matamoras, (2) John Y., m. Arminda Stoll.
 Jacob, bap. July 9, 1784.
 Elijah, bap. Mar. 28, 1786.
 Jonathan, bap. Mar. 8, 1789.

41

MARTIN^4 VAN GORDEN (Jacob,^1 Elsie,^2 Daniel^3), m. Jane Van Gorden
Geege. Children (Van Gorden):

 Catherine,^5 m. (1) Lodewyke De Witt, m. (2) Isaac Shimer, Quicktown,
  Pa.
 William.
 Silas, m. Kate Stogum, had ____, who m. ____ Edsall.
 Peter, m. Eleanor Winfield.
 Dewitt, m. ____ Southard.
 Elsie, m. David Lambert.
 Maria.

42

LEVI^4 VAN GORDEN (Jacob,^1 Elsie,^2 Daniel^3), b. May 17, 1783,
m. Amy ____, b. Sept. 17, 1786, d. Feb. 8, 1836. Indian Orchard Farm,
near Delaware, Pike Co., Pa. Children (Van Gorden):

 David,^5 b. Sept. 10, 1812.
 Rebecca, b. April 1, ____, d. Sept. 21, ____, Milford, Pa.
 Maria, b. May 6, 1817, d. Oct. 7, 1895, m. Saffrein Van Noy, b. July
  30, 1810, d. May 7, 1892, son of Benjamin and Hannah Van Noy, and
  had (1) Amy, b. Oct. 30, 1837, (2) Benjamin, b. Nov. 11, 1839, d.
  Jan. 17, 1907.
 John, b. Dec. 27, 1818, m. Jane Whitehead Gumaer, dau. of Peter G.
  and Eunice Gumaer, and had Jeremiah.
 Levi J., b. Dec. 10, 1825.

43

COL. WILLIAM ABRAM^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham^3), b.
Nov. 5, 1759, bap. Nov. 21, 1759, d. Jan. 27, 1846, m. Charlotte Van
Inwegen, b. 1751, d. Aug. 24, 1829, Lived at Cuddebackville, which
hamlet was named for him at the building of the Delaware & Hudson
Canal. He was a Colonel of militia at time of the war of 1812. He
succeeded to the lands and position and influence in the community of
his father, Captain Abram Cuddeback. Children (Cuddeback):

 Samuel,^5 b. 1779, d. Dec. 30, 1843, m. Christiana Decker, b. 1793,
  d. Mar. 17, 1867. Farmers near Cuddebackville on Oakland Road.
 95 Abram, b. Sept. 6, 1784, m. Katherine Kuykendall.
 96 Margaret, b. July 18, 1785, m. Jacob Gumaer.
 Harmonas, b. Oct. 16, 1790, m. Hannah Kuykendall, had one son,
  Daniel, b. 1835, d. 1889.
 97 William, b. April 12, 1792, m. Mary Westbrook.
 98 Ezekiel, b. 1794, m. Jane Van Inwegen.
 99 Peter G., b. Oct. 22, 1795, m. Caroline Mapes.
 100 James, b. Mar. 18, 1799, m. (1) Jemima Cuddeback, m. (2)
  Catherine Cuddeback.
 101 Lewis, b. Jan. 16, 1807, m. Caroline Lee Thompson.

[Illustration: House of Colonel William A. Cuddeback 1822,
Cuddebackville, N. Y.]

44

JACOB GUMAER^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham^3), b. April 1,
1763, d. July 8, 1826, m. Blandina Van Etten, b. May 28, 1765, d.
April 25, 1844, dau. of Jacob (Yok) Van Etten of the Showockemack (?)
farm. This farm, on the east bank of the Neversink near a stream of
that name above Huguenot, was the home of a large family, who lived
there for many years. Now there is no vestige of its former
habitation. Jacob owned and occupied the farm on a part of which is
now Lake Orinoco, about midway between Port Jervis and Huguenot.
Children (Cuddeback):

 102 Jennie,^5 b. Sept, 28, 1790, m. J, (Cobus) B. Cole.
 103 Hester, b. Nov. 30, 1793, m. Peter E. Gumaer, see No. 77.
 104 Sarah, b. June 8, 1800, m. Simeon Westfall.
 Naomi, b. Feb, 17, 1804, m, Peter Van Patten, farmer in Western New
  York, later removed to Michigan.
 105 Jacob, b. Oct, 30, 1805, m. Elizabeth Van Auken.
 Jemima, b. Oct, 30, 1805, m. Jacob G. Cuddeback, see No. 127.
 Abram J., b. Jan. 17, 1807, d. Aug, 31, 1881, m. Jan, 8,  1831,
  Catherine Cuddeback, b. June 28, 1809, d. June 8, 1877, farmer,
  Deerpark, see No. 130.
 106 Joseph, b. April 22, 1812, m. (1) Eliza Decker, m, (2) Martha
  Clark.
 107 Isaac, b. Jan. 30, 1816, m. Catherine Rose.

45

CORNELIUS^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham^3), b. Feb. 2,
1772, d. Aug, 20, 1841, m, (1) Jan, 4, 1795, Sarah Van Etten, dau. of
Yok Van Etten, m, (2) Margery Van Auken, b. 1781, d. Nov, 25, 1857.
He owned and occupied the Alva Cuddeback farm north of Huguenot,
living in the long, low, red one and one-half story house just north
of the present Hotel Huguenot. Children, by first marriage
(Cuddeback):

 108 Naomi,^5 b. Aug. 31, 1795, m. James D. Swartwout.
 109 Abram, m. Dec. 15, 1827, Deborah Swartwout.
 110 Margaret, m. June 22, 1821, Thomas Van Fleet.

Children by second marriage (Cuddeback):

 Catherine, b. June 25, 1804.
 111 Peter G., b. Nov. 13, 1806, m. Jane Van Etten.
 Jemima, m. James Cuddeback, see No. 100.
 Sally, b. Mar. 16, 1811, d. Sept. 16, 1859, m. William Foster,
  farmer, Huguenot.
 112 Maria, b. Aug. 4, 1813, m. Jacob Hornbeck. See under No. 59.
 113 Martha, b. Aug. 26, 1815, m. Joseph Shimer.

46

JEMIMA^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham^3), b. Feb. 4, 1768,
d. May 16, 1852, m. David Westfall, b. Jan. 25, 1768, d. Mar. 25,
1854, son of Simeon, grandson of Simeon Westfall of Bennett Mills at
Tri-States. David was a farmer of Westfall Township, Pa. Children
(Westfall):

 Simeon,^5 b. May 12, 1792, m. Sarah Cuddeback. See No. 104.
 Abram, was killed by a falling tree. Farmer in Ohio.
 114 Wilhelmus, b. Jan. 21, 1796, m. Margery Cole.
 Cornelius, b. July 22, 1798, m. Hulda Cuddeback. See under No. 126.
 115 Jacob, b. 1800, m. Mary Westfall.
 Sally, b. Mar. 29, 1802, m. James Bennett. See No. 177.
 116 Hester, m. William Van Noy.
 Solomon, b. 1807, d. July 11, 1885.

47

WILLIAM^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin^3), b. Aug. 30,
1768, d. July 4, 1845, ni. May 17, 1786, Annatje (Hannah) Van
Inwegen, b. Jan. 21, 1767, sister of David Van Inwegen. He was called
"Dick Willem" (Thick William), so named because of his corpulence. He
owned the home farm and occupied the "Cuddeback Stone House" south of
Port Clinton. Children (Cuddeback):

 117 Catherine,^5 m. Jacob Nearpass.
 118 Benjamin, b. Sept. 22, 1789, m. Catherine Kuykendall.
 119 Margaret, b. Oct. 12, 1791, m. Daniel Van Etten.
 120 Harmonas, b. Jan. 30, 1794, m. Nancy Whitehead.
 121 Simon, b. 1795, d. 1887, m. Margery Middaugh.
 Jemima, b. Aug. 16, 1798, d. Jan. 13, 1838, m. Michael Nearpass,
  farmer, New Jersey, b. Aug., 1795, d. Nov. 14, 1869. He m. (2),
  July 13, 1839, Charlotte, dau. of William and Temperance Stuart, b.
  Jan. 8, 1809, d. May I, 1890.
 122 Charlotte, b. Dec. 19, 1800, m. Jerry Gumaer.
 123 Levi, b. Nov. 12, 1803, m. Maria Van Inwegen.
 124 Sally, b. Jan. 11, 1806, m. William Nearpass Case.
 Lewis, b. Jan. 16, 1807.
 Samuel, b. Oct. 14, 1808. A farmer in Wisconsin.
 Jane, b. July 4, 1811, m. Oct. 31, 1835, William Donaldson, a farmer
  at Deerpark, later removed to Wisconsin.

48

HENRY^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin^3), b. Mar. 23, 1771,
d. Oct. 30, 1860, m. Oct. 3, 1794, Esther Gumaer, b. Sept. 23, 1774,
d. Sept. 22, 1847, dau. of Jacob Gumaer. He was a farmer, owning and
occupying the Peter Van Etten farm on Caudebec patent at Huguenot,
where he lived twenty or more years. Later he purchased from Jacob
Westbrook and occupied the Levi Van Etten farm east of the Never-sink
River adjoining and northeast of "Penhausen's Landt." Children
(Cuddeback):

 125 Elizabeth,^5 b. Dec. 29, 1794, m. Thomas Van Fleet, see No. 110.
 126 Hulda, b. Dec. 11, 1796, m. Cornelius Westfall, see No. 46.
 127 Jacob G., b. Mar. 13, 1799, m. (1) Blandina Hornbeck, m. (2)
 Jemima Cuddeback, see No. 44.
 128 Cynthia, b. April 9, 1801, m. David Swartwout.
 Benjamin, b. Feb. 22, 1804, d. 1806.
 129 Simeon, b. Oct. 6, 1806, m. Blandina Bennett, see No. 61.
 130 Catherine, b. June 28, 1809, m. Abram Cuddeback, see No. 44.
 Jemima, m. Charles D. Burdick and had son, Charles D. Burdick, of
 Sturges, Kentucky.
 131 George, b. Aug. 10, 1815, m. Margaret Carpenter.

49

BENJAMIN^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin^3), b. Oct. 1779,
in "Cuddeback Stone House," bap. Oct. 29, 1780, d. July 25, 1870, m.
Dec, 26, 1805, Blandina Van Etten, b. Jan, 4, 1788, d. Oct. 1, 1867,
dau. of Levi Van Etten and Jane Westbrook. Children (Cuddeback):

 Levi Van Etten,^5 b. Mar. 13, 1807, d. Nov. 18, 1810.
 132 Catherine, b. June 6, 1809, m. James Cuddeback, see No. 100.
 133 Jane, b. Dec. 22, 1811, m, Alexander T. Johnson.
 134 Aseneth, b. May 12, 1814, m. Samuel Bernard Farnum.
 135 Elting, b. Oct. 10, 1816, m. (1) Ann Bevier Elting, m. (2)
  Margaret Cuddeback.
 136 Hannah, b. April 12, 1819, m. Peter P. Swartwout.
 137 Thomas, b. Aug. 31, 1821, m. Mary Elizabeth Thompson.
 138 Jemima, b. April 1, 1825, m. Lemuel Steele Chapin.
 139 Lydia, b. Sept. 5, 1827, m. Walter Wallace Titsworth.

50

JEMIMA^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin^3), b. in Deerpark,
Aug. 10, 1773, d. June 9, 1861, m. April 26, 1801, Anthony Van Etten,
b. Mar. 30, 1799, after his father's death, bap. in Deerpark, Oct.
29, 1780, d. Jan. 30, 1821, son of Anthony Van Etten, who was
assassinated by the Tories in 1778, and Hannah Decker. Anthony owned
and occupied a farm at Owasco, N. Y., where they lived and died.
Children (Van Etten):

 140 Hannah,^5 b. May 31, 1802, m. Warren Austin.
 141 Benjamin, b. Feb. 28, 1804, m. Amanda Grover.
 142 Aseneth, b. Jan. 26, 1806, m. William Howard.
 Levi W., b. Nov. 22, 1807, d. Jan. 1, 1891. He was a farmer on
 homestead at Owasco, N. Y., with his brother, Thomas.
 Thomas, b. Aug. 23, 1809, d. May 8, 1890, m. Jan. 19, 1876, Jane E.
  Green. He was a farmer on homestead with his brother, Levi.
 143 Catherine, b. Sept. 14, 1811, m. Martin Pierce Sweet.
 144 Simon, b. July 28, 1814, m. Anna Hine.
 145 Mary, b. June 5, 1816, m. Israel H. Owen.
 146 Ann, b. Jan. 12, 1819, m. Holdridge Ozro Collins.

51

CYNTHIA^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin^3), b. Sept. 10,
1777, d. Aug. 20, 1837, m. May 29, 1787, Simon Westfall, b. 1764, d.
Oct. 23, 1846, son of Simon Westfall and Sarah Cole. Children
(Westfall):

 147 Benjamin,^5 b. April 15, 1788, m. Cynthia (Syntche) Gumaer.
 148 Sally, b. June 15, 1792, m. Daniel Whitlock.
 149 Levi, b. May 10, 1795, m. Elizabeth Van Etten.
 150 Catherine, b. Feb. 6, 1796, m. John D. Carpenter.
 151 Jemima, m. John De Witt.

52

JOHN^4 CUDABACK (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James^3), b. 1779, d. Dec. 21,
1831, m. Roxana Caldwell Siebold, b. 1784, d. Aug. 16, 1823. Farmer
near Sussex, N. J., later on Holland Purchase, near Olcott, N. Y.,
where he moved about 1816. Children (Cudaback):

 152 Sylvia,^5 b. Sept. 6, 1805, m. Peter Bogert.
 153 John Siebold, b. Aug. 24, 1807, m. (1) Abigal Whitney, m. (2)
  Jane Hamilton.
 154 Lydia, b. ____, m. Socrates Griswold.
 Sarah, b. Feb. 2, 1817, d. Aug. 1, 1831.
 155 Samuel Adams, b. Mar. 30, 1831, m. Elizabeth Smith.

53

JAMES^3 CUDABACK (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James^3), m. Elizabeth Cox.
Farmer in Niagara Co., N. Y., about 1820, and later emigrated to
Michigan. Children (Cudaback):

 Amanda.^5
 Beardsley,
 Reuben.
 John.
 Nathan.

54

RICHARD^4 CUDABACK (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James^3), farmer Niagara Co.,
N. Y., later of Michigan, m. Ruth Cox. Children (Cudaback):

 156 Nicholas,^5 m. Armitta Bradley.
 Henry.
 Richard.
 Nicholas.
 Emma.
 Ellen.
 Rebecca.
 Mary.
 James.

55

ELEANOR^4 CUDABACK (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James ^3), m. Samuel Shelley,
a farmer and tanner of Morris Co., N. J. They lived first in
Papakating Valley, near Sussex, N. J., later in Niagara Co., N. Y. He
d. at Sparta, N. J., aged 102 years. Children (Shelley):

 157 Elizabeth,^5 m. Evi Ketcham.
 158 Maria, m. Joseph Morris.
 159 Sarah, m. David Force.
 Susan, m. Francis Cain, Youngstown, N. Y.
 160 Jane, m. Barrett D. Havens.
 161 Lydia, m. Solomon Marshall.
 162 Rosanna, m. Morris Sharp.
 163 Roxana, m. Robert Adams.
 164 James, m. Margaret Matilda Hiles.
 Samuel.
 165 Ford, m. Catherine Ackerson.

56

MARY WESTBROOK^4 CUDABACK (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James^3), m. Samuel
Adams, of Deckerstown, N. J., and later of Niagara Co., N. Y.
Children (Adams):

 166 Sylvanus,^5 m. Martha Carr.
 167 Philah, m. Thomas Owens.
 168 James, m. Susan Hall.
 169 Hulda, b. Mar. 31, 1804, m. Samuel D. Coykendall.
 170 Isaiah, m. Eliza Hall.
 171 Ensley, m. Ada Hall.
 172 John S., m. Margaret Bailey.

57

 ____^4 CUDABACK (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James^3), m. James Wilson, of
Sussex Co., N. J. They later removed to Niagara Co., N. Y. Children
(Wilson):

 James,^5 m. Elizabeth Prigmore.
 John, m. (1) ____ Carson, m. (2) ____ Ayres, m. (3) ____ Rice.
 Estel, m. Mary Mackherter.
 Sarah, m. Joshua Benjamin,
 173 Lydia, m. Robert Tisdell.

58

JACOB^4 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph^4), "Major." Farmer near
Dingman's and in Pike Co., Pa. Children (Hornbeck):

 174 Belinda,^5 m. Judge Martin Westbrook Dingman.
 175 Maria, b. Oct. 28, 1804, d. May 1, 1883, m. Feb. 19, 1826, Judge
  Oliver S. Dimmick.

59

BENJAMIN^4 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph^3), "Capt.," d. April
5, 1855, m. Mary Shimer, who d. 1860, dau. Jacob, Sr., and Phoebe
Shimer, Children (Hornbeck):

 175A Phoebe,^5 m. William Posten, farmer, Montague.
 Jacob, b. Dec. 24, 1809, m. Maria Cuddeback, see No. 112.

60

SAFFREIN (SOVERYNE)^4 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph^3), m.
____ Decker, farmer, Montague, N. J., was drowned in the Delaware
River in 1806. Children (Hornbeck):

 176 Joseph,^5 m. Ella Clark.
 John, m. Polly Westbrook.
 ____, m. ____ Cuddeback.

61

LYDIA^4 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph^3), m. Jan. I, 1792,
James Bennett, son of James Bennett and Sally Westbrook. Farmer,
Montague. Children (Bennett):

 177 James,^5 b. April 14, 1804, m. Sally Westfall.
 178 Soveryne, b. 1806, m. Caroline Snyder.
 179 Mary, m. George Westfall.
 180 Sally, m. Nicholas Van Noy.
 Blandina, b. Jan. 30, 1809, m. Simeon Cuddeback, see No. 129.
 181 Joseph, m. Mary Van Noy.
 Hannah.
 Henry.

62

JACOB^4 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert^3), m. Sally Benedict.
Farmer, near Wurtsboro, Sullivan Co., N. Y. Children (Hornbeck):

 182 Clarissa,^5 m. James Niven of Monticello, N. Y.
 183 Louis, m. Eliza Lydia Stanton.
 184 Evert, b. Mar. 27, 1817, m. Sarah Maria Masten.
 185 Hester Ann, m. Matt LeFevre.
 186 Maria, m. Louis N. Weed.
 187 Laura, m. John A. Van Keuren.
 Mary, m. (1) Almond Smith, m. (2) Simon Relyea, m. (3) Garrison
  Royce.
 188 Jacob, b. Dec. 19, 1827, m. Abbie Eustick.
 Harriet, b. Mar. 3, 1828, at Westbrookville, N. Y., d. Feb. 8, 1909,
  at Port Jervis, N. Y., m. 1851, Darius Rhodes, carpenter and
  builder. Port Jervis.
 189 Delia, m. David Smith.

63

BENJAMIN^4 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert^3), of Huguenot, m.
Rebecca Weiss. Children (Hornbeck):

 190 Benjamin,^5 b. 1842, m. Prudence Ackerman.
 Wilhamena, m. Herbert Nicklewiez, Brooklyn, N. Y.
 William H., m. Sept. 3, 1876, Bella Cutler, Port Jervis, N. Y.

64

CORNELIUS^4 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert^3), m. May 17, 1817,
Rachael Van Noy. Children (Hornbeck):

 191 James,^5 b. Jan. 24, 1820, m. Susan Drake.
 192 Esther, m. Almerin Janes Taylor.
 Abram, Cayuga Co., N. Y.
 Eliza, m. Chester Schoonover, Bradford Co., Pa., child: (Schoonover)
  (1) Mary Jane, m. John E. Dodge, Bradford Co., Pa., d. Jan. 24,
  1879.
 Jemima.
 Mary Jane.

65

JEMIMA^4 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert^3), d. Jan. 24, 1879, m.
Mar. 8, 1828, Daniel Enness, Montague, N. J. Children (Enness):

 Lena,^5 m. David Bennett.
 Esther, m. John Marsh Youngs, one child (Youngs): Eva, m. Arthur
  Cooper, Montague, N. J.
 Jackson (Alexander).

66

CATHERINE^4 ROSENCRANZ (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Maria^3), b. 1775, d.
June, 1856, m. (1) Daniel Decker, m. (2) Crissie Bull, d. 1851, son
of John Bull and Hannah Holley, grandson of William Bull and Sarah
Wells of Orange Co., great grandson of John Bull and Johanna Clark
and a great, great grandson of Peter Bull of England. Children
(Decker):

 193 Lena,^5 m. John D. Everett.
 Roanna, m. John B. Layton.
 James Rosenkrantz, b. May 6, 1803.

Children (Bull):

 194 Elizabeth Maria, b. June 10, 1813, m. Eli Van Inwegen.
 Rosencrans Chrissie, b. June 10, 1816, m. Jemima Westfall, see under
  No. 126.
 James.
 Hannah Rogers, b. Nov. 1, 1810, m. Jan. 31, 1832, Col. Henry
  Sperling Mott, b. at Easton, Sept. 23, 1811, d. at Milford, Pa.,
  June 1, 1877.

67

DIANA^4 ROSENCRANTZ (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Maria^3), b. 1779, d. Oct.
19, 1864, m. John B. Quick, b. 1780, d. Mar. 5, 1865, son of Peter
Quick. Children (Quick):

 Jacob R.,^5 m. Hannah Crawford, Pinckney, Mich.
 Martin C, m. (1) Maria Werneth, m. (2) Mrs. Elizabeth Hazlett.
 Marie E., m. (1) ____ Wood, m. (2) Barnhart Kratz, Callicoon, N. Y.
 James R., m. Sallie Coskey, Meadville, Pa.
 Hannah S., m. John Jackson, Detroit, Mich.
 Peter A. L., b. Feb. 1, 1819, m. April 19, 1858, Catherine A. Angle,
  b. July 25, 1832. Children (Quick): (1) Lafayette Westbrook, (2)
  Emma J., m. George R. Snelling, lawyer, Topeka, Kansas, (3)
  Margaret A., m. John W. Nyce, Caldwell, Kansas, (4) Flora A., m.
  William R. Connor, Caldwell, Kansas, (5) Lena A., m. W. C. Cole.

68

EVERT (EVERITT)^4 VAN AUKEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Margaret^3), m.
Sarah Westbrook. Farmer, Montague N. J. Children (Van Auken):

 195 Lydia,^5 m. David G. Finch, farmer, Finchville, N. J.
 196 Mary, m. Col. Benjamin Woodward, farmer. Mount Hope, N. J.
 Sally, m. Thomas Van Etten, farmer, Deerpark, see No. 200.

69

JANE^4 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia^3), b. Nov. 1757, d.
Dec. 15, 1837, m. Nov. 17, 1777, Levi Van Etten, b. Feb. 12, 1758, d.
Oct. 25, 1843, son of Anthony Van Etten, b. June 12, 1726, d. 1778,
m. Aug. 3, 1750, Hannah Decker, b. 1830 d. Mar. 12, 1817, an
"associator" and captain in Colonial army during the Revolution,
grandson of John and great grandson of Jacob Jansen Van Etten, the
emigrant. Children (Van Etten):

 197 Jacob,^5 bap. Oct. 29, 1780, m. Charity Gumaer.
 198 Solomon, b. Jan. 25, 1782, m. Jemima Gumaer.
 Blandina, b. Jan. 4, 1788, m. Benjamin Cuddeback, see No. 49.
 199 Levi, b. Aug. 13, 1790, m. Eleanor Carpenter.
 200 Thomas, b. May 4, 1795, m. Sally Van Auken, see under No. 68.

70

MARIA^4 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia^3), m. Cornelius
Westbrook, Montague, N. J. Children (Westbrook):

 201 Blandina,^5 b. Dec. 31, 1784, m. Isaac (Zoy) Van Etten.
 Lydia, b. Aug. 4, 1791, m. Jeptha Clark, farmer, Montague, N. J.
 202 Peter, b. May 2, 1794, m. Elsie Westbrook.

71

JOHN I.^4 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia^3), farmer, Sandyston,
N. J., m. ____. Children (Westbrook):

 203 Hester,^5 m. Dr. Jacob Hornbeck.
 204 Abram I., m. Phebe Enness.

72

SOLOMON^4 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia^3), "Capt.," b. Oct.
6, 1762, d. Mar. 30, 1824, m. Sept. 24, 1782, Margaret De Witt, b.
1767, d. 1834. Farmer, N. J., later removed to Delaware Township, Pa.
Children (Westbrook):

 205 Jacob,^5 b. Jan. 30, 1786, m. Hannah Van Auken.
 206 John (Joannes), b. Jan. 9, 1789, m. Sarah Brodhead.
 207 Solomon, b. April 5, 1794, m. Hannah Coolbaugh.
 208 Margaret, m. William H. Nyce.
 Soveryn, bap. Feb. 25, 1804.

73

SAFFREIN (SOVERYN)^4 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia^3), m.
Blandina Westbrook. Children (Westbrook):

 209 Sally,^5 m. Jacob Shimer.
 Jennica, bap. Nov. 8, 1786.
 Jacob, bap. Aug, 3, 1788.
 Ledia, bap. Dec. 5, 1790.
 Peter, bap. Oct. 26, 1792.
 Joseph, b. Jan. 18, 1795.
 Margaret, b. Mar. 28, 1801.
 Hester, bap. Mar. 17, 1805.
 Catherine, bap. July 31, 1807.

74

ALEXANDER^4 ENNES (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Eleanor^3), farmer, near
Brick House, N. J. Children (Ennes):

 210 Sally Ann,^5 m. Joseph J. Westbrook.
 Daniel, m. Mar. 8, 1828, Jemima Hornbeck, see No. 65.

75

MARY^4 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Dinah,^2 Margaret^3), b. Oct., 1774, d.
1852, m. Judge Daniel W. Dingman, b. July 28, 1774, d. April 12,
1862. Children (Dingman):

 Margaret,^5 b. Oct. 5, 1796, m. Jan. 2, 1816, Abram Coolbaugh, b.
  Feb. 16, 1796. He was a farmer and miller in Monroe Co., Pa.
 Cornelia, m. Garret Brodhead.
 Andrew, b. Dec. 25, 1804, d. Mar. 22, 1889, m. Jan. 31, 1825,
  Caroline Eliza Sayre, b. Oct. 6, 1804, d. May 6, 1885. Their
  children were (1) Mary Dingman, m. J. W. Kilsby, ferryman at
  Dingmans, and had Victoria Kilsby and Carrie Kilsby, who m. Lafe
  Quick, (2) Daniel W. Dingman, m. ____ Puderbaugh, of Hawley, Pa.,
  (3) Susan Elizabeth Dingman, b. Aug. 8, 1827, m. Feb. 20, 1819,
  John McGinnis, of Warwick, N. Y., (4) Andrew S. Dingman, b. Aug.
  12, 1837, d. Jan. 28, 1907, m. May 18, 1889, Kate Van Auken,
  resided Milford, Pa., and had Walter V. Dingman, b. Mar. 14, 1890,
  (5) Evi Sayre Dingman, b. Aug. 21, 1829, m. Jennie Snyder and
  resided in Scranton, Pa., (6) Jane Dingman, m. John J. Case, (7)
  Margaret A. Dingman, m. John Lattimore, of Dingmans, Pa., (8)
  William H. Dingman, m. Eunice Steele, (9) Dr. Abram Coolbaugh
  Dingman, resided Hawley, Pa.
 Jane, m. William Franklyn Brodhead.
 Daniel W., m. Elizabeth Fecart.
 Martin Westbrook, m. Belinda Hornbeck, see No. 174.

76

ABRAHAM^4 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Dinah,^2 Margaret^3), b. Nov. 15, 1775,
bap. Aug. 24, 1777, d. Aug. 7, 1841, m. Nancy Anne Buckley, b. Oct.
11, 1778, dau. of Reuben Buckley. Children (Westbrook):

 Mary,^5 b. Jan. 19, 1800, m. (1) Matthias Clark, m. (2) Isaac
  Carmer.
 Martin, b. June 19, 1801, d. Oct. 15, 1814.
 211 Hugh B., b. May 26, 1804, m. Margaret Westbrook, see No. 205.
 Reuben B., b. Feb. 26, 1806.
 Eliza, b. Aug. 29, 1808.
 Daniel D., b. Feb. 17, 1809, d. Aug. 13, 1822.
 Abraham, b. April 3, 1811, d. Sept. 8, 1847.

77

PETER E.^4 GUMAER (Jacob,^1 Dinah,^2 Naomi^3), b. May 28, 1777, d.
Dec. 18, 1869, m. Esther Cuddeback, dau. of Jacob Cuddeback, see No.
44. Children (Gumaer):

 Morgan,^5 b. Jan. 27, 1815, d. July 5, 1855.
 Ezekiel P., b. May 10, 1817, m. (1) Mary Rose, m. (2) Mrs. Elmira
  Van Noy Cuddeback, widow of Daniel Cuddeback.
 Jacob Cuddeback Elting, b. Oct. 18, 1820, m. (1) Mary Sullivan, m.
  (2) Abbie Mulock.
 Peter Louw, b. Jan. 29, 1827, m. Sarah Jane Mulock.
 Naomi, b. Jan. 20, 1830, d. May 2, 1862.
 Andrew Jackson, b. Nov. 4, 1833, m. Annie F. Strong.
 Esther Harriet, b. Aug. 30, 1835, m. Isaac Mulock.

78

HESTER^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.^3), b. Dec. 26,
1785, in Deerpark, m. Richard Conkling, farmer, Onandago Co. Children
(Conkling):

 212 John.^5
 213 Jane, m. James Sloven
 214 Emaline, m. Cornelius Adriance.
 Egbert, Mount Morris, N. Y.
 Louisa, m. ____ Harmon.
 215 Hester, m. ____ Hunsickor.
 216 Caroline, m. ____ Brinkerhoff.

79

ISAIAH^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.^3), b. Oct. 29,
1787, farmer, Onondago Co., m. (1) ____ Courtright, m. (2) Rachel
Cole, m. (3) Maria Smith. Children, by first marriage (Cuddeback):

 217 De Witt Clinton,^5 m. Caty Ann Lefevre,
 Julia, m. ____ Stevens.
 Deborah, m. Clinton Storms.

Children, by second marriage (Cuddeback):

 218 Enos, m. ____ Servin.
 219 Maria, m. ____ Dowlan.
 220 Isaiah, m. Ester C____.
 221 Norman, m. ____ Servin.
 222 Hannah, m. ____ Baker.
 Livia, California.
 George W., San Francisco, Cal.
 Eliza Jane, m. ____ Servin.

Child, by third marriage, (Cuddeback):

 Ann, m. ____, and had (1) Ann ____, (2) Eliza ____.

80

JACOB^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.^3), b. Jan. 27, 1789,
d. 1852, m. (1) Elizabeth Dewitt, m. (2) Catherine Spurbeck. Farmer
near Skaneateles. Children, by first marriage, (Cuddeback):

 223 David,^5 b. 1811, m. Fannie Spaulding.
 224 Mary, b. 1813, m. Ambrose Spurbeck.
 225 Jane, b. 1815, m. Dwight Church.
 Harvey, b. 1823.

Child, by second marriage, (Cuddeback):

 226 Elizabeth, b. 1825, m. C. C. Wycoff.

81

EGBERT D.^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.^3), b. Dec. 7,
1792, d. Aug. 2, 1864, m. May 21, 1818, Maria Gumaer, b. July 4,
1797, d. Dec. 10, 1867. Farmer near Skaneateles. Children
(Cuddeback):

 Benjamin,^5 b. Sept. 2, 1819, d. Mar. 20, 1847.
 228 Jane, b. Sept. 27, 1821, m. Norman Rundle.
 229 Laura, b. May 14, 1823, m. Newel Turner.
 230 Lafayette, b. June 3, 1825, m, Cornelia Davis.
 Egbert Guerdon, b. Sept. 18, 1833, m. Ellen S. Cuddeback, see
  under No. 85.

82

MOSES^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.^3), b. Jan. 13, 1795,
m. Helen Spurbeck. Farmer near Buffalo, N. Y. Children (Cuddeback):

 232 Jane W.^5 m. Ira Cheesbro, Utica, N. Y.
 Martin, Michigan.
 Theron.
 Mary.
 Rhuami, Michigan.

83

LEVI^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.^3), b. April 29, 1799,
m. Rudy Foote, Skaneateles. Children (Cuddeback):

 233 Alfred,^5 m. Esther Brooks.
 Louisa.
 234 Lydia, m. Charles Smith.

84

DE WITT^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.^3), b. July 20,
1801, m. Sarah Peckham. Farmer, Skaneateles. Children (Cuddeback):

 Seth,^5 Toledo, Ohio.
 Emily, m. ____ Payne, Syracuse, N. Y.

85

SIMEON^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.^3), b. July 11,
1803, m. Angelica Wycoff, Skaneateles. Child (Cuddeback):

 Ellen S.,^5 b. April 22, 1840, m. Egbert G. Cuddeback, see No. 231.

86

MOSES^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Peter^3), bap. Sept. 6, 1781,
in Deerpark, m. Mary Tenure. Farmer near Skaneateles. Children
(Cuddeback):

 Margaret,^5 m. ____ Bisday.
 Esther, m. ____ Rogers.
 Mary, m. ____ Niles.
 Locke, m. ____ Perrein.
 Eliza.
 235 Jacob, m. Annie Gumaer.
 James.
 236 Peter, m. Maria Smith.
 237 Nathan, m. Martha Hall.

87

PETER^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob.^1 Abraham,^2 Peter^3), m. Stevens. Lived at
Waterloo, N. Y., and later in California. Child (Cuddeback):

 John,^5 at Waterloo, N. Y., later California.

88

ABRAM^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Peter^3), m. Hannah Dewitt.
Children (Cuddeback):

 Sally Ann,^5 m. ____ Hilliard, New York City.
 Betsey, m. John Brundage, Auburn, N. Y.
 Henrietta, m. Haskins, Auburn, N. Y.




FIFTH GENERATION



LIVING APPROXIMATELY 1810 to 1890


89

JOHN^5 VAN ETTEN, JR. (Jacob,^1 Maria,^2 Marretjen,^3 Johannes^4), b.
1759, m. Mariah Rosenkrans. Children (Van Etten):

 Maria,^6 b. Oct. 24, 1816.
 Lannah, b. Nov. 27, 1818.
 David, b. Nov. 20, 1820.

90

JAMES^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Maria,^2 Marretjen,^3 Johannes^4), b.
1763, m. Sarah Rosenkrans. Children (Van Etten):

 Solomon Rosenkrans,^6 b. Dec. 8, 1817.
 Elsie, b. Nov. 4, 1819.
 Amanda, b. Feb. 9, 1822.
 Drusilla, b. July 18, 1824.
 Moses, b. Nov. 17, 1826.

91

DANIEL^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Maria,^2 Marretjen,^3 Johannes^4), b.
1780, m. Catherine Decker. Children (Van Etten):

 Dorothy,^6 b. Sept. 18, 1810.
 Oliver Perry, b. Mar. 29, 1816.
 Cornelia, b. Aug. 24, 1820.
 Cornelius, b. July 22, 1823,

92

CORNELIUS^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Maria,^2 Marretjen,^3 Johannes^4), b.
1782, d. 1869, m. Anna Smith. Children (Van Etten):

 238 Amos,^6 b. Sept. 25, 1808, m. Lydia C. Thrall.
 239 Robert Kennedy, b. May 6, 1816, m. Eliza Palmer.
 Amanda, b. May 27, 1822, m. Henry M. Courtright.
 Catherine, b. Dec. i6, 1813.
 Mary, b. Jan. 26, 1811, d. Nov. 20, 1894.
 Hilay, b. Dec. 18, 1814.
 Margaret, b. Oct. 18, 1818, m. Benjamin Cole, of Montague.
 Solomon.
 Rachel.

93

SOLOMON^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Maria,^2 Marretjen,^3 Johannes^4), b.
1789, m. Catherine Rosenkrans. Children (Van Etten):

 Dorothy,^6 b. Aug. 17, 1817.
 Hulda, b. Oct. 13, 1819.

94

DOROTHY ^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Maria,^2 Marretjen,^3 Johannes^4), m.
John Lattimore. Child (Lattimore):

 Solomon Van Etten,^6 July 4, 1818.

95
ABRAM^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 William A.^4), b.
Sept. 6, 1784, d. Dec. 21, 1863, m. Feb. 16, 1809, at Mamakating,
Catherine Kuykendall, b. Feb. 11, 1791, d. Mar. 20, 1877. Farmer at
Cuddebackville, owning and occupying the farm at the junction of
Bashas Kill, and the Neversink River, on the original patent, the
Thomas Cuddeback farm. Children (Cuddeback):

 James,^6 b. April 12, 1812, d. Mar. 29, 1861, m. 1842, Mary Ann
  LeBar, d. July 24, 1889, farmer, Bradford Co., Pa., then Ballard,
  Ill., and later in Mo., and had (1) Theodore, b. 1843, drowned in
  Basha's Kill, Oct. 12, 1852; (2) Thomas, b. 1845, m. 1869, Martha
  Stryker, of Spring Hill, Kansas, 2 children: James David Cuddeback,
  m. Eva Mower, and had Frank and Verna Cuddeback and Thomas
  Cuddeback; (3) Benjamin Franklin, b. 1848, m. Nora Robinson of
  Bucyras, Kansas, 2 children: Thomas and Maude Cuddeback; (4)
  Frances, m. Frank Farrell, Albany, Linn Co., Oregon, 2 children:
  Anna Farrell, m. John Hodgkins and James Farrell; (5) Jane, m.
  Perry Doyle, Greenfield, Ill., 5 children, Pearl Doyle, Frank Doyle,
  Clement Doyle, Agnes Doyle, Thomas Doyle.
 William Abraham, b. Sept. 6, 1815, d. Binghamton, N. Y., June 1,
  1892, m. (1) Feb. 3, 1842, Eleanor Graham, b. Jan. 18, 1827, d.
  Dec. 28, 1846, and had (1) Mary J., b. Nov. 16, 1842, d. Oct. 29,
  1846; (2) Ruth A., b. April 23, 1845, d. Aug. 31, 1845. William A.,
  m. (2) Nov. 9, 1861, Mary Splamm, farmers, thirty years at Owego,
  N. Y., and had (3) Catherine, b. Aug. 18, 1862, d. May 3, 1878; (4)
  William, b. Feb. 23, 1866; (5) William Abram, b. Nov. 8, 1869,
  printer, in Binghamton.
 Jane, b. Dec. 1, 1817, d. June 29, 1841, m. Jan., 1836, John D.
  Westfall, b. Mar. 11, 1813, d. July 9, 1853, Cuddebackville and
  had, (1) William, b. Jan., 1837, m. Dec. 26, 1860, Martha Jane
  Cuddeback, Schoolmaster, Deerpark, 3 children: Jane Westfall, b.
  Oct. 25, 1862, m. Jan. 3, 1895, John C. Orth; Grace Westfall, b.
  Feb. 29, 1863, Macy Westfall, b. 1866.
 Hester, b. Mar. 26, 1820, d. Mar. 21, 1876.
 Thomas, b. June 22, 1822, d. April 24, 1917, m. Feb. 19, 1857,
  Sallie Jane Cogdill, b. May 10, 1822, d. June 15, 1904, homestead,
  Cuddebackville, and had: (1) Hulda, b. June 10, 1858, (2) Fannie,
  b. April 12, 1860, m. Dec. 31, 1884, Mahlon Ketchum, (3) Olive, b.
  Oct. 16, 1861, Paterson, N. J., (4) Luther L., b. April 12, 1863,
  d. June 22, 1917, Cuddebackville, (5) Allen Winter, b. April 11,
  1868, m. Oct. 29, 1901, Esther Colfax Beatty, Paterson, N. J., 2
  children: Thos. Marshall Cuddeback, b. Aug. 16, 1903, Louise
  Beckwith Cuddeback, b. Jan. 19, 1906, (6) Thomas, b. April 11,
  1868, d. Sept. 1, 1869.
 Hannah, b. May 10, 1824, d. 1826.
  Sarah Catherine, m. Eilko Van Houton, Pella, Iowa.
  Harmonas, b. Mar. 27, 1827, d. Oct. 6, 1890, m. Adeline Chapman,
  b. at Otisville, Feb. 16, 1833, d. Oct. 6, 1911, Cuddebackville,
  and had (1) Charlotte, Paterson, N. J., (2) Silas, m. Mar. 23,
  1913, Anna Mabel Anderson, (3) Irving, b. Sept. 9, 1868, d. April
  26, 1870, (4) Harmonas, b. June 14, 1874, d. Sept. 5, 1874.
 Charlotte, b. July 23, 1830, d. Dec. 16, 1850, m. Isaac Bonnell,
  New Jersey.
 Hulda, b. April 25, 1831, m. April, 1858, Sylvester Case, Warwick,
  N. Y., and had (1) Kate, b. Sept., 1860, (2) Johannah, b. July,
  1868, m. William S. Benedict, one child: Sylvester Benedict, b.
  July, 1890.

[Illustration: Approach to Cuddebackville from Middletown, N. Y.]

[Illustration: Approach to Cuddebackville from Port Jervis, N. Y.]

96

MARGARET^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 William A.^4),
b. July 18, 1785, m. Dec. 29, 1803, Jacob Gumaer, b. Oct. 7, 1783,
son of Jacob De Witt Gumaer, b. Dec. 12, 1739, d. Dec. 26, 1831, m.
Oct. 29, 1762, Hulda Decker, b. Nov. 18, 1744, d. June 19, 1819,
Mamakating. Children (Gumaer):

 William^6 (Wilhelmus), b. Nov. 21, 1804, m. Artemissa Wiltsie,
  farmer, Wurtsboro, and had (1) Margaret, m. Samuel F. Smith, of
  Broome Co., N. Y., 3 children, William Smith, Anna Smith and Ida
  Smith, who m. ____ Keeler, of Union, N. Y., (2) Hiram, m. Sarah Dekator,
  Wurtsboro, later of Grand Rapids, Mich., 2 children, John Gumaer
  and William Gumaer, (3) Cyrus, m. Mary Bennett, 4 children, Spencer
  Gumaer, William Gumaer, Elizabeth Gumaer, Edwin Bennett Gumaer, (4)
  Ann, m. Spencer Corwin, of Poughkeepsie, (5) Thomas, m. Rebecca
  Cudney of Jersey City, 4 children, Leonard Gumaer, m. ____
  Henderson, Leander Gumaer, m. Anna ____, and had William Gumaer,
  Adaline Gumaer, Anna Gumaer, (6) Fred, (7) Edsall.
 Hulda, b. July 31, 1806, m. ____ Tyce.
 Charlotte, b. Aug. 7, 1808, m. Abram Westbrook of Waverly, and had
  (1) Levi, m. Elizabeth Whitaker, 2 children, Abram Whitaker
  Westbrook and Louisa Whitaker Westbrook, (2) Margaret, m. Cooper E.
  Corbet, three children: Jennie Corbet, William Corbet and Charlotte
  Corbet, (3) William A. C, (4) Jane, (5) Jacob G., m. Clara S.
  Overshire, 2 children: Charles E. Gumaer and Florence Gumaer.
 Catherine, b. Aug. 1, 1809, m. James Graham, of Wurtsboro and had
  (1) Mary, m. Dr. Henry Edsall, 2 children: Josephine Edsall, m.
  June 25, 1879, Richard Strong, and ____ Edsall, (2) Alice, m. as
  his second wife, Dr. Henry Edsall, four children: Mary Edsall,
  Norma Edsall, at Cuddebackville, Jennie Edsall, b. April 6, 1834,
  d. April 23, 1909, at Ellenville, N. Y., Eleanor Edsall, (3) Jane,
  m. William R. Rose of Ellenville, son of Wm. C. Rose of Chenango
  Co., and Lavina Shimer of Easton, 3 children: Katharine Rose, James
  Graham Rose, and William R. Rose, who m. Amy Childs of Ellenville.
 Thomas, b. Oct. 29, 1812.
 Mary, b. Oct. 22, 1814, m. (1) William Van Inwegen, b. Nov. 6, 1803,
  d. Nov. 20, 1853, and had William. She m. (2) Smith Henderson of
  Jersey City and had (2) Henry, m. Amanda Benedict, 3 children:
  Charlotte Henderson of Monticello, Fred Henderson and Louisa
  Henderson, (3) Anna, (4) Louis.
 Samuel, b. April 25, 1817, d. Mar. 13, 1879, m. Charlotte Ketchum,
  b. 1822, d. Jan. 16, 1907, Wurtsboro, and had (1) Alexander, killed
  July 4, ____, (2) Christiana, m. ____ Stevens, (3) Harriet, m.
  Moses Courtright, New York City, (4) Edsall, (5) Lewis, m. Mary
  Le Fever, (6) Fred.
 Peter, b. April 24, 1819, m. Esther Ann Smith, and had (1) Mary, m.
  Edward Desbon of Passaic, N. J., (2) Smith, (3) Henry, (4) Jacob,
  all of Kansas, (5) Anna.
 Jane, b. Oct. 4, 1821, m. Hiram Stanton of Wurtsboro, and had (1)
  Sarah, (2) Mary, m. ____ Hoar, (3) Abile, of Michigan, (4) Peter,
  (5) Lewis, of Michigan, (6) Carrie.
 James, b. Jan. 5, 1825, d. Sept. 11, 1917, m., 1847, Harriet
  Dorrance and had (1) Martha, m. George Patmore of Middletown,
  N. Y., (2) Catherine, m. William Benedict of Kansas, (3) Hulda, m.
  Isaac Gumaer of Jersey City, 2 children, De Witt Gumaer and La Mont
  Gumaer, (4) Alice, m. Eugene Rhodes, 3 children: Gladys Rhodes,
  Hazel Rhodes and Fletcher Rhodes, who m., Nov. 12, 1912, Amy
  Carwithen, (5) Mary, m. Henry Mesren of Waverly, N. Y., (6)
  William, m. ____ Winter of Jersey City, N. J., (7) John,
  (8) George.
 Louis, b. Dec. 8, 1828, d. Mar. 9, 1851.
 Jacob, b. Jan. 19, 1829, Jersey City.
 John.
 George.
 Isaac.

97

WILLIAM^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 William A.^4), b.
April 12, 1792, d. Oct. 4, 1866, m. June 10, 1815, Mary Westbrook, b.
Feb. 19, 1795, d. Jan. 1, 1864, dau. of Abram T. Westbrook and Maty
Van Keuren, farmers on the homestead farm at Cuddebackville. Children
(Cuddeback):

 Abram Westbrook,^6 b. April 27, 1816, m. Mar. 25, 1843, Emahne
  Penney, b. Mar. 10, 1825, d. April 19, 1901, and had (1) Horace, b.
  Aug. 27, 1845, d. Jan. 19, 1903, (2) George, b. July 24, 1850, (3)
  Edgar, b. Feb. 27, 1853, (4) John, b. Mar. 20, 1858, d. April 20,
  1911, (5) Yancey, b. Sept. 9, 1860, (6) Mary, b. July 27, 1863, (7)
  Margaret, b. Feb. 27, 1866, d. Feb. 14, 1892, (8) Herbert, b. Nov.
  15, 1855, m. Sept. 17, 1888, Annie Knapp, b. Aug. 7, 1858, 2
  children: Martin Cuddeback, b. Dec. 21, 1891, and Emeline M.
  Cuddeback, b. Dec. 5, 1895.
 Margaret, b. April 10, 1818, d. Oct. 21, 1884, m. Aug. 10, 1871,
  Elting Cuddeback, b. Oct. 10, 1816, d. Mar. 28, 1897, see No. 135.
 Mary Van Keuren, b. Oct. 2, 1820, d. Mar. 21, 1878, m. Jan. 5, 1839,
  John Van Etten, Jr., b. Feb. 28, 1815, d. Aug. 7, 1872, miller at
  Huguenot and had (1) Margaret, b. Oct. 19, 1839, d. Dec. 14, 1862,
  m. Dec. 27, 1860, Lyman Rose, b. Sept. 27, 1835, d. Dec. 14, 1903,
  child, Rufus Van Etten Rose, b. Dec. 24, 1862, d. July 25, 1863,
  (2) William Orville, b. Aug. 9, 1843, d. May 24, 1871, m. Sept. 29,
  1868, Emilie J. Graham, who m. (2) C. P. McAllister of Bradford,
  Pa., children: Alexander G. Van Etten, b. July 21, 1869, d. Aug.
  10, 1897, and Mary Van Etten, b. July 28, 1871, d. Nov. 22, 1904,
  (3) Alice, b. Jan. 27, 1846, m. Oct. 26, 1876, Stoddard Van
  Inwegen, b. Oct. 3, 1834, d. Dec. 13, 1899, (4) Isabella, b. Oct.
  19, 1856, d. July 27, 1861, (5) Edgar L., b. April 5, 1850, d. June
  18, 1853, (6) Charlotte, b. Feb. 6, 1859, m. (1), Sept. 29, 1881,
  Horace Holmes, b. 1855, d. Feb. 3, 1884, child: Nellie Holmes, d.
  Feb. 1, 1884, she m. (2), April 18, 1888, James H. Prost, children:
  John Stoddard Prost, b. Sept. 2, 1889, Sarah Alice Prost, b. Oct.
  9, 1891, m., June 27, 1914, Willard Furth, Bordentown, N. J., Emily
  V. E. Prost, b. Mar. 4, 1896, Laura Muchmon Prost, b. Feb. 18,
  1899, d. Jan. 4, 1900, (7) Carrie, b. Sept. 21, 1861, d. Sept.,
  1861, (8) Mary E., b. Jan. 14, 1854, d. Oct. 12, 1855, (9) Minnie
  C. b. Mar. 14, 1863, d. Mar. 30, 1872, (10) Mary Ellen, b. Dec. 19,
  1853, d. Oct. 12, 1855, (11) Minerva, b. April 14, 1863, d. Mar.
  30, 1872.
 Sarah, b. Oct. 2, 1822, d. Oct. 16, 1914, m. Sept. 5, 1846, Martin
  Wheeler, d. April 11, 1862, and had (1) Floyd, (2) Frank, b. Sept.
  5, 1854, m. Mary Wright, reside Waterbury, Conn., (3) William H.,
  b. Nov. 1, 1856, m. Hattie Croft, reside Vergennes, Vt., child:
  Frances Wheeler, b. Dec. 18, 1900.
 Elsie, b. Feb. 6, 1826, d. Nov. 29, 1906, m. Dec. 15, 1858, William
  Mapes, b. Dec. 20, 1822, d. April 23, 1884, of Otisville, N. Y.,
  and had (1) Hattie, b. Jan. 13, 1860, d. May 31, 1875, (2) Mary, b.
  Jan. 27, 1865, d. Sept. 11, 1865, (3) Grace Emily, b. July 29,
  1866, d. Oct. 29, 1894, m., Feb., 1893, Dr. W. Coe McKeeby.
 Charlotte, b. June 15, 1828, d. Mar. 17, 1914, at Otisville.
 Minerva, b. May 13, 1834, d. April 26, 1899, m., Nov. 28, 1865,
  Rev. Egbert Winter, b. Jan. 15, 1836, at Zoatkamp, Netherland,
  Holland, d. Dec. 9, 1906, in Michigan.
 Harriett, b. 1840.
 Catherine Dubois, b. May 22, 1831, d. April 5, 1834.

[Illustration: Cuddeback Homes of 1800. Cuddebackville. N. Y.]

[Illustartion: Caudebec Inn, Cuddebackville, N. Y.]

98

EZEKIEL^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 William A.^4), b.
1794, d. April 10, 1844, m., April 1, 1820, Jane Van Inwegen, b. Jan.
1, 1801, d. May 25, 1835. Farmer, Cuddebackville. Children
(Cuddeback):

 Margaret,^6 b. Jan. 13, 1822, d. June 29, 1893, m. Nov. 17, 1842,
  Edward L. Norris, b. June 12, 1813, d. Aug. 22, 1889, and had (1)
  William, b. Aug. 7, 1843, Port Clinton, d. Dec. 7, 1916, m., Feb.
  27, 18--, Jemima Whitlock, b. June 10, 1845, seven children: Jemima
  Norris, m., 1891, George Henry Swartwout, b. Nov. 6, 1863, d. Oct.
  18, 1910, and had Isabelle Norris Swartwout, Leadville, Colo., Mary
  Norris, m. Daniel Sears, and had child: Clifford Sears, of
  Summitville, N. Y., William Norris, m., June, 1915, Katherine F.
  Morgan, Solomon Van Etten Norris, b. 1880, d. Jan. 31, 1908, at
  Leadville, Colo., (2) Charles, of Port Jervis, m. (1) Sept. 20,
  1871, Eliza Cole, b. Mar. 28, 1853, d. Nov. 16, 1878, 3 children:
  Georgia Norris, Charles Van Anken Norris, m. Helen Cuddeback,
  reside at Leadville, Colo., Leonard Norris, Leadville, Colo.,
  Charles, m. (2) Jan. 15, 1880, Alice Wilkin, and had 3 children:
  Lulu Norris, m. Dr. Black of New York City, Lewellyn Norris, Nina
  Norris: m. Jan. 20, 1917, Dr. John F. Kane of Goshen, N. Y., (3)
  Alfred, b. Sept. 10, 1851, d. Aug. 29, 1888, m. Mary Swartwout, 2
  children: Elmer Norris and Fred Norris, (4) Martha, m. Robert
  Jackson of Cuddebackville.
 Cornelius, b. Dec. 27, 1823, d. Aug. 27, 1843.
 Mary, b. April 26, 1826, d. Feb. 28, 1912, m., Oct. 24, 1846, Beniah
  Rhodes, b. Nov. 23, 1823, d. May 8 1893, resided Cuddebackville and
  had (1) George, b. Oct. 12, 1850, d. Dec. 28, 1895, m., Jan. 2,
  1878, Lizzie Alexander, resided Mount Pleasant, Pa., one child:
  John Alexander Rhodes, b. Aug. 27, 1880, (2) Angeline, b. Aug. 18,
  1848, d. in Port Jervis, April 24, 1917, m. Sept. 17, 1873, Elisha
  Ozro Harding, (3) Jacob C. b. Jan. 22, 1853, of Paterson, m. July
  3, 1882, Sarah A. Coe, 2 children: Floyd S. Rhodes, b. May 17,
  1884, and Wilbur Rhodes, b. June, 1893, (4) Samuel L., b. Feb. 22,
  1857, d. May 11, 1915, m. Isadore Hoyt, child: Genevieve Hazel
  Rhodes, b. July 8, 1895, (5) William Floyd, b. July 5, 1860,
  resided Oakland Valley.

99

COL. PETER G.^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 William
A.^4), b. Oct. 22, 1795, d. Dec. 7, 1892, m. Aug., 1825, Caroline
Mapes, b. July 22, 1808, d. Nov. 7, 1882. He was a farmer at Huguenot
on the "Mineral Spring Farm." Children (Cuddeback):

 Daniel,^6 b. Sept. 13, 1826, d. July 7, 1860, m. Nov. 30, 1865,
  Elmira Van Noy, who m. Feb. 12, 1870, Ezekiel P. Gumaer.
 Wickham, b. Nov. 2, 1827, d. Aug. 28, 1898. He was a farmer and
  lawyer at Huguenot.
 Jemima, b. Feb. 7, 1829, d. Oct. 31, 1890, m. Sept. 22, 1862,
  Nathaniel Roe, b. Nov. 30, 1816, d. 1886, at New York City. Their
  children were (1) William Irving Roe, m. Dec. 1, 1858, (2) Adeline
  L. Roe, b. Jan. 27, 1854, d. Oct. 10, 1858, (3) Thomas N. Roe, b.
  April 2, 1855, d. April 28, 1860, (4) Nathaniel O. Roe, b. July 18,
  1861, d. May 12, 1916, m. April 11, 1894, Lillian Westbrook, and
  had Jemima Roe and Natalie Roe.
 Adeline, b. Sept. 15, 1830, d. Nov. 26, 1883, m. Jan. 24, 1850,
  Abraham Shimer, b. July 23, 1826, d. Jan. 20, 1892, son of Jacob
  Shimer and Sarah Westbrook. Their children were (1) Jemima Shimer,
  m. William E. Scott and had Addie Scott, m. Oct. 26, 1907, Herbert
  Edmunds of Butte City, Mont., and Frank Scott, b. April 20, 1881,
  (2) Frank Shimer, b. Aug. 11, 1852, d. at Crede, Colo., April 19,
  1902, m. Jan. 13, 1880, Sarah Augusta Goodale, b. Jan. 6, 1857, d.
  Denver, Colo., Oct. 13, 1909, and had Charles Evi Shimer, m. Mar.
  16, 1901, Janet Raebum Wilson, Denver, Colo., and Adeline Shimer,
  m. Sept. 2, 1908, Dr. Karl Franklin Rochrig, of Denver Colo., (3)
  Evi Shimer, b. Dec. 8, 1860, d. Sept. 8, 1913, m. Nov. 21, 1888,
  Susan Donaldson and had Jemima Shimer, b. Nov. 4, 1889, m. Nov. 21,
  1912, Edward Pierce Jones, a lawyer of Port Jervis. Their child is
  Ann Jones, b. Aug. 23, 1913.
 Martha.
 Selah.
 Christiana, b. Feb. 4, 1836, d. Nov. 17, 1847.
 Lewis, b. 1838, d. Jan. 19, 1897, m. Annie Gardner. Their children
  were (1) Mary, (2) Nathaniel, b. 1874, d. Feb. 20, 1893.
 Gilbert, b. Jan. 25, 1844, d. Feb. 12, 1846.
 Job, b. Aug., 1849, d. Jan. 4, 1900.

100

JAMES^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 William A.^4), b.
Mar. 18, 1799, d. Oct. 12, 1883, m. June 14, 1823, Jemima Cuddeback,
d. Oct. 10, 1826, see No. 45. He m. (2) Aug. 1, 1829, Catherine
Cuddeback, b. June 6, 1809, see No. 132. He was a farmer at
Cuddebackville, owning and occupying farms now of his grandsons,
Elting and James Cuddeback. The land on the Caudebec patent, east of
the highway between the river and the Capt. Abraham Cuddeback farm.
Child (Cuddeback):

 Cornielius,^6 m. Nov. 14, 1866, Adelle A. Case. Their child was
  Warren Cuddeback, who m. Harriet Drake and had Cynthia Cuddeback,
  Edna Cuddeback and Frank Cuddeback.

101

LEWIS^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 William A.^4), b.
Jan. 16, 1807, d. Aug. 16, 1889, m. Caroline Lee Thompson, b. July 3,
1822, d. May 12, 1877, dau. of Rev. Andrew Thompson, of Mount Hope.
He was a merchant many years at Cuddebackville, later was County
Clerk and afterwards removed to Goshen, N. Y. Children (Cuddeback):

 Augustus,^6 b. June 27, 1849, m. May 9, 1877, Mary B. Sanford, b.
  May 7, 1855. Their children were (1) Caroline Lee Cuddeback, b. May
  14, 1878, d. Jan. 12, 1900, (2) Emma Sanford Cuddeback, b. Dec. 15,
  1883, d. June 16, 1885.
 William Herman, b. Mar. 23, 1852. A lawyer of Buffalo, N. Y.
 Mary Thompson, b. May 17, 1856, m. Nov. 10, 1887, Joseph Merritt, b.
  Dec. 17, 1855, lived at Goshen, N. Y. Their children were (1) Lewis
  Cuddeback Merritt, b. Dec. 2, 1888, (2) Henry Bacon Merritt, b.
  June 19, 1894.
 Katharine, b. July 25, 1859, m. Oct. 3, 1889, Aaron Van D. Wallace,
  b. June 20, 1860. Their children were (1) Augustus Cuddeback
  Wallace, b. Oct. 27, 1890, (2) Helen Wallace, b. May 3, 1893, m.
  Oct. 6, 1917, William Melville Atchison, of Morristown, N. J., (3)
  Van Dusen Wallace, b. Jan. 1, 1897, (4) Lucie Nanette Wallace, b.
  Oct. 25, 1899.

[Illustration: Home of Col. Peter Cuddeback, Huguenot, N. Y.]

[Illustration: Home of Elting Cuddeback 1816-1898, Deerpark, N. Y.]

102

JENNIE^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 Jacob G.,^4), b.
Sept. 28, 1790, d. Oct. 19, 1876, m. J. (Cobus) B. Cole, b. July 25,
1791, d. July 30, 1868, son of Martin Cole, d. April 17, 1825, age 63
years, and Eleanor Rosenkrans, d. Mar. 14, 1836, age 65 years. He was
a millwright, blacksmith, and farmer at Montague, N. J. Children
(Cole):

 Maria,^6 b. Sept. 25, 1812, d. Feb., 1870, m. Mar. 9, 1837, Elijah
  Rose, b. 1813, d. April, 1871. He was a farmer at Matamoras, Pa.
  Their children were (1) Sarah Rose, (2) Clarissa Rose, (3) Mary
  Rose, m. Linn Edsall and had Herbert Edsall, who m. Jennie Carman,
  Fred Linn Edsall, Florence Edsall, (4) Margaret Rose, m, June 3,
  1872, Oliver L. Carpenter, and had Leroy Carpenter, who m. Mazie
  Cleland and had Leroy Carpenter, Jr., (5) James C. Rose, b. Dec. 7,
  1840, m. Oct. 17, 1866, Elizabeth Martin and had Maude Rose,
  Marguerite Rose, who m. June 8, 1912, Henry I. Falk, of Denver,
  Colo., Elijah Rose and Clarence Rose, (6) Frederick Rose, m. Fannie
  Cornwall, and had May-Rose. Lottie Rose m. Lauren Langton,
  children, Lauren and Fred.
 Eleanor, b. Jan. 27, 1815, m. James Clark. Lived at Sandyston.
  Their children were (1) Maria Clark, (2) William Clark, (3) Cole
  Clark, (4) John Y. Clark, (5) Jane Clark, (6) Martha Clark.
 Martin V., (Judge), b. April 9, 1817, d. Aug. 15, 1895, m. Jan. 8,
  1839, Lydia Jane Van Etten, b. May 29, 1817, d. Dec. 25, 1894. He
  was a farmer at Montague. Their children were (1) Sally Jane Cole,
  b. Aug. 13, 1839, d. Mar. 22, 1870, m. April 9, 1867, Anthony
  Struble Stoll and had Luella Stoll, who m. Franklin McCoy, a farmer
  at Sussex, N. J., (2) Eleanor Cole, b. Mar. 27, 1814, (3) Dr.
  Martin Cole, b. Aug. 22, 1849, m. Feb. 5, 1878, Libbie Bevans,
  lived at Hainesville, N. J., and had Blase Cole, M. D., of Newton,
  N. J., (4) Capt. James E. Cole, b. Dec. 12, 1843, m. (1) Antoinette
  Dusinberry, b. Mar. 18, 1844. d. Mar. 5, 1878, and had 4 children,
  Henrietta D. Cole, Merlin D. Cole, b. Aug. 22, d. July 7, 1900, m.
  1898 Bertha Hornbeck, dau. of Joseph Hornbeck, Loren T. Cole, b.
  April 4, 1870, m. Anne Gardner and had 3 children: Cornelia Cole,
  and Elizabeth Dusinberry Cole, who m. Dec. 22, 1917, Dr. John C.
  Burr, and had one child, and James E. Cole. Capt. James E. Cole m.
  (2) Dec. 23, 1880, Edna Westfall, b. Jan. 15, 1854, d. March 15,
  1882, no children. Capt. James E. Cole m. (3) Anne Van Auken and
  had 1 child, Sally J. Cole, who m. Feb. 7, 1907, James Britton
  Young and their children are Margery Young, Josephine Young and
  ____ Young. (5) Thomas Van Etten Cole, b. Dec. 30, 1846, d. Dec.
  19, 1907, m. Mary Shimer. He was a farmer and merchant at Montague,
  N.J. Their children were: Eaton Shimer Cole, d. Dec. 7, 1901,
  Martin Cole, m. Aug. 25, 1908, Emily Westbrook, dau. of Baton
  Westbrook, merchant at Montague, and Jacob Cole, m. Aug. 16, 1914,
  Corinne Weller, (6)Jacob Cole, b. April 24, 1857.
 Jacob, b. Oct. 5, 1822, d. Jan. 5, 1850, m. . Their children were
  (1) J. Irving Cole, (2) Hannah Jane Cole, m. Nathan E. Burchard
  of Fenmore, Wis., and had Emily Burchard, Irving Burchard and
  Jessie Burchard.
 Peter, b. Oct. 23, 1826, d. Sept. 12, 1827.
 Diana, b. May 30, 1829, d. Oct. 1, 1894, m. Sept. 15, 1851, Rev.
  Henry Butcher, b. Feb. 21, 1821, d. at Warwick, N. Y., April 28,
  1906. Their children were (1) Ida Butcher, m. Feb. 7, 1883, J.
  William Deans, of Passaic, and had four children: Carl, Harry,
  Dwight and Anna, (2) Dwight Butcher, m. ____ Tillotson, lived at
  Warwick, N. Y., child, Jessie.
 James, m. Arminda ____. He was a farmer at Clove Road, Montague.
  Their children were (1) Martin V. Cole, b. Nov. 24, 1851, d. Feb.
  16, 1912, m. Elizabeth Merrill, dau. of Elias Merrill of Montague,
  and had Elias Cole, of Newton, N. J., Harry Cole, Blase Cole,
  Bessie Cole, the last two twins, and Loren Cole, (2) William Cole,
  of Port Jervis, N. Y.
 Isaac, b. 1830, resided Middletown, N. Y.
 Hannah Jane, b. 1833, d. May 22, 1908, m. Jan. 23, 1856, Moses
  Leonard Cole, son of Leonard Cole, b. Oct. 30, 1822, d. May 17,
  1907, Matamoras, Pa., whose first wife was Eliza Bailey. Merchant,
  farmer, and had (1) Eliza, d. Nov. 16, 1878, m. Chas. Norris,
  three children: George Norris, C. Van Auken Norris, m. Oct. 28,
  1898, Helen Cuddeback, Leonard Norris, Cripple Creek, Colo., (2)
  Martin, (3) Stelle, (4) Willis, (5) Frederick, Salt Lake City, (6)
  Mary, m. Sept. 23, 1897, Alfred Marvin, lawyer, Matamoras, Pa.,
  child: Reinold Cole Marvin.
 Catherine, b. 1826, d. June 2, 1908, m. Finley D. Shaefer. Port
  Jervis, N. Y., and had (1) Jacob, (2) Jennie.

103

HESTER^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 Jacob G.^4), b.
Nov. 30, 1793, d. April 6, 1870, m. Peter E. Gumaer, b. May 28, 1771,
d. Dec. 1, 1869, see No. 77. Owned and occupied the Gumaer homestead
farm. Surveyor and historian. He was a son of Ezekiel Gumaer, b. Dec.
29, 1742, and Naomi Low, dau. of Abraham Louw, grandson of Peter
Gumaer, b. at Kingston, Nov. 15, 1708, d. 1779 and m. Mar. 17, 1730,
Traatje (Charity) Dewitt, b. 1710, d. Nov. 12, 1756, great grandson
of Peter Gumaer, the emigrant, b. 1666, d. in 1739, m. April 18,
1692, Esther Hasbrouck, dau. of Jean Hasbrouck of Paltz. Children
(Gumaer):

 Morgan,^6 b. Jan. 27, 1815, d. July 5, 1855.
 Ezekiel P., b. May 10, 1817, d. June 25, 1877, Port Clinton, m. (1)
  Mary Rose, and had (1) Peter E., b. Aug. 2, 1848, m. Jan. 24, 1872,
  Annie Corwin, 2 children: Mary Holbert Gumaer, m. Nov. 15, 1899,
  Fred M. Caswell, Brockport, and had child: Elizabeth Caswell,
  Elizabeth Gumaer, (2) Augustus R., d. Oct. 13, 1916, m. May 17,
  1874, Ella Mulock of Mount Hope. In 1880 removed to Florence,
  Colo., (3) Mary Ellen, b. June 13, 1846, d. June 29, 1877, m. Feb.
  16, 1870, O. N. Goldsmith, 1 child: Oliver N. Goldsmith, Jr., (4)
  Martha, (5) Alice, b. Sept. 22, 1854, d. Oct. 15, 1915, m. May 12,
  1854, John Van Brown, one child: Willis LeRoy Brown, m. Oct. 26,
  1912, Berthe Cuddeback Bell, (6) Maggie Esther, m. Aug. 2, 1894,
  Peter Sutherland Ritchie, (7) Sarah Catherine, b. July 8, 1863, d.
  May 13, 1872, Ezekiel P., m. (2) Feb. 12, 1870, Mrs. Elmira Van Noy
  Cuddeback, widow of Daniel Cuddeback.
 Jacob Cuddeback Elting, b. Oct. 18, 1820, d. Oct. 31, 1897, m. (1)
  1855, Mary Sullivan, d. 1856, farmer, removed 1850 to Ovid, Mich.,
  and had (1) Mary Sullivan, m. Dr. Wells, (2) Maude Wells, m. ____
  Macdonald. Jacob, m. (2) Abbie Mulock and had: (3) Frank, (4)
  Leroy, (5) Jennie, m. Loren W. Vaughn of Ovid, one child: Howard
  Vaughn.
 Peter Louw, b. Jan. 29, 1827, d. May 31, 1912, m. Dec. 29, 1853,
  Sarah Jane Mulock, b. Dec. 12, 1834, d. Nov. 29, 1906, of Guymard
  and had: (1) Laertes Webster, b. Nov. 22, 1857, m. April 13, 1896,
  Mary Eugenia Halstead, b. June 27, 1871, d. Oct. 27, 1914, dau.
  of Oscar Halstead and Mary Kortwright, one child: Pierre Laertes
  Gumaer, b. Feb. 21, 1898, (2) Geor-gianna, b. Feb. 14, 1855, d. May
  10, 1872, (3) Chauncey I., b. Feb. 20, 1860, m. Feb. 8, 1877, Belle
  Graham, Alma, Colo., (4) Franklin Peter, b. Aug. 20, 1863, d. Mar.
  8, 1906, m. Ida May Snell and had 2 children: Marie Louise Gumaer,
  b. Sept. 23, 1888, Franklin Peter Cooper Gumaer, b. 1898, (5) Marie
  Louise, b. April 15, 1866, (6) George Seward, b. Aug. 12, 1874,
  Joplin, Mo., m. Dec. 25, 1900, Bertha Dolph, b. July 11, 1878, one
  child: Dolph Gumaer.
 Esther Harriet, b. Aug. 30, 1835, d. Sept. 6, 1899, m. Isaac Mulock,
  b. Feb. 22, 1830, d. Mar. 29, 1886, Minisink, N. Y., and had (1)
  Sarah, (2) Peter, b. Sept. 20, 1858, d. Jan. 2, 1865, (3) Luella.
 Naomi, b. Jan. 20, 1830, d. May 2, 1862.
 Andrew Jackson, b. Nov. 4, 1833, d. Oct. 11, 1915, m. (1) Oct. 8,
  1862, Annie F. Strong, b. May 16, 1840, d. Sept. 16, 1866, m. (2)
  Delia Strong, d. Mar. 7, 1890, and had (1) Andrew Augustus, m. May
  8, 1901, Charlotte Jayne Myers, (2) Anne E., m. Christian Berg,
  Middletown, N. Y., (3) William Irving, one child: Sarah Jane
  Gumaer, b. Oct. 9, 1905, d. June 13, 1911, (4) Cecil Earl, m. July
  17, 1912, Frances H. Hennings.

[Illustration: Simon Westfall's House in Deerpark]

[Illustration: Gumaer Stone House]


104

SARAH^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 Jacob G.^4), b.
June 8, 1800, d. July 17, 1855, m. Oct. 30, 1819, Simeon Westfall, b.
May 12, 1792, d. Aug. 22, 1878, son of David Westfall. Owned and
occupied farm along the Delaware in Penn., opposite Port Jervis.
Children (Westfall):

 Eleanor,^6 b. Sept. 11, 1820, d. Mar. 3, 1838.
 Abram, b. Mar. 29, 1823, d. Nov. 3, 1873, m. Dec. 31, 1846, Hannah
  Winifield, b. May 25, 1820, Matamoras, Pa., and had (1) Estella J.,
  b. Dec. 28, 1847, m. Samuel Hunt, N. Y. City, one child: Jefferson
  Dunning Hunt, b. Nov. 9, 1865, (2) John, b. Sept. 7, 1849, drowned,
  June 2, 1869, (3) George, b. May, 1851, (4) Samuel, b. May, 1853,
  (5) William, b. May, 1859.
 Sarah Jane, b. April 12, 1831, d. June 5, 1895, m. Sept. 16, 1851,
  James W. Quick, b. Aug. 5, 1830, Matamoras, Pa., and had (1) Abram
  J., b. April 8, 1853, m. April 24, 1879, Sarah Bell, 3 children:
  Edward Graham Quick, d. July 16, 1892, Anna Gertrude Quick, m.
  George McCullom, Ruth Quick, (2) Sarah L., b. Sept. 28, 1855, d. Dec. 11,
  1910, m. June 29, 1897, John L. Fredenstein.
 Peter Gumaer, b. Sept. 27, 1834, d. Aug. 1, 1856.
 Simeon, b. Sept. 15, 1838, d. Jan. 27, 1912, Matamoras, m. Feb. 13,
  1862, Jemima Van Etten, b. May 13, 1839, and had (1) Elmer E., b.
  Dec. 10, 1862, m. Oct. 9, 1889, Isabella Beers, (2) Eleanor, m.
  Lester W. Woolsey, Sept. 9, 1903, Port Jervis, N. Y., (3) Blanche,
  b. Feb. 16, 1865, m. Sept. 10, 1891, Lewis McKeeby, b. April 17,
  1863, 2 children: Florence McKeeby, b. Nov. 1, 1899, Richard
  McKeeby, b. Mar. 8, 1904, (4) Maggie, b. Sept. 19, 1867, d. Nov.
  20, 1873, (5) Floyd, b. Oct. 19, 1873, d. Nov. 26, 1873, (6) Frank,
  b. May 11, 1876, (7) Edna, m. Fred Harding, 2 children: Byron
  Harding, Raymond Harding.

105

JACOB^5 CUDDEBACK, JR. (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 Jacob G.^4),
b. Oct. 30, 1805, m. Elizabeth Van Auken, dau. of John Van Auken.
Farmer, Cayuga, N. Y. Children (Cuddeback):

 Diana,^6 b. July 10, 1818, m. Peter Swartwout, farmer. Auburn, N. Y.
 John, b. Sept. 29, 1819, m. ____, farmer, Auburn, N. Y.
 Washington, b. Dec. 21, 1820.
 Leah, b. Nov. 27, 1822.
 Jane, b. Sept. 24, 1824.
 Maria, b. Mar. 28, 1826.
 Jemima, accidentally killed.
 Lewis.
 Solomon.
 Jemima.
 Jacob.

106

JOSEPH^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 Jacob G.^4), b.
April 22, 1812, d. Aug. 30, 1860, m. (1) Nov. 22, ____, Eliza Decker,
b. Nov. 22, 1821, d. Mar. 12, 1843, m. (2) Martha Clark, b. Dec. 20,
1818, d. Jan. 24, 1892. Child, by first marriage (Cuddeback):

 Mary,^6 b. Jan, 22, 1841, d. Oct. 10, 1909, m. James W. Wiggins,
  Otisville, and had (1) Judson Kilpatrick Wiggins, m. and had two
  children: Charlotte Mae Wiggins, Evelyn Lamina Wiggins. (2) Fannie
  Wiggins, m. Ira Robertson.

Children, by second marriage (Cuddeback):

 Eliza,^6 m. John Lettig, Freeport, Ill.
 Emma, b. Deerpark, 1847, d. April 6, 1915, m. April 10, 1872, Jason
  Cole, b. Montague, 1841, d. Feb., 1916, at Freeport, Ill., farmer,
  New Jersey, removed about 1880 to Freeport, and had (1) Judson
  Cole, (2) Lydia Cole, m. L. L. Earnist.
 William.
 Jennie, b. 1859, d. July 31, 1880.
 Dayton.
 Irving.

107

ISAAC^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,'3 Jacob G.^4), b.
Jan. 30, 1816, d. Dec. 7, 1868, m. Dec. 30, 1836, Catherine Rose, b.
Jan. 16, 1816, d. Feb. 12, 1889, dau. of Frederick A. Rose, of Penn.
Farmer, Deerpark, on the homestead farm. Children (Cuddeback):

 Jacob,^6 b. Aug., 1840, d. Jan. 9, 1867, m. Dec. 4, 1862, Phoebe
  Preston and had: Mary.
 Mary Jane, d. Jan. 4, 1916, m. June 8, 1863, Mark Van Etten, b.
  Sept. 28, 1833, d. Mar. 16, 1909, Mount Hope, and had (1) Thomas,
  b. Feb. 28, 1868, d. Dec. 21, 1872, (2) Grace, b. Jan. 13, 1865, m.
  Oct. 7, 1889, John Carry, Finchville, (3) Maggie, b. May 1, 1866,
  m. ____ Niles, Finchville, (4) Clement, b. Aug. 5, 1872, (5)
  Catherine, b. April 11, 1870, m. (1) John M. Skinner, m. (2) Horace
  Smith, Vail, N. J., 2 children: Mary Aseneth Skinner, b. Jan. 5,
  1892, Anna Van Inwegen Skinner, b. Jan. 5, 1892.
 Margaret Ellen, b. 1842, d. Oct. 14, 1915, m. Hiram Smith, b. 1838,
  d. Oct. 4, 1881, and had (1) Nettie, m. Harry Denton, 3 children,
  Harry C. Denton, b. 1905, d. May 8, 1905, Louis A. Denton, b. May,
  1906, d. Sept. 15, 1906, Walter Edgar Denton.
 Fred, b. Feb. 18, 1845, d. July 12, 1876, m. Kate Blizzard, who m.
  (2) Feb. 8, 1883, Geo. Williams of Walton, N. Y., and had: Ida.
 Catherine, b. 1849, d. Oct. 1, 1887, m. Oct. 4, 1871, Charce J. Van
  Inwegen, and had: Willard.
 Isaac, d. Oct. 20, 1908, m. Mar. 24, 1875, Phoebe McKnight, farmer,
  Westbrookville, and had: (1) Ada, m. E. H. Van Zandt, Eastwood,
  L. I., (2) William D. Clement, m. June 25, 1918, Alice Myers, Mount
  Hope, N. Y.

108

NAOMI^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 Cornelius^4), b.
Aug. 31, 1795, d. Dec. 16, 1854, m. June 20, 1816, James D.
Swartwout, b. Nov. 1, 1792, d. Nov. 7, 1871, farmer, Deerpark, east
of the Neversink on "Penhausen's Landt." Children (Swartwout):

 Peter E.,^6 b. April 1, 1817, d. Dec. 31, 1851, m. June 17, 1840,
  Mary Shimer, b. June 17, 1819, he d. at Phelps, Ont. Co., N. Y.,
  had (1) Jacob, m. Nov. 13, 1872, Lillie Decker, 2 children: Alice
  Swartwout, ____ Swartwout, (2) Sarah Alice, m. May 23, 1870, Otis A.
  Browning, Toledo, Ohio.
 Cornelius, b. Aug. 2, 1820, d. Mar. 19, 1882, m. May I, 1844,
  Eleanor Carpenter, b. Oct. 22, 1822, farmer, Dingmans, Pa., see
  under No. 150.
 Sarah, b. Sept. 7, 1823, d. Mar. 15, 1897, m. Aug. 28, 1842, Charles
  S. Woodward, b. Aug. 21, 1808, d. Aug. 6, 1883, farmer. Mount Hope,
  son of Col. Benjamin Woodward, whose first wife was Mary Van Auken,
  See under No. 196, and had (1) Naomi, (2) Augusta, (3) Hattie, (4)
  Millicent, (5) Robert, (6) Sarah, d. Nov. 29, 1913, m. Edward B.
  Terry, 3 children: Charles Woodward Terry, Detroit, Mich., Edward
  B. Terry, Brooklyn, N. Y., Robert Terry, Brooklyn, N. Y., (7)
  Margaret, m. Emmet Langdon, (8) Charles, (9) Kate, Middletown,
  N. Y., (10) Camilla (Millie), m. ____ Tuthill, Scranton, (11) Dr.
  Elinor, m. ____ Howell, Philadelphia, Pa.
 Jane, b. Aug. 16, 1830, d. 1896, m. Jan. 13, 1849, John Mather, b.
  May 25, 1821, of Elkhart, Ind., and had (1) Sarah, m. ____
  Woodward, (2) James, (3) Carrie.
 Margaret, b. Sept. 5, 1833, d. May 3, 1903, m. Dec. 29, 1857, Hulet
  D. Clark, farmer. Supervisor, miller, etc., Westtown, N. Y., b.
  Feb. 15, 1834, d. Mar. 29, 1897, and had (1) Deborah, m. Samuel W.
  Hornbeck, 2 children: Hulet Hornbeck, Jay Hornbeck, Slate Hill,
  N. Y., (2) Naomi, m. John G. Beaks, Middletown, N. Y., (3) Clarence
  J., m. Mary Horton, Westtown, N. Y., (4) Carrie M., m. George L.
  Durland, Slate Hill, N. Y., (5) Niven H., Johnsons, N. Y.
 Deborah, b. Mar. 20, 1836, d. Aug., 1859, m. Dec. 29, 1857, Daniel
  S. Dewitt, b. Feb. 23, 1832, d. Aug., 1900.
 Abram, b. June 15, 1826, m. (1) Dec. 22, 1852, Catherine Dewitt, b.
  Oct. 28, 1827, m. (2) Jane Tillman, b. May 23, 1837, d. Nov. 10,
  1914, at Sparrowbush, had (1) Peter E., b. Nov. 9, 1855, d. July 24,
  1912, m. Sept. 22, 1880, Cordelia D. Schultz, 1 child: John D.
  Swartwout, lawyer, Richmond, Va., Cordelia, m. (2) Charles B.
  Carter, Barton Heights, Va., and d. Mar. 22, 1909, (2) Moses
  Dewitt, b. Mar. 16, 1859, m. Eugene Blanche Vail, Oct. 12, 1882,
  (3) William, b. Sept. 18, 1860, d. 1861, (4) James D., b. Oct. 7,
  1865.

109

ABRAM^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 Cornelius^4), m.
Dec. 15, 1827, Deborah Swartwout, farmer near Lyons, N. Y. Children
(Cuddeback):

 Cornelius,^6 m. ____, and had (1) Abraham, m. ____, (2) Minnie, (3)
  Grace, m. Levi Whitlock, one child: Neva Whitlock, (4) William.
 Jane, m. Spencer Van Demark and had (1) Henry, m. ____, one child:
  Irene Van Demark, (2) Alice, m. Anson Burnett.
 Samuel, m. Jennie Hooper, and had Chad.
 Ada, m. ____ Pickens of Virginia.
 Olive, m. Oscar Bishop and had Samuel.
 William, m. ____ Hoffman and had (1) Ina, (2) Lulu.

110

MARGARET^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 Cornelius^4), m.
June 22, 1821, Thomas Van Fleet, b. Oct, 19, 1788, d. Sept. 13, 1847.
Thomas, m. (2) Elizabeth Cuddeback, see No. 125. Farmer, Deerpark.
Child (Van Fleet):

 James,^6 b. Nov. 19, 1822, d. Nov. 23, 1857, m. (1) Emeline
  Fergusson, m. (2) Mrs. Catherine Fountain Scott, m. (3) Elizabeth
  Cuddeback.

111

PETER G.^4 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 Cornelius^4), b.
Nov. 13, 1806, d. Feb. 2, 1852, m. Oct. 4, 1828, Jane Van Etten, b.
Feb. 5, 1809, d. Dec. 25, 1888, dau. of Solomon Van Etten and Jemima
Gumaer. Farmers, owned and occupied a part of the Caudebec patent.
Children (Cuddeback):

 Solomon V.,^6 b. Aug. 29, 1829, d. June 23, 1860, farmer, Huguenot,
  m. Ellen Van Etten, b. Dec. 27, 1836, d. Mar. 19, 1918. She m. (2)
  Jan. 12, 1871, Charles R. Bodle, b. 1830, d. Jan. 17, 1890, and had
  (1) Hattie, b. 1857, d. July 16, 1878, (2) Blanche, m. Benjamin C.
  Swartwout, see No. 254.
 Jacob, b. Nov. 26, 1832, d. Jan. 16, 1914, farmer, Huguenot, m. Nov.
  15, 1860, Elmeda Durland, b. Oct. 10, 1837, d. Dec. 6, 1881, and
  had (1) Jennie, m. May 3, 1894, Clark Caskey, (2) Floyd, b. Oct.
  15, 1863, d. Dec. 30, 1863, (3) Alva, m. May 15, 1889, Anna Haines
  Elston, 5 children: Elmeda M. Cuddeback, Myrtell Cuddeback,
  Christie E. Cuddeback, Charles H. Cuddeback, Alva Elston Cuddeback,
  (4) Laura, m. Sept. 1, 1900, Clarence D. Shattuck, 1 child: Wilfred
  C. Shattuck, b. Nov. 3, (5) ____ Anna m. July 26, 1915, Alexander
  Currie, N. Y. City, (6) Wilfred, m. (1) July 22, 1903, Elizabeth
  Poland, d. July 3, 1911, of Bristol, Me., m. (2) Jan. 22, 1916,
  Velma M. Roberts, 1 child: Kenneth D. Cuddeback.
 Cornelius, b. June 26, 1836, d. Mar. 3, 1893, farmer, Huguenot, m.
  Melvina Griffin and had (1) Solomon V., m. Grace Kennedy, 2
  children: Harry Cuddeback, d. Dec. 17, 1893, Grace Cuddeback, d.
  Dec. 29, 1893, (2) Milton, (3) Jemima, m. Dec. 28, 1899, Joe Van
  Rosencrans, Jersey City, N, J., (4) Osmer Beach, m. June 28, 1900,
  Jane Bennett, see No. 287, (5) Carrie E., m. Jan. 9, 1898, Joseph
  Griffin, Mattawan, N. Y., (6) Martha Jane, (7) Ruth, (8) Peter.
 Martha Jane, b. Feb. 21, 1841, Dec. 26, 1860, William Westfall,
  schoolmaster, Wurtsboro, N. Y., and had (1) Jane, b. Oct. 25, 1862,
  (2) Grace, b. Feb. 29. 1863, (3) Mary.
 Peter G., b. Mar. 23, 1849, d. Aug. 9, 1890.

112

MARIA^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 Cornelius^4), b.
Aug. 4, 1813, d. Oct. 21, 1884, m. Feb. 20, 1836, Jacob Hornbeck, b.
Dec. 24, 1809, d. Nov. 6, 1890. Farmer and miller at Montague, N. J.
Children (Hornbeck):

 Mary,^6 b. Oct. 8, 1840, d. Dec. 15, 1916, m. Sept. 23, 1860,
  Thomas J. Bonnell and had (1) Clarence Hornbeck, M. D., b. Nov. 1,
  1870, m. Nov. 26, 1907, Edith Frances Fraser, Stamford, Conn., 1
  child: Fraser C. Bonnell, (2) Florence, b. June 11, 1873.
 Benjamin, b. April 19, 1843, d. Mar. 3, 1916, m. Nov., 1873, Agnes
  Simpson, b. May 5, 1855, and had (1) Irving, b. July 14, 1874, m.
  Rachel ____, (2) Mary Elizabeth, b. April 1, 1875, m. Oct. 19,
  1899, John E. Bennett, b. Nov. 4, 1872, 2 children: Agnes Bennett,
  b. July 11, 1900, John Edgar Bennett, b. Oct. 11, 1905, (3)
  Margaretta, b. April 27, 1877, m. June 29, 1899, Howell Bennett, b.
  July 19____, 1 child: Alice Bennett, b. Aug. 4, 1900, (4) Jacob, b.
  Mar. 24, 1881, (5) Emma, b. June 7, 1886, m. Oct. 4, 1913, Lancelot
  W. Armstrong, Milford, 1 child: Mary Agnes Armstrong, (6) Harrison,
  b. Oct. 23, 1888, (7) Harold, b. May 1, 1892.
 Martha, b. Feb. 4, 1873, m. Rev. Robert Hill, North Dakota, and had
  (1) May H., (2) William, (3) Bessie, (4) Emma, (5) Robert.
 Jacob, b. 1853, d. July 16, 1893, Port Jervis, N. Y.
 Emma, m. Oct. 17, 1877, Robert Jordan, d. Mar. 10, 1915, and had (1)
  Jacob, b. July 29, 1880, m. Nov. 27, 1907 Carpenter, N. Y. City,
  (2) Florence, b. July 31, 1882, (3) Robert.

113

MARTHA^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 Cornelius^4), b.
Aug. 26, 1815, d. Mar. 15, 1839, m. Dec. 13, 1837, Joseph Shimer,
farmer. Huguenot. Child (Shimer):

 Cornelius,^6 Montague, N. J.

114

WILHELMUS^5 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 Jemima^4), b.
Jan. 21, 1796, d. Sept. 23, 1843, a soldier in the War of 1812, m.
July 26, 1817, Margery Cole, b. Oct. 24, 1797, d. April 6, 1855,
farmer, New Jersey, owning and occupying lands on which Port Jervis
is now located, afterward the David Westfall farm in Montague.
Children (Westfall):

 Cornelius,^6 b. July 12, 1818, d. April 14, 1869, m. Nellie McCabe,
  Joliet, Ill., and had Charles.
 David, b. Jan. 16, 1821, d. Jan. 13, 1916, m. April 20, 1848, Ann J.
  Stewart, b. Dec. 17, 1829, dau. Horace K. Stewart and Emaline
  Youngs, farmers on homestead in New Jersey, and had (1) Wilhelmus,
  b. Feb. 16, 1849, d. Nov. 9, 1878, m. 1876, Hannah Jennie Everitt,
  b. Jan. 5, 1848, d. June 21, 1904, 2 children: Ellen Westfall, b.
  Aug. 18, 1877, and Wilhelmus David Westfall, (2) Allen, m. Mar. 24,
  1904, Frederica Christiana Kees, d. Jan., 1917, (3) Emma, (4) Sarah
  Edna, b. Jan. 15, 1854, m. Dec. 23, 1880, James E. Cole, d. Mar.
  15, 1882, (5) Anna, b. Aug. 31, 1858, (6) Emaline S., b. Sept. 7,
  1850, d. April 2, 1853.
 Jacob, b. Feb. 2, 1824, Mackinaw, Mich.
 Charles Hardenburgh, b. June 20, 1826, drowned in Sacramento River,
  Feb. 17, 1855.
 Sarah Owen, b. Oct. 19, 1828, d. June 3, 1859, m, Simon Swartwout,
  farmer, Michigan, and had (1) George W., (2) Julia, (3) George, (4)
  Mary.
 George, b. Nov. 24, 1830, killed on railroad, June 19, 1860.
 Hannah Jane, b. Nov. 24, 1833, m. Albert Westfall, Michigan, and had
  (1) George W., (2) Lewis W., (3) Clarence J., (4) Mary.
 Julia, b. Feb. 23, 1828, d. June 17, 1854.
 Lewis, b. Jan, 9, 1836, d. Oct. 22, 1888, at Baltimore, Md., m.
  Donna Snow Woods, at Jackson, Mich., and had (1) Ella.
 Ella H., d. Oct. 8, 1886.

[Illustration: Westfall Homestead, New Jersey]

[Illusatration: Elting Homestead, (formerly Van Auken Fort), N. Y.]

115

JACOB^5 WESTFALL (Jacob.^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 Jemima^4), b. 1800,
d. Jan. 23, 1899, m. June 10, 1824, Mary Westfall, dau. of Samuel
Westfall. Children (Westfall):

 Jemima.^6
 Amanda, b. 1830, d. Oct. 4, 1886, m. Peter D. Swartwout, Huguenot,
  N. Y., see under No. 128.
 Samuel.
 Esther, m. ____ Roy.
 Davis, m. ____ Cisco.
 Mary, m. ____Roy.
 John G., m. ____ Roy, and had (1) Isabella, d. Mar. 8, 1913, at
  Battle Creek, Mich., (2) Alice, m. ____ Gleason, Battle Creek, Mich.

116

HESTER^5 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Abraham,^3 Jemima^4), m. Dec.
4, 1819, William Van Noy, farmer, Alleghany Co., N. Y. Children (Van
Noy):

 George,^6 b. May 22, 1824, m. ____, and had (1) Diotta Doll, m. Levi
  Van Fleet, (2) Sarah, m. ____ Miner, (3) Esther, m. Henry Van
  Fleet.
 Sarah, b. Feb. 5, 1822.

117

CATHERINE^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 William^4), m.
Jacob Nearpass, b. June 11, 1808, d. April 24, 1863. Farmers, removed
to Tyre, Seneca Co., N. Y., in 1834, Jacob, m. (2) ____ Gleason, and
had nine children. Children (Nearpass):

 William^6 b. Feb. 17, 1807.
 Anna, b. Nov. 17, 1808.
 Benjamin, b. Oct. 10, 1811, d. Feb. 17, 1896, m. 1837, Amelia Van
  Buskirk, b. 1819, d. Feb. 12, 1896, farmer, removed to Seneca Co.,
  N. Y., 1846, and had (1) Cornelius, (2) Cornelia, d. Oct. 27, 1894.
 George, b. Oct. 6, 1814.
 John, b. Nov. 22, 1822, in Montague, d. Mar. 21, 1891, m. Catherine
  Babcock and had (1) George, (2) Frank, (3) Elizabeth, (4) Emily.
 Samuel, b. Nov. 26, 1826, in Montague, d. Sept. 1, 1897, in Seneca
  Falls, m. Emily Golden and had (1) William, m. Ellen Buskirk, (2)
  John, m. Laurence, (3) Catherine, (4) Victor.

118

BENJAMIN^5 CUDEBEC (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 William^4),
called "Little Ben," b. Sept. 22, 1789, farmer and cooper, m.
Catherine (Catrinche) Kuykendall. Lived near Tyre, Seneca Co., N. Y.,
late in life, he changed the spelling of his name to that noted above.
Before "going west" he lived in Deerpark, in the log house in
"Brooklyn" belonging to Elias Kuykendall, whose dau. he married.
Children (Cudebec):

 William,^6 m. Betsy Babcock, farmer, Seneca Co., N. Y., and had (1)
  George, m. ____, 2 children: Benjamin Cudebec, Mary Cudebec, (2)
  Nancy, m. De Witt Howard, Shearborn, Chenango Co., N. Y., (3)
  Estella, m. Richard Dunning, Mount Morris, N. Y., (4) William,
  m. ____, 1 child: Lea Cudebec, (5) Vitellus, (6) Benjamin, (7)
  Agnes.
 Elias, b. July 24, 1810, Alleghany Co., N. Y., m. 1835, Mary Young,
  and had (1) Clarence L., Portage Bridge, Livingston Co., N. Y., m.
  (1) Abbie Hatch, m. (2) 1876, Almeda Bennett, 13 children: (1)
  Clinton Cudebec, (2) Rosa Cudebec, (3) Miriam Cudebec, (4) Nettie
  Cudebec, m. A. M. Hunt, had Lois H. Cudebec Hunt, Mary Cudebec
  Hunt, (5) Floyd Cudebec, Clinton Springs, N. Y., (6) Roy J.
  Cudebec, m. Cora B. Stone, (7) Albert B. Cudebec, m. Ora Moe, had
  Cevira, (8) Clyde L. Cudebec, (9) Fern Cudebec, m. Stevens,
  Courtland, N. Y., (10) Orlando, Auburn, N. Y., m. Catherine Van
  Ness, 2 children, Mary Cudebec, Bertha Cudebec, (11) Frank Cudebec,
  (12) Adelbert Cudebec, (13) Bertha Cudebec, (2) Helen, (3) Harriet,
  m. James Davis, (4) Jemima, m. William Laurie, Allen, N. Y., had 2
  children: Grace Laurie, Madge Laurie, (5) Ernest, Dalton, N. Y.,
  (6) Fred, Mullen, Nebr., (7) Elsie, m. William Hewett, lawyer,
  Custer Co., Nebr., had 2 children: Ernest Hewett, Mary Hewett, (8)
  George W., b. Nov. 6, 1858, Dalton, Livingston Co., N. Y., later
  Cal., (9) Frank F., b. Mar. 4, 1859, teacher, Syracuse, N. Y., (10)
  Hattie, m. Linus Augustine, farmer. Granger, N. Y., had La Grange
  Augustine, (11) Mary, m. Lewis Denigan, d. Feb. 28, 1884, farmer.
  Grange, N. Y.
 Jacob M., b. Sept. 9, 1821, in Deerpark, m. Ann Babcock, Seneca
  Falls, and had (1) Alice, (2) Rosetta, m. Peter M. Van Cleafe,
  Waterloo, Seneca Co., N. Y., had Nellie Van Cleafe, (3) Clinton G.,
  Plattsburgh, N. Y.
 Jemima, b. Nov. 21, 1818, m. Russell D. Spafford, at Farmers Tyre,
  N. Y.
 Rosetta, b. Oct. 19, 1816, m. Peter Van Buskirk, Seneca Co., N. Y.,
  and had (1) Levi, m. Caty Nearpass, (2) Thomas, m. Elizabeth
  Thomas, (3) Sally.
 Mary, m. Bert Townsend, farmer, Waterloo, N. Y., later Michigan, and
  had (1) Kate, m. Clarence Eura, Mich., (2) Jemima, (3) George.
 Levi, b. July 2, 1814.

119

MARGARET^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 William^4), b.
Oct. 12, 1791, d. Aug. 22, 1879, m. Dec. 14, 1810, Daniel Van Etten,
d. Jan. 25, 1845, farmer, near Lyons, N. Y. Children (Van Etten):

 Hannah,^6 b. Jan. 24, 1811 (?), m. June 18, 1829, William A. Teller.
 Jacob, b. Sept. 6, 1813, m. Dec. 31, 1835, Mary Jackson.
 Catherine, b. May 3, 1819.
 Sally, m. June 18, 1846, John Cuddeback, Seneca Falls, see No. 121.
 Jane, b. Jan. 2, 1823, in Minisink, d. May 19, 1901, m. Oct. 22,
  1847, William Vasburg, Pittsburgh, Pa.
 Nancy, b. July 23, 1825, d. Oct. 28, 1893, m. Oct. 20, 1852, Smith
  Halstead, Lyons, N. Y., and had (1) D. S. Halstead, (2) Sarah
  Halstead.
 Jemima, b. Feb. 26, 1827, m. July 6, 1854, Wells Hornbeck.
 William, b. May 19, 1829, m. Feb. 11, 1851, Margaret A, Smith.
 Hervey, b. Oct. 3, 1832, m. Oct. 18, 1854, Jane Hornbeck.

120

HARMONAS^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 William^4), b.
Jan. 30, 1794, farmer, Wayne Co., N. Y., m. Nancy Whitehead. Child
(Cuddeback):

 John L.,^6 m. (1) Esther K. Swartwout, d. May 18, 1851, m. (2) ____,
  and had William.

121

SIMON^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 William^4), b.
1795, d. at Tyre, June 9, 1887, removed from Deerpark to Tyre, Seneca
Co., in 1834, m. Margery Middagh. Children (Cuddeback):

 John,^6 b. in Deerpark, Nov. 10, 1821, merchant, Seneca Falls, d.
  Feb. 14, 1896, m. June 18, 1846, Sally Van Etten and had Eugenia
  Delia, m. Adelbert S. Davis, Seneca Falls, son, ____, m. Van
  Benschoten.
 Jacob M., farmer, Seneca Falls, had Clinton G., who m. ____ Young.
 Daniel, m. ____ Johnson, Seneca Falls.
 Catherine, m. W. Little Van Demark, Tyre, N. Y.
 Rosetta, m. Alpheus Westbrook, and had (1) Mary, m. Benjamin Van
  Cleave, (2) Catherine, (3) Jacob, m. Addie Van Buskirk, (4) John, m.
  Amelia Lauringe.

122

CHARLOTTE^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 William^4), b.
Dec. 19, 1800, m. April 14, 1821, Jerry Gumaer, farmer, Sandyston,
N. J. Children (Gumaer):

 Isaac,^6 b. Jan. 3, 1822.
 Margaret, m. Benjamin Westbrook, and had (1) Oscar, (2) Martin.
  William Cuddeback, b. ____, m. (1) Sarah De Puy, m. (2) Sally
  Gordon, b. 1833, d. Feb. 1, 1906, and had (1) Charlotte, d. May 24,
  1908, m. Jacob Case, of Oakland, N. Y., children: Sarah Case,
  Willard Case, William Case and Clarence Case, (2) Ellen, m. George
  Decker, (3) Charles Clark, b. Feb. 25, 1857, d. Feb. 25, 1915, in
  Rio, N. Y., (4) William E., New York City, (5) Jerry, m. Estelle
  McGuire, children: William Gumaer, Burt Gumaer, John Gumaer, Elmer
  Gumaer, Anna Gumaer and Olive Gumaer, reside Rio, N. Y., (6) Isaac
  Elmer, b. 1862, d. Jan. 8, 1913, N. Y. City, (7) Henry, of Rio,
  N. Y., (8) Jane, m. Robert Whittaker, reside Rio, N. Y.
 Sarah Eleanor, m. May 4, 1864, Anson A. Jagger, of Sandyston, N. Y.
 Hannah E., m. May 18, 1865, Victor P. Laurent, and had (1) Victor
  P., of Port Jervis, m. Margaret Schneider, (2) Margaret, m. Walter
  M. Strunk, of Stateford, Pa.
 Eunice.
 Jane, m. ____ Flemming, and had Bert Flemming.
 Jemima, m. John Flemming.
 Peter.
 Harmonas.
 Lewis, of Beechwoods.

123

LEVI^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 William^4), b. Nov.
12, 1808, farmer, Deerpark, living on the homestead, the "Cuddeback
Stone House," near Port Clinton, m. July 16, 1825, Maria Van Inwegen,
dau. of John Van Inwegen and Elizabeth Van Fleet of Huguenot, N. Y.
Children (Cuddeback):

 John,^6 farmer, near Cuddebackville, N. Y., m. Julia Mulhern, b.
  1843, d. Newburgh, Dec. 18, 1913, and had (1) Libbie, (2) Ward, (3)
  Maggie, (4) Osmer.
 Margaret, b. 1828, d. Oct. 16, 1913, m. Samuel Gordon, d. 1895,
  Westbrookville, N. Y., and had (1) Levi, of Oakland, (2) Martha, m.
  ____ Thompson, of Newburgh, (3) Julia, m. ____ Moore, of Fishkill,
  N. Y., (4) Charles, of Cuddebackville, (5) William, of Guilford,
  Conn., (6) Milvin, (7) Maria, m. ____ Griswold, of Toronto, Canada.
 Aseneth Jane, m. George Brando, of Greene Co., N. Y., and had (1)
  Osmer, (2) Catherine, m. Charles Thomas, of Catskill, N. Y., child:
  Belle Thomas, (3) Arthur, m. Edna ____, children: Pearl Brando and
  Brando, (4) Bertha.
 Thomas, m. ____.
 Jesse, of Athens, Ga., m. Feb. 1, 1865, Hannah Jane Northrop and had
  (1) Anna Belle, m. W. N. Bacon, children: Charles L. Bacon and
  Lewis Earl Bacon, (2) Fred, d. Feb. 23, 1890, (3) Burt, m. Jessie
  Brant, N. Y. City, children: Florence Fay Cuddeback, Jennie
  Cuddeback, Jessie Cuddeback, (4) Pearl, m. Oct. 8, 1903, Anna May
  Simons, Salem, N. Y., children: Gladys Ellen Cuddeback and Elida
  Frieda Cuddeback, of Athens, Pa.
 Daniel, m. (1) Phoebe Hoffman and had (1) George, m. Minnie Decker,
  of Newton, N. J., children: Carrie Cuddeback and Clarence
  Cuddeback, (2) James Joshua, m. Nettie Emory, of Sparrowbush,
  children: Oliver Cuddeback, Hazel P. Cuddeback, m. June 3, 1917,
  Clarence A. Gilson, William Cuddeback, Lata Cuddeback, (3) Carrie,
  m. Burt Wood, of Middletown, N. Y., (4) Hannah Jane, m. Isaac
  Clark, of Middletown, N. Y., children: Luella Clark and Mertle
  Clark, Daniel, m. (2) Mar. 22, 1876, Eliza La Rue Gunderman, and
  had (5) Martin, m. (1) Lena Knight, b. Oct. 21, 1873, d. Oct. 21,
  1911, children: Legrand Cuddeback, b. Mar. 2, 1899, d. Oct. 3,
  1906, Daniel Cuddeback, Hazel Cuddeback, Roberta Cuddeback, Ina
  Cuddeback, Martin, m. (2) Aug. 19, 1908, Alma Ogden, of Matamoras,
  Pa.
 Mary, m. John Holcott.
 Levi, b. Nov. 22, 1849, m. Nov. 23, 1881, Carrie Holley, b. Feb. 10,
  1859, and had (1) Edna Mearl, b. July 24, 1886, m. June 24, 1911,
  Orange Benson, (2) Reta Gladys, b. Jan. 15, 1896, (3) Harold Jay,
  b. Jan. 7, 1901.
 Martin.
 Elizabeth.

124

SALLY^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 William^4), b.
Jan. 11, 1806, d. April 20, 1888, m. Aug. 18, 1827, William Nearpass
Case, b. April 14, 1804, d. April 29, 1896, son of Henry Case and
Caty Nearpass. He was a farmer and lumberman at Oakland, N. Y.
Children (Case):

 Henry,^6 farmer, near Wurtsboro, N. Y., m. Deborah Griffin and had
  (1) Charles, m. Frank Ray, (2) Wallace, m. Emaline Hopkins,
  children: William Case, Wallace Case, Andrew Case, Flora Case, and
  Maude Case, (3) Virgil, (4) Blanche, (5) Oscar, (6) Horton, (7)
  Blake, (8) Sanford, (9) Catherine, (10) Levert.
 Benjamin, b. 1829, d. April 15, 1893, m. Deborah Hopson, b. 1837, d.
  1898. He was a farmer and lumberman at Oakland, N. Y., and had (1)
  Catherine, b. 1874, d. Mar. 23, 1895, (2) Anna B., b. June 8, 1868,
  d. Mar. 31, 1870.
 Samuel, of Hawley, Pa., m. April 4, 1860, Caroline Ketcham.
 Jacob N., lived on homestead at Oakland, N. Y., m. (1) Honora Kane,
  b. June 20, 1845, d. Dec. 22, 1877, m., (2) Charlotte Gumaer, dau.
  of Wm. Gumaer, and had (1) Clarence, (2) Sarah, (3) William, (4)
  Willard.
 Jerry Gumaer, b. Dec. 16, 1842, d. July 10, 1914, a lumberman and
  farmer of Oakland, N. Y., m. (1) Ruth Newkirk, b. 1847, drowned
  Aug. 31, 1903, m. (2) May 1, 1907, Florence Van Inwegen, b. Oct.
  16, 1855.
 Catherine, m. William Teller, of Lyons, N. Y., and had (1) Sarah, b.
  1868, d. 1897, (2) Grace M., m. Fred Seybolt of Otisville,
  children: Sadie Seybolt, Ruth Seybolt, Caroline Seybolt and Jerry
  Seybolt.

125

ELIZABETH^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Henry^4), b.
Dec. 29, 1794, d. Dec. 26, 1865, m. June 17, 1821, Thomas Van Fleet,
b. Oct. 19, 1788, d. Sept. 13, 1847, whose first wife was Margaret
Cuddeback, see No. 110. Children (Van Fleet):

 Margaret,^6 b. Mar. 4, 1824, d. June 11, 1824.
 Benjamin, b. May 21, 1826, d. Aug. 10, 1905, a farmer at Deerpark,
  m. Dec, 1, 1852, Jane Van Etten and had (1) Amanda, b. Dec. 3,
  1854, (2) Thomas, b. Sept. 13, 1856, m. Eva Tracey, of Kingston,
  N. Y., (3) Margaret, b. Feb. II, 1858, m. Oct. 4, 1893, Andrew J.
  Dennis, d. Mar. 9, 1897, (4) Frank, b. Sept. 20, 1861, m. June 24,
  1906, Hattie Allen, of Port Jervis, N. Y., (5) Clara, b. Nov. 19,
  1863, (6) Jennie, b. Sept. 6, 1866.
 Solomon, b. Dec. 18, 1829, d. Feb. 15, 1907, a farmer at Deerpark,
  m. Feb. 13, 1877, Phoebe Cole, b. June 9, 1839, d. Jan. 26, 1907.

[Illustration: Van Fleet Homestead, Deerpark]

[Illustration: Home of Levi Van Etten, Deerpark, N. Y.]

126

HULDA^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Henry^4), b. Dec.
11, 1796, d. Feb. 19, 1882, m. Dec. 14, 1815, Cornelius Westfall, b.
July 22, 1798, d. April 21, 1877. He was a farmer of Westfall
Township, Pike Co., Pa. Children (Westfall):

 Jemima,^6 b. June 21, 1817, d. Aug. 3, 1892, m. July 2, 1842,
  Rosencrantz C. Bull, b. June 10, 1816, farmer, near Milford, Pa.,
  and had (1) Cornelius Westfall, b. Jan. 5, 1845, d. Dec. 6, 1910, a
  lawyer at Milford, Pa., m. (1) 1870, Julia A. Cross, d. 1871, m.
  (2) 1877, Anna R. Nyce, dau. of Geo. Nyce, of Bushkill, Pa., 3
  children: George R. Bull, m. Sept. 5, 1906, Mary Bidlack Reed, dau.
  of Dr. H. B. Reed, of Milford, Pa., children: Cornelius Bull,
  Jemima Bull, m. April 20, 1910, George R. Van Wyck, of Washington,
  D. C, and Anna C. Bull, (2) Henry Mott, b. May 1, 1833, d. April
  29, 1905, m. Arminda Crissman, and had 2 children: Cyrus Bull and
  Maria Bull, (3) Maria, m. John Klaer, near Stroudsburgh, Pa., 4
  children, of whom one was Bertha, (4) Hulda, (5) Sarah Elizabeth,
  m. Mar. 26, 1903, George Mitchell, a merchant of Milford, (6)
  Jarvis Crissie, b. Nov. 15, 1861, m. Jan. 28, 1885, Eva Nyce. He
  was a farmer at Milford.
 Jacob G., b. 1821, d. July 20, 1884, a farmer at Matamoras for 27
  years and Justice of the Peace, m. Jan, 26, 1853, Elizabeth Van
  Noy, b. Montague, July 14, 1829, d. Matamoras, Jan. 16, 1912. They
  had (1) Mary, m. Oct. 11, 1883, Lansing B. Wright, child: Millicent
  Wright, m. July 28, 1909, T. N. Woodley, (2) Elizabeth, m. Nov. 20,
  1883, George T. Sayre, child: Eva Sayre, m. Albert Clark, (3)
  Henry, m. Feb. 27, 1884, Delia Wells, 2 children: Charles Cleveland
  Westfall, m. Feb. 10, 1910, Elizabeth M. Arnst and Jacob Westfall,
  d. Nov., 1904.
 Elizabeth, b. 1824, d. Jan. 31, 1915, m. (1) Solomon Westbrook, m.
  (2) Peter G. Canfield, of Matamoras, Pa.
 Dina, b. Dec. 3, 1833, d. Sept. 22, 1848.
 Sally, b. Nov. 1, 1825, d. Nov. 25, 1909, at Matamoras, Pa.

127

JACOB G.^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Henry^4), b.
Mar. 13, 1799, d. April 8, 1863, m. (1) July 20, 1820, Blandina
Hornbeck, b. May 5, 1800, d. May 8, 1832, m. (2) Feb. 16, 1833,
Jemima Cuddeback, b. Oct. 30, 1805, d. June 22, 1863, see under No.
44. Children by first marriage (Cuddeback):

 Henry,^6 b. Sept. 2, 1824, m. Feb. 18, 1847, Hannah White, d. Sept.
  25, 1877, lived near Carbondale. They had (1) Florence J., b. Sept.
  9, 1850, (2) George E., b. July 8, 1852, (3) Jacob H., b. Aug. 3,
  1854, d. Jan. 29, 1859, (4) Elizabeth Ann, b. May 23, 1860, (5)
  Gertrude, b. May 15, 1876.
 Saffrein, b. May 9, 1827, near Carbondale, Pa.

Children, by second marriage (Cuddeback):

 Peter G., b. Dec. 3, 1833, d. July 5, 1863, at Michigan, m. ____.
 George, b. Dec. 10, 1837, lived in Michigan.
 Abram J., b. Nov. 25, 1840, lived in Michigan.
 Jemima, b. Aug. 27, 1845, m. ____.

128

CYNTHIA^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Henry^4), b.
April 9, 1801, d. Feb. 26, 1845, m. Sept. 16, 1820, David Swartwout,
b. July 28, 1800, d. Oct. 18, 1874, son of Peter and Jannetje
Westfall Swartwout. He was a farmer near Huguenot. Children
(Swartwout):

 Henry,^6 b. Nov. 30, 1821, farmer near Honesdale, m. Eliza White and
  had (1) Emma, m. Henry Welles.
 Jane, b. Dec. 30, 1823, d. June 27, 1853, m. John Whitlock and had
  (1) David, (2) Joel, m. Elizabeth Hoff, one child: Joseph Hoff
  Whitlock.
 Hester, b. Dec. 17, 1825, d. Dec. 30, 1841.
 Philip, b. April 12, 1828, d. Feb. 18, 1844.
 Peter D., b. April 27, 1830, d. Aug. 5, 1901, a farmer at Huguenot,
  m. Nov. 10, 1853, Amanda Westfall, b. Sept. 19, 1830, d. Oct. 4,
  1885. They had (1) Mary, b. Aug. 26, 1854, m. Alfred Norris, child:
  Fred Norris, (2) David, b. June 23, 1856, m. Oct. 14, 1896, ____
  Grant, child: Peter Grant Swartwout, (3) Helen, b. Jan. 3, 1858, d.
  Mar. 19, 1865, (4) Albert B., b. Oct. 22, 1864, m. Alice Heindel,
  lived at Springfield, Ohio, child: Albert Swartwout, drowned May,
  1916, (5) Carrie, b. May 29, 1868, (6) Samuel Dewitt, b. Dec. 19,
  1870.
 Margaret, b. Aug. 22, 1834, m. Edwin White, a farmer in Luzerne Co.,
  Pa., and had (1) David White, (2) Ellen White.

129

SIMEON^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Henry^4), b. Oct.
6, 1806, d. Jan. 24, 1892, m. Oct. 29, 1831, Blandina Bennett, b.
Jan. 30, 1809, d. Jan. 10, 1892, see under No. 61. Farmer living near
Huguenot, later near Milford, Pa. Children (Cuddeback):

 James Bennett,^6 b. Sept. 2, 1832, d. May 25, 1917, m. May 9, 1866,
  Eliza Decker, b. Aug. 8, 1841, d. Dec. 5, 1915, dau. of Abraham and
  Eliza Burrel Decker, of Dingmans. Resided Port Jervis and had (1)
  Ella Maud, b. Nov. 15, 1867, m. April 22, 1891, Nelson Blood, their
  children were: Leroy Blood, b. June 5, 1893, James Herbert Blood,
  b. July 7, 1894, Sarah Helen Blood, b. Dec. 3, 1896, William
  Wallace Blood, b. Dec. 15, 1898, Charles Kenneth Blood, b. Dec. 15,
  1898, and Raymond C. Blood, b. May 15, 1909, (2) Albert Leroy, b.
  Nov. 21, 1875, d. April 9. 1917, m. Nov. 22, 1905, Etta Kipp, of
  Milford, Pa., (3) Charles Burrell, b. Feb. 22, 1880, m. April 27,
  1910, Sarah K. Schill, lived Port Jervis, N. Y., (4) Paul Bennett,
  b. Feb. 17, 1884, m. Oct. 29, 1914, Pearl Van Inwegen, of
  Monticello, N. Y., (5) Simeon Frank, b. Dec. 15, 1870, m. Jan. 26,
  1905, Helen Krieg, resided Jamesville, Wisc., and had Florence E.
  Cuddeback, b. Mar. 9, 1906, and Harold C. Cuddeback, b. April 19,
  1908.
 Henry, b. April 13, 1834, d. April 20, 1906, farmer at Ovid, Mich.,
  m. Jane Greenleaf, d. April, 1918.
 Stephen, b. Mar. 18, 1836, d. Mar. 18, 1897, he was a farmer at
  Milford, Pa., m. Nov. 18, 1869, Margaret A. Morris, of Suffolk,
  Va., b. July 30, 1848, and had (1) Irene, b. 1871, (2) Lewis, m.
  Maggie McDermott, of Brooklyn, N. Y., (3) David, b. 1874, m. Daisy
  De Witt, of Milford, Pa., (4) William H., b. July 7, 1876, m. Mar.
  15, 1905, Ella Wood, lived at Port Jervis, N. Y., (5) Stephen, b.
  1878, (6) Blandina, m. April 3, 1908, Willard D. Taylor, of New
  York City, d. July 10, 1911, (7) Maria J., lives at New York City,
  (8) Solomon Van Fleet, lives at Portland, Oregon.
 Benjamin, b. Jan. 4, 1838, d. Oct. 23, 1839.
 David, b. Mar. 28, 1840, d. April 17, 1869, killed on board ship.
 Thomas, b. Mar. 20, 1844, lived in Kentucky.
 George, b. Feb. 12,1842, d. Nov. 4, 1845.
 Eli, b. Feb. 22, 1846, d. Dec. 6, 1879, resided Milford, Pa.
 Lydia, b. Sept. 25, 1847, d. Nov. 16, 1917, m. (1) Nov. 22, 1871,
  Hudson Van Etten, b. 1843, d. July 6, 1880, she m. (2) July 2,
  1892, William Martin, of Port Jervis, b. Sept. 23, 1847, d. Oct.
  25, 1905, farmer at Montague. She had (1) Evert Van Etten, b. 1872,
  d. Nov. 20, 1890, at Ovid, Mich., (2) Hudson Van Etten, m. Oct. 12,
  1914, Louise Thorpe, (3) Martha Van Etten, m. Jan. 18, 1900, A. C.
  Kronk.
 Franklin, b. Feb. 1, 1852, resided Michigan.

A GROUP OF GRANDPARENTS At home of Elting Cuddeback 1880.

[Illustration: Grandparents]

 1. Mrs. Jane Cuddeback Johnson
 2. Alexander T. Johnson
 3. Mrs. Aseneth Cuddeback Farnum
 4. Samuel B. Farnum
 5. Mrs. Catherine Cuddeback Cuddeback
 6. James Cuddeback
 7. Elting Cuddeback
 8. Mrs. Margaret Cuddeback Cuddeback
 9. Mrs. Hannah Cuddeback Swartwout
 10. Peter P. Swartwout
 11. Mrs. Jemima Cuddeback Chapin
 12. Mrs. Lydia Cuddeback Titsworth

130

CATHERINE^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Henry^4), b.
June 28, 1809, d. June 8, 1877, m. Jan. 8, 1831, Abram J. Cuddeback,
farmer of Deerpark, see under No. 44. Children (Cuddeback):

 Dina,^6 b. Nov. 27, 1833, d. Sept. 22, 1848.
 Margaret, b. 1834, d. Mar. 9, 1891, m. Aug. 16, 1870, Wm. C. Drake,
  of Cochecton, b. 1810, d. Oct. 23, 1893.
 Esther, b. 1835, d. July 8, 1891.
 Amanda, b. 1839, d. Aug. 26, 1916, m. June 27, 1861, Los Angeles,
  Cal., Eli Perry Mulock, b. 1848, d. Mar. 20, 1903, Colo., their
  children were (1) Louisa Mulock, b. Sept. 23, 1862, d. April 9,
  1863, (2) Delia Mulock, b. Jan. 10, 1864, m. Seeley W. Mudd, of Los
  Angeles, Cal., (3) Catherine Mulock, m. Hiram T. Cleaves, of
  Denver, Colo., (4) William Mulock.
 Martin V., b. July 28, 1841, d. at Magnolia, Va., Mar. 26, 1879, m.
  Mar. 2, 1865, Alice Patterson, b. Dec. 17, 1845, d. Dec. 5, 1903,
  they had: (1) Charles M., (2) William, (3) Margaret, all lived at
  Chattanooga, Oklahoma.
 Elizabeth, b. Aug. 30, 1844, d. Sept. 26, 1848.
 Henry, b. Aug. 16, 1847, d. Mar. 2, 1894, m. (1) Oct. 25, 1870,
  Sarah E. Van Inwegen, of Huguenot, m. (2) Nov. 6, 1882, Carrie E.
  Hadsall, of Damascus, Pa., children: (1) Blake, (2) Maggie, b.
  1884, d. Sept. 29, 1891, at Pittston, Pa.
 Abram J., b. April 4, 1851, d. Aug. 8, 1892, m. Oct. 25, 1876,
  Letitia Baker O'Reilly, d. July 26, 1916, at Cocheton, and had: (1)
  Letitia, b. Sept. 22, 1878, m. Oct. II, 1910, Dr. W. Ray Tubbs, of
  Denver, Colo., (2) Helen, m. Oct. 19, 1898, C. Van Auken Norris,
  one child: Lulu Norris.

131

GEORGE^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Henry^4), b. Aug.
10, 1815, d. Jan, 18, 1889, m. Dec. 21, 1848, Margaret Carpenter, b.
Mar. 24, 1824, d. Feb. 11, 1898, dau. of John Carpenter and Catherine
Westfall. He was a farmer in Deerpark, east of the Neversink, on
their family homestead farm. Children (Cuddeback):

 Henry G.,^6 b. Oct. 17, 1849, m. (1) Sept. 18, 1878, Libbie A.
  O'Reilly, of Cochecton, b. Dec. 5, 1854, d. Nov. 29, 1879. He m.
  (2) Feb. 28, 1883, Sarah Whitlock, b. May 29, 1848, d. Dec. 13,
  1917, dau. of Benjamin and Jane Swartwout Whitlock, of Lyons. He
  adopted his wife's nephew as his son: Cornelius Whitlock Cuddeback,
  m. April 16, 1918, Annette Celestine Clifford.
 John D., b. June 22, 1851, d. Sept. 14, 1871.
 Mary Ellen, b. June 25, 1856, d. Sept. 18, 1862.
 Esther, b. May 22, 1858, d. Sept. 24, 1862.
 Margaret Alice, b. Nov. 28, 1860, d. Sept. 23, 1862.
 George, b. Oct. 12, 1868, m. Dorrell.
 Martha Elizabeth, b. March 16, 1864, m. Dec. 5, 1884, Reuben Bell,
  of Matamoras, b. May 7, 1847, d. July 5, 1917. Children: (1) Bertha
  C, b. June 3, 1886, m. Oct. 26, 1912, Willis L. Brown. (2)
  Margaret, b. April 28, 1889, m. June 28, 1911, Ralph Berger. (3)
  Esther G., b.  April 7, 1898.

132

CATHERINE^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin^4), b.
June 6, 1809, d. Nov. 3, 1887, m. Aug. 1, 1829, James Cuddeback, b.
Mar. 18, 1799, d. Oct. 12, 1883, see No. l00. He was a farmer at
Cuddebackville, owning and occupying a portion of the original patent
during their entire lives. Children (Cuddeback):

 Jane,^6 b. Oct. i6, 1831, d. June 7, 1841.
 Caroline, b. Aug. 12, 1835, d. June 9, 1841.
 240 Lewis, b. Jan. 31, 1838, m. Marilla Ann Chapman.
 241 Benjamin, b. May 23, 1840, m. Eliza V. Whitlock. Levi, b. July
  31, 1843, d. July 21, 1917, m. Oct. 16, 1872, Hattie Graham. Had
  Hotel Caudebec at Cuddebackville.

133

JANE^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin^4), b.
Dec. 22, 1811, d. Sept. 28, 1904, m. Oct. 27, 1836, Alexander T.
Johnson, b. Nov. 13, 1811, d. Aug. 29, 1898, in Port Jervis, N. Y.,
son of William Johnston, of Minisink, and Rachel Millspaugh, and
grandson of James Johnston and Mary Graham, who was a dau. of Dr.
Graham, schoolmaster and farmer. Children (Johnson):

 242 William Elting,^6 b. Oct. 17, 1837, m. Mattie Maria Fuller.
 243 Blandina Ellen, b. Mar. 29, 1841, m. Benjamin F. Dunning.
 244 Thomas Benjamin, b. May 14, 1844, m. (1) Henrietta Barstow, m.
  (2) Mrs. Nellie Nightingale Lesher, m. (3) Carrie Barstow.
 Lyman Hoyt, b. Mar. 9, 1847, d. Feb. 14, 1884.

134

ASENETH^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin^4), b.
May 12, 1814, d. Oct. 23, 1899, m. Jan. 12, 1837, Samuel Bernard
Farnum, b. at Litchfield, Conn., Jan. 22, 1810, d. at Port Jervis,
Jan. 11, 1892, was the son of Peter and Chloe Farnum. He was a
surveyor. Division Superintendent on the Delaware and Hudson Canal
many years and was a farmer. Children (Farnum):

 245 Mary Jane,^6 b. Nov. 8, 1837, m. Russel F. Lord.
 246 Benjamin Cuddeback, b. Sept. 20, 1839, m. Emma McCormick.
 Abigal Ann, b. Nov. 7, 1841, at Mongaup, d. Nov. 20, 1843.
 247 Henry Harrison, b. April 3, 1844, m. Elizabeth Beattie.
 248 Lizzie, b. Oct. 4, 1846, m. Albert Stoll.
 Catherine Cuddeback, b. Mar. 1, 1849.

135

ELTING^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin^4), b.
Oct. 10, 1816, d. Mar. 28, 1897, M. (1) Sept. 18, 1844, Ann Bevier
Elting, b. April 29, 1820, d. Jan. 20, 1862, m. (2) Aug. 10, 1871,
Margaret Cuddeback, b. April 10, 1818, d. Oct. 21, 1884. Children
(Cuddeback):

 Ann Maria,^6 b. Sept. 11, 1845, d. Feb. 27, 1846.
 248A Cornelius Elting, b. Mar. 10, 1849, m. Esther Mills.
 249 Benjamin Elting, b. Mar. 29, 1851, m. Clara Augusta Conkling,
 Nov. 24, 1880.
 Philip Bevier, b. May 30, 1853, d. June 16, 1853.
 250 William Louis, b. April 26, 1854, m. Alice D. Malven.
 251 Blandina, b. Sept. 28, 1856, m. Rev. John L. Stillwell.
 Philip Bevier, b. Oct. 7, 1859, d. Sept. 30, 1860.
 Philip Bevier, b. Aug. 20, 1861, d. April 22, 1862.

136

HANNAH^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin^4), b.
April 12, 1819, d. Dec. 26, 1900, m. Nov. 10, 1842, Peter P.
Swartwout, b. May 25, 1817, d. Oct. 27, 1885, son of Philip Swartwout
and Hester Westbrook Westfall. Children (Swartwout):

 251A Catherine,^6 b. Sept. 21, 1843, m. Daniel De Witt.
 252 Jemima, b. Nov. 14, 1845, m. Stoddard Van Inwegen.
 252A Jane, b. Oct. 30, 1847, m. Hector J. Bidwell.
 Elizabeth, b. Feb. 4, 1850, d. May 4, 1852.
 Philip, b. Feb. 22, 1852, d. Nov. 2, 1873.
 253 Esther, b. April 12, 1854, m. Henry D. Hebert.
 253A Ellen, b. April 28, 1856, m. Charac J. Van Inwegen.
 254 Benjamin, b. Sept. 2, 1858, m. Blanche Cuddeback.
 254A Henry, b. Feb. 4, 1861, m. Carrie B. Peck.

[Illustration: Elting Cuddeback at 80 Years]

[Illustration: Elting Cuddeback at 40 years]

137

THOMAS^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin^4), b.
Aug. 31, 1821, d. Nov. 3, 1893, m. Aug. 1, 1847, Mary Elizabeth
Thompson, b. Aug. 22, 1825, d. April 17, 1895. He graduated as a
physician at Yale, 1847, lived at Port Jervis until 1860 when he
removed to Big Flats where he lived as merchant and farmer until his
death. Children (Cuddeback):

 Benjamin,^6 b. Aug. 5,1848, m. Oct. 6, 1874, Sarah Elizabeth Clute,
  b. Oct. 21, 1851. He was a farmer at Corning, N. Y.
 255 Ellen, b. April 20, 1850, m. John Ralph Minier.
 Ida, b. Mar. 17, 1852, d. Jan. 5, 1858.
 Edward Elting, b. Dec. 21, 1859, m. ____.

138

JEMIMA^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin^4), b.
April 1, 1825, d. Jan. 18, 1914, m. June 5, 1850, Lemuel Steele
Chapin, b. at Butternuts, Otsego Co., N. Y., Nov. 25, 1819, d. at
Crete, Nebr., Nov. 16, 1905. He lived for 25 years as a merchant and
farmer at Wattsburgh, Pa., removed in 1880 to Nebraska where, as
farmers, the family still lives. Children (Chapin):

 Aseneth Farnum,^6 b. Mar. 19, 1851, at Mongaup, N. Y., d. at Crete,
  Nebr., Jan. 29, 1904.
 Joseph Augustus, b. Mar. 3, 1853, m. May 1, 1917, Mrs. Esther
  Keefer.
 Benjamin Steele, b. Sept. 1, 1855, at Wattsburgh, Pa., d. at Crete,
  Nebr., April 24, 1917.
 256 Irving Grassie, b. Nov. 7, 1859, at Wattsburgh, Pa., m.
  Elizabeth Barbara Davies.
 Mary Blandina, b. Mar. 12, 1863, at Wattsburgh, Pa., m. Jan. 17,
  1895, Prof. Edgar E. Clippinger, of Stormsburg, Nebr., d. Nov. 17,
  1913.

139

LYDIA^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin^4), b.
Sept. 5, 1827, d. April 24, 1905, m. Nov. 6, 1851, Walter Wallace
Titsworth, b. Dec. 21, 1822, d. Mar. 21, 1914. He was a farmer at
Clove Valley, Wantage, N. J. Children (Titsworth):

 Benjamin Cuddeback,^6 b. Oct. 27, 1852, d. May 3, 1861.
 Jane, b. Oct. 16, 1855, m. May 17, 1904, William T. Wright, of
  Sussex, N. J., b. July 30, 1841, d. Sept. 23, 1908. He was a farmer
  and miller at Sussex.
 Olivia, b. June 19, 1862, d. Sept. 22, 1866.
 257 Walter Wallace, b. Feb. 6, 1870, m. Grace Ann Condict.
 Lizzie, b. Jan. 25, 1872, d. Oct. 8, 1899, m. Nov. 17, 1892,
  Lebbeus Martin, of Sussex, N. J.

140

HANNAH^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Jemima^4), b. May
31, 1802, d. Oct. 16, 1879, m. Dec. 15, 1819, Warren Austin, who was
a farmer at Owasco. Children (Austin):

 Anthony,^6 b. Mar. 11, 1821, d. May 2, 1892, m. Melissa Garlock, and
  had (1) George, who m. Hattie Thornton, 2 children: Anthony and
  Mabel Austin.
 Dorr, b. Sept. 13, 1826, m. Mar. 22, 1847, Marietta Hatch and had
  (1) Fred C., m. May 11, 1887, Anna Barker Ogden, (2) M. Estelle, m.
  Nov. 13, 1883, Alfred H. De Camp, (3) James B., d. July 13, 1886.
 Henry Warren, b. Aug. 1, 1828, d. Dec. 25, 1889, m. Oct. 3, 1859,
  Martha Sophia Voorhees.
 James, b. Nov. 17, 1830, d. Oct. 22, 1854.
 Miriam, m. Edwin F. Lawton and had (1) Wilbur A., m. Nov. 9, 1884,
  Etta E. Little, their children are: Miriam Lawton, Edwin Foster
  Lawton, Wilbur Austin Lawton, Charles Lawton, Hattie Lawton and
  Laura Lawton, (2) Laura A., m. June 27, 1888, George M. Turner,
  County Judge of Auburn.
 Annettie, b. Feb. 25, 1838, m. Oct. 2, 1860, Emerson H. Adams, of
  Skaneateles, and had (1) Warren Adams, Professor of Greek at Yale,
  (2) Harry Adams, (3) Spencer Adams, a lawyer of Chicago.

141

BENJAMIN^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Jemima^4), b.
Feb. 28, 1804, d. at Pecatonica, Ill., April 24, 1881, m. Aug., 1836,
Amanda Groves, b. 1801, d. Aug. 21, 1895. Child (Van Etten):

 Mary,^6 m. ____ Lawton, of Skaneateles.

142

ASENETH^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Jemima^4), b.
Jan. 26, 1806, d. at Skaneateles, Oct, 20, 1867, m. Jan. 25, 1826,
William Howard, a farmer, at Owasco. Children (Howard):

 Franklyn,^6 m. ____ Patee, of Conn.
 Martha, d. Feb. 3, 1885.
 Oscar, m. Cornelia Austin and had (1) Mabel Howard, resided Salt
  Lake City, (2) ____, (3) ____.
 S. Vennette, m. Oct. 8, 1884, Frank H. Parsons.
 Orson.
 Edward.
 William.
 Mark.

143

CATHERINE^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Jemima^4), b.
Sept. 14, 1811, m. Dec. 25, 1835, Martin Pierce Sweet, of Freeport,
Ill., and later Clinton, Iowa. Children (Sweet):

 Martin Anthony,^6 d. May 6, 1889.
 Julia Jemima, b. Aug. 6, 1843.
 Charles G., b. Mar. 17, 1845, d. July 17, 1859.
 Catherine, b. Oct. 10, 1847, d. April 13, 1848.
 Thomas, b. Aug. 3, 1849.
 Venette, m. Joseph Addison Crane.
 Mary Ellen, b. Feb. 20, 1852, m. ____.
 Caroline, b. Dec. 31, 1853.

144

SIMON^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Jemima^4), b. July
28, 1814, d. May 10, 1891, m. June 6, 1853, Anna Hine. He was a
farmer at Pecatonica, Ill. Child (Van Etten):

 Frank.^6

145

MARY^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Jemima^4), b. June
5, 1816, d. Dec. 17, 1869, m. Aug. 27, 1837, Isreal H. Owen of
Auburn, N. Y. Children (Owen):

 Holdridge,^6 m. Oct. 8, 1884, Jessie Ryder.
 Narcissa, m. William Taylor, of Elbridge, N. Y.

146

ANN^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Jemima^4), b. Jan.
12, 1819, d. Dec. 22, 1858, m. Oct. 23, 1843, Holdridge Ozro Collins,
b. 1811, at Straitsville, Conn., removed in 1850 to Connecticut,
resided in Ohio. Children (Collins):

 Holdridge Ozro,^6 b. Dec. 10, 1844, in Cayuga Co., N. Y. He was a
  lawyer of Chicago, later of Los Angeles, Cal., m. April 23, 1874,
  Mary Ballance, b. Peoria, Ill., May 19, 1851, d. Dec. 24, 1894,
  dau. of Col. Charles Ballance. They had (1) Rejoice Ballance
  Collins, b. July 28, 1876, in Chicago, (2) Gladys Collins, b. Aug.
  14, 1883, d. Feb. 6, 1886, in Oakland, Cal, (3) Constance Dorothy
  Collins, b. Oct. 26, 1888, in Chicago, (4) Jessie Fremont Collins,
  b. Jan, 21, 1890, d. May 10, 1890, in Los Angeles, Cal.
 Woolsey W., b. Oct. 17, 1846, in Cayuga Co., N. Y., d. June 8, 1886,
  in Cal., m. Aug. 2, 1873, Belle Prince Browning, of Alabama.

147

BENJAMIN^5 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia^4), b.
April 15, 1788, d. Feb. 12, 1833, m. Sept. 18, 1808, Cynthia
(Syntche) Gumaer, b. July 14, 1790, d. Oct. 8, 1867. A farmer on the
Westfall farm at Deerpark, on the Neversink, Children (Westfall):

 Margery,^6 b. Jan. 30, 1809, d. May 30, 1832, m. May 29, 1832,
  Martin Westbrook, farmer, of Sandyston, N. J.
 258 Simon, b. Nov. 27, 1810, m. Margaret Van Etten.
 Catherine, b. Jan. 6, 1814, m. Lewis Inwegen, of Port Jervis, N. Y.
  He m. (2) Priscilla Van Etten and lived in Hastings, Minn.
 259 Rusilla, b. April 14 ,1816, m. Jonathan Bonnell.
 260 Sally, b. July 14, 1818, m. William Martin.
 261 Jemima, b. Dec. 5, 1820, m. Thomas J. Lyon.
 Peter Gumaer, b. Mar. 24, 1823, drowned Oct. 31, 1843.
 262 Levi, b. April 13, 1827, m. Ann Jackson.

148

SALLY^5 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia^4), b. June
15, 1792, d. Feb. 1, 1873, m. Sept. 26, 1811, Daniel Whitlock, b.
Nov. 1, 1791, d. June 4, 1830. A farmer near Lyons, N. Y. Children
(Whitlock):

 263 Levi,^6 b. July 5, 1812, m. Charlotte Hartman.
 264 Nancy, b. Aug. 26, 1814, m. Daniel Van Auken.
 265 Benjamin, b. Sept. 17, 1816, m. Jane Swartwout.
 266 Joel, b. Nov. 8, 1818, m. Hannah Merritt.
 267 Nelson, b. Mar. 20, 1821, m. Sarah Hartman.
 268 Aseneth, b. May 16, 1823, m. Daniel R. Roselle.
 Lavina, b. Oct. 4, 1825, m. Charles M. Clark.
 269 Catherine, b. Sept. 17, 1828, m. William B. Miner.

149

LEVI^5 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia^4), b. May
10, 1795, d. Feb. 19, 1873, m. July 14, 1816, Elizabeth Van Etten, b.
July 14, 1797, d. Dec. 26, 1865, dau. of Henry Van Etten and
Elizabeth Westfall, granddaughter of Anthony Van Etten and Hannah
Decker. He was a farmer in Niles Township, Cayuga Co., and in
Moravia, N. Y. Children (Westfall):

 270 Chauncey,^6 b. June 13, 1818, m. Philena Odell.
 271 Anna, b. Aug. 30, 1820, m. John C. Odell.
 Henry, b. May 6, 1824, d. Jan. 15, 1848.
 272 Aseneth, b. April 1, 1829, m. Hector H. Tuthill.
 Sally, b. Mar. 10, 1833, d. Dec. 22, 1851.
 Eliza, b. June 30, 1840, d. May 13, 1877, m. Feb. 15, 1871, John V.
  Westfall, son of Abram Westfall, of Moravia.

150

CATHERINE^5 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia^4), b.
Feb. 6, 1796, d. June, 1885, m., 1817, John D. Carpenter, b. April
15, 1764, d. Feb. 26, 1829, son of Benjamin Carpenter and Margaret
Decker, b. April 9, 1770, d. Aug. 13, 1853, dau. of Major Johannes
Decker. Children (Carpenter):

 Sally,^6 b. June 20, 1817, d. Jan. 6, 1890, spinster, who was a
  seamstress.
 273 Aseneth, b. Nov. 25, 1818, m. Nathan Skinner.
 274 James, b. Oct. 13, 1820, m. Elizabeth House.
 275 Eleanor, b. Oct. 22, 1822, m. Cornelius Swartwout.
 Margaret, b. Mar. 2, 1824, m. George Cuddeback, see No. 131.
 Benjamin, b. May 24, 1826, d. Dec. 29, 1863, m. Mary Coleman. He
  was a physician of Port Jervis, N. Y.
 276 Levi Westfall, b. May 24, 1829, m. Elizabeth Malven.
 Simon, b. Feb. 19, 1831, d. Mar. 28, 1833.
 277 Solomon, b. May 27, 1833, m. (1) Mary Dunn, m. (2) Margaret
  Clark.
 278 John Wesley, m. Louisa Carpenter.
 279 Catherine Amanda, b. Feb. 3, 1837, m. Philip Smith Malven.
 280 Martha Elizabeth, b. May 27, 1843, m. William W. Prather.

151

JEMIMA^5 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia^4), m.
John De Witt, a farmer, at Tunkhannock, Pa. Children (De Witt):

 Simeon,^6 m. Mary Ann Roberts. He was a lawyer of Illinois.
 281 Margaret, m. Moses De Witt.
 282 Benjamin, m. ____.
 Manning, m. ____. Was at Whitehall, Ills.
 283 Aseneth, m. Benjamin Hall.
 Clinton, m. (1) Josephine Carter, m. (2) ____. He was a lawyer at
  Towanda, Pa.
 284 Olive, m. Wilmot Carpenter.
 John. Resided Springfield, Ills.
 285 Jacob, m. Mary Renshaw.

152

SYLVIA^5 CUDABACK (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^2 John^4), b. Sept. 6,
1805, m. Sept. 9, 1824, Peter Bogert, b. April 5, 1779, d. Sept. 3,
1880. Was a farmer at Adrian, Mich. Children (Bogert):

 Roxana,^6 b. Aug. 20, 1825, m. Dec. 24, 1846, Francis Graves, b.
  Aug. 24, 1819, of Chesterfield, Mass., and had (1) Myra Graves, b.
  Nov. 11, 1847, at Adrienne, Mich., (2) Adelia Graves, b. Nov. 24,
  1849, (3) George Graves, b. Jan. 11, 1854, m. ____, his children
  were: Myra Graves and George Graves.
 Katie, b. Mar. 27, 1827, m. Aug. 27, 1850, Harvey Hitchcock, and had
  (1) Frederick Hitchcock, b. Oct. 3, 1857, m. 1879, Clara Bate,
  Adrienne, Mich., b. June 6, 1857, they had Richard Hitchcock, b.
  Sept. 10, 1880.
 Rachel, b. Oct. 8, 1829, d. Sept. 22, 1830, in Niagara Co., N. Y.
 John, b. April 16, 1835, in Niagara Co., N. Y., m. Sept. 29, 1888,
  Martha Paterson, of So. Dakota, and had (1) John Bogert, b. May 21,
  1891, (2) Maud Bogert, b. May 23, 1889, (3) Cora Bogert, b. May 26,
  1893.
 Adelia, b. Aug. 28, 1837, m. Aug. 27, 1854, John Saviers, b. Oct.
  26, 1830, and had (1) Peter W. Saviers, b. Mar. 13, 1861, at
  Adrian, Mich., m. Abby Wood, who was b. Dec. 26, 1860.
 Peter, b. Oct. 7, 1846, m. Sarah Burkhardt, Nov. 25, 1874, at
  Adrian, Mich., and had (1) Perry W. Bogert, b. June 5, 1883.
 Adelaide, b. Jan. 3, 1850, m. Dwight Snediker of Adrian, Mich., and
  had (1) Florence Snediker, b. Aug. 1874, m. Peter Speilman, (2)
  Maud Snediker.

153

JOHN SIEBOLD^5 CUDABACK (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 John^4), b. Aug.
24, 1807, near Deckertown, N. J., d. Nov. 12, 1896, m. (1) June 7,
1831, Abigail Whitney, b. Mar. 27, 1808, d. June 30, 1845, m. (2)
Nov. 4, 1846, Jane Hamilton, b. April 30, 1816, d. April 28, 1891.
He was a farmer and tanner all his days at Wilson, N. Y. Children
(Cudaback), all by his first marriage:

 Sophia,^6 b. July 29, 1833, m. John Ortt, of Wilson, N. Y., and had
  (1) William Ortt.
 John, b. July 30, 1836, m. Frances Hamilton, of Niagara Co., N. Y.,
  and had (1) Jennie Cudaback, m. Ralph Moore, of Cleveland, Ohio.
 Harvey, b. July 7, 1838, m. Lydia LeBar and had (1) Nellie Cudaback,
  m. Wm. McCleand, of Niagara-on-the-Lake, Canada. He was a clerk in
  New Orleans at the outbreak of the rebellion. He was drafted in the
  Confederate Army, was captured by Gen. Butler in New Orleans. He
  explained his position, organized a company and became its captain
  and continued in the Union Army until the close of the war. Now,
  1912, lives at Niagara-on-the-Lake.
 William, b. Aug. 25, 1840, resides Wilson, N. Y.
 Mary, resides Wilson, N. Y.
 Asher T., b. Mar. 1, 1844, m. Sept. 24, 1873, Mary Rogers, dau. of
  Dr. Rogers, of Niagara Falls. Asher T. was for many years custom
  inspector at Niagara Falls.
 Jane, m. Rev. Samuel G. Davis, of Calais, Me.

154

LYDIA^5 CUDABACK (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 John^4), d. Nov. 28,
1861, m. Socrates Griswold, a farmer of Niagara Co., N. Y., later
near Adrian, Mich. Children (Griswold):

 Archibald,^6 b. 1835, in Niagara Co., N. Y.
 Eber, b. Feb. 24, 1837, in Niagara Co., N. Y., m. Sept. 20, 1868,
  Charlotte Willard, of Salem, Minn., b. Sept. 20, 1845, lived at
  Alleghany, N. Y., and had (1) Carrie Griswold, b. June 23, 1869, d.
  June 9, 1882, (2) Alice Griswold, b. Jan. 5, 1872, (3) Harvey
  Griswold, b. Feb. 27, 1876, d. June 7, 1882. Resided Cullman Co.,
  Pa.
 Roxie, b. 1839.
 Sylvia, b. 1839, m. (1) ____ Thompson, who d. at Union-mills, Pa.,
  m. (2) ____ Price.
 Cudaback, b. Mar. 2, 1841, m. Oct. 5, 1871, Louisa Wallace, b. Sept.
  15, 1848, d. Nov. 17, 18__, lived at Hastron, Colo., and had (1)
  Claude Griswold, b. May 15, 1872, lived at Ouray, Colo., (2) Theda
  Griswold, b. July 31, 1874, m. (1) Harry Angelo, one child: Pearl
  Angelo, b. Dec. 31, 1893, (2) Claude Howes and had one child:
  Harold Howes, b. July 24, 1897, Grand Junction, Colo., (3) Walter
  Griswold, b. Jan. 2, 1877. Lived at Ouray, Colo.
 George, b. Aug. 16, 1843, m. Oct. 4, 1870, Martha Mathews, b. Feb.
  19, 1848, lived Ustick, Whiteside Co., Ills., and had (1) Jessie B.
  Griswold, b. Sept. 24, 1872, Durant, Cedar Co., Iowa, (2) Ray C.
  Griswold, b. April 28, 1874, Grinell, Iowa.
 William.
 Mary, b. Nov. 5, 1845, m. Oct. 2, 1866, Alfred Barber, b. Oct. 16,
  1833, Lowanee Co., Mich., and had (1) Cora Barber, b. Sept. 6,
  1868, m. Aug. 1, 1866, Martin Westgate, b. Dec. 18, 1860, lived
  Rome, Lowanee Co., Mich., one child: Wallace A. Westgate, b. Mar.
  20, 1887.
 Charles, b. 1851.

155

SAMUEL ADAMS^5 CUDABACK (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 John^4), b. Mar.
30, 1801, d. Mar. 17, 1871, m. July 1, 1824, Elizabeth Smith, b. Feb.
11, 1808, d. Sept. 14, 1864. He m. (2) Adelia ____. Children
(Cudaback), all by first marriage:

 Mary Elizabeth,^6 b. Oct. 28, 1825, at Wantage, N. J., m. May 18,
  1843, Tunis G. Outwater, b. Feb. 13, 1820, d. June 9, 1882, son of
  John Outwater and Cathalina Van Bussum, a lineal descendant of
  Tomas Fransen Oudewater and Tryntje Breesteede, who were m. in
  New York, May 31, 1686. Oudewater is a town in Holland. They had:
  (1) Cathalinda Outwater, b. Jan. 5, 1849, (2) Elizabeth Outwater,
  b. Nov. 25, 1850, d. Oct. 20, 1898, m. Feb. 27, 1878, Joseph L.
  Adkins and had one child: Ada Grace Adkins, b. Mar. 15, 1879, (3)
  John Outwater, b. June 17, 1853, m. Sept. 29, 1880, Sylvia Hancock,
  one child: Leah Estella Outwater, b. Nov. 13, 1881, (4) Tunis
  Outwater, b. Aug. 4, 1855, m. Mar. 30, 1886, Nina E. White, (5)
  Samuel Outwater, b. May 17, 1857, m. Oct. 26, 1899, Luella Scott,
  (6) Alida Outwater, b. June 17, 1859, m. May 19, 1885, Henry Hobart
  Dawson, of Toledo, Ohio, (7) Mary Outwater, b. Mar. 18, 1864, d.
  Feb. 18, 1883.
 Cornelia, b. Nov. 26, 1828, d. Aug. 11, 1886, m. Charles Ward, b.
  April 29, 1822, d. Mar. 3, 1882, they had (1) Don Carlos Ward, m.
  Jennie Pettit, (2) William Ward, (3) Samuel Glen Ward, b. May 12,
  1858, d. Feb. 29, 1860, (4) Roxa Ward, b. Jan. 16, 1862, m. James A.
  Thurber, one child: Ward Thurber, b. Oct. 4, 1881, (5) Wallace Ward.
 Sylvia, b. Sept. 4, 1832, m. Dec. 1, 1853, Solomon Richardson, b.
  May 15, 1832, and had (1) Elizabeth Gertrude Richardson, b. Oct.
  17, 1854, m. John Barber Wicks, 2 children: Everette Clyde Wicks
  and Sylvia C. Wicks, (2) Clara Belle Richardson, b. June 13, 1863,
  m. Oct. 23, 1891, George Edward Stabler.
 Grant, b. May 16, 1834, m. Jan. 18, 1860, Eliza Bartlett, b. Aug.
  28, 1836, dau. of Benj. Bartlett. He was a farmer in Mich., they
  had (1) Eva G. Cuddeback, b. Dec. II, 1861, d. May 7, 1862, (2)
  Mary Bartlett Cuddeback, b. July 6, 1864, m. Dec. 10, 1885, Arthur
  S. Miller.
 Samuel, m. Mary Pettit.
 Louisa, b. Aug. 4, 1840, m. Jan. 1, 1866, Lewis W. McNeil, b. Mar.
  25, 1840, in California and had (1) Harriet Elizabeth McNeil, b.
  Jan. 12, 1868, (2) Ella Isabel McNeil, b. Jan. 15, 1872, m. Aug.
  13, 1891, William Walters Carpenter, b. Aug. 5, 1858, (3) Andrew
  Ernest McNeil, b. May 30, 1874.

156

NICHOLAS^5 CUDABACK (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Richard^4), m. Armitta
Bradley. Lived Niagara Co. Children (Cudaback):

 Daniel Wesley,^6 m. Sarah Gaskill and had (1) Clinton G. Cudaback,
  m. Mamie E. Kyte, one child: Vivian Kyte Cudaback, (2) Edgar L.
  Cudaback, m. Jessie J. Nichols and lived Buffalo, N. Y., (3) Jessie
  M. Cudaback, m. Albert Hoffman and lived at Ransonville, Niagara
  Co., N. Y.
 Matthew, a soldier in Confederate Army, Moss Point, Miss., m. and had
  (1) Thomas Cudaback.
 Hiram, a soldier in Confederate Army, lived Moss Point, Miss., m.
  Fannie Dee and had (1) Matthew Cudabac, (2) Hidee Cudabac, (3)
  Elton Cudabac, (4) Elber Cudabac, (5) Flora Cudabac, m. Ollie
  Cowan, one child: Dora Cowan, (6) Cora Cudabac, m. ____ Coffee.
 Clark, m. ____ Vossburg, lived Grand Rapids, Mich., and had (1)
  Irving Cudaback, lived Niagara Falls.

157

ELIZABETH^5 SHELLEY (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Eleanor^4), m. Evi
Ketcham of Peppercotting Valley, Sussex Co., N. J. Children
(Ketcham):

 Eleanor,^6 m. John B. Martin.
 James F., m. Matilda Hile and had (1) William Ketcham, (2) Samuel
  Ketcham, (3) Martin Ketcham, (4) Maria Ketcham, (5) Simeon Ketcham,
  (6) James Ketcham.
 Thomas.
 Jerry.
 George.
 Floyd, m. Catherine Ackerson and had (1) George Ketcham.
 Samuel, m. Margaret Benjamin, and had (1) Levi Ketcham, (2) George
  Ketcham, (3) Nettie Ketcham, (4) Margaret Ketcham, (5) EHzabeth
  Ketcham, (6) Delia Ketcham.

158

MARIA^5 SHELLEY (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Eleanor^4), m. Joseph
Morris of Youngstown, Niagara Co., N. Y. Children (Morris):

 Eva.^6
 Eleanor.
 Joseph.
 Sarah.
 Francis.
 Oscar.
 Maria.

 159

SARAH^5 SHELLEY (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Eleanor^4), m. David
Force of Youngstown, N. Y. Children (Force):

 Morris,^6 of Youngstown, N. Y.
 Lorenzo.
 Elizabeth.

160

JANE^5 SHELLEY (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Eleanor^4), m. Barrett D.
Havens. Children (Havens):

 Samuel,^6 m. (1) Cornelia Roe and had (1) Otis Havens, (2) Carrie
  Havens, m. (2) Mary Parshall and had (3) ____ Havens, (4) ____
  Havens.
 Robert, m. Emaline Moore and had (1) Annie Havens, (2) Jennie
  Havens, (3) Hattie Havens, (4) Barrett Havens, (5) William Havens.
 John, m. Emaline Cox.
 Elizabeth, m. John Lewis and had (1) Sarah Lewis, (2) Jane Lewis,
 (3) Rosetta Lewis, (4) Mattie Lewis. Harriet, m. James B. Fuller and
 had (1) John Fuller, (2) Margaret Fuller. Eleanor, m. Jefferson Dunn.

161

LYDIA^5 SHELLEY (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Eleanor^4), m. Solomon
Marshall. Children (Marshall):

 John.^6
 Prudence.
 Ellen.
 Samuel.
 James.
 Oscar, m. Mary Cairneck and had (1) Joseph Marshall.
 Mary, m. Lewis F. Price and had (1) Dorvis Price, (2) Emma Price,
  and (3) Grant Price.
 Matilda, m. Aaron Fields and had (1) Eva Fields, (2) Laura Fields,
  and (3) John Fields.
 Maggie, m. Jesse Richards and had (1) Webster Richards, (2) Orin B.
  Richards.
 Jennie, m. Webster Carnick and had (1) Harry Carnick, (2) William
  Carnick, (3) Theodore Carnick, m. Sarah Green.
 William, m. Nellie Lane and had (1) Jennie Marshall, m. ____
  Willmanson, one child: John Willmanson.

162

ROSANNA^5 SHELLEY (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Eleanor^4), m. Morris
Sharp. Children (Sharp):

 Elizabeth,^6 m. Charles Thornton and had (1) Morris D. Thornton, (2)
  Lewis Thornton, (3) Margaret Thornton.
 Catherine, m. Wesley Ingersoll and had (1) Harry Ingersoll.
 Maggie.

163

ROXANA^5 SHELLEY (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Eleanor^4), m. Robert
Adams. Children (Adams):

 Josephine,^6 m. William Van Houten, of Paterson, N. J., and had (1)
  Wilhelmina Van Houten, (2) Ella R. Van Houten.
 Hannah, m. Halmah Van Houten, Paterson, N. J., and had (1) Robert
  Van Houten, (2) Eva May Van Houten, (3) Bertha Van Houten, (4)
  Richard Van Houten.
 Ann Eliza, m. Charles Hulse, of Middletown, N. J., and had (1)
  Thomas Hulse, (2) Ida M. Hulse, (3) Henrietta Hulse, (4) Grace R.
  Hulse, (5) Minnie G. Hulse.

164

JAMES^5 SHELLEY (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Eleanor^4), m. Margaret
Matilda Hiles. Children (Shelley):

 William.^6
 Samuel, m. Annie Martin.
 James Ford, m. Kate Phillips and had (1) Samuel Shelley.
 Maria, m. Simon Williams and had (1) James Williams.
 Rosanna, m. William Little and had (1) Maggie Little, (2) De Witt
  Little, (3) Eddie Little, (4) Martin Little, (5) James Little.

165

FORD^5 SHELLEY (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Eleanor^4), m. Catherine
 Ackerson, of Franklin Furnace, N. J. Children (Shelley):

 David.^6
 George, m. ____.
 Jane, m. Dayton McKinney.

166

SYLVANUS^5 ADAMS (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Mary^4), m. Martha Carr.
Children (Adams):

 Maria,^6 m. Leander Hill, of Canton, Pa.
 Hulda, m. George Ketchum, of Canton, Pa.
 Susan, m. James Harding.
 Phebe.
 Elizabeth, m. Benjamin Harding.
 James, m. Emily Carey.

167

PHILAH^5 ADAMS (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Mary^4), m. Thomas Owens.
Children (Owens):

 Samuel,^6 m, (1) Elizabeth, and had (1) Lizzie Owens, m. (2) Mary
  Tivan.
 Mary, m. George Griffin and had (1) Philah Griffin, m. George
  Bristol, (2) George Griffen, m. Alice Chapman and had Alice
  Griffin, James Griffin and Harry Griffin.
 James, m. Simeon Jones and had (1) Clarence Owens, (2) Ella Owens,
  (3) Raymond Owens, (4) Ida Owens.
 William, m. Lydia Taylor, and had (1) Allen Owens and (2) Delia
  Owens.
 Lucy, m. C. Stone and had (1) William Stone and (2) Frank Stone.
 Harriet, m. Dr. Robbins.

168

JAMES^5 ADAMS (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Mary^4), m. Susan Hall.
Children (Adams):

 Lewis,^6 m. Lavinia Sheperd and had (1) Sarah H. Adams, (2) Charles
  A. Adams, (3) Anna Adams, (4) M. Estelle Adams, (5) Georgetta
  Adams.
 Havilah, m. C. Fuller.
 James B., m. Harriet Havens and had (1) John Adams, and (2) Mary
  Adams.
 Fred, m. Carrie Cole and had (1) Ida Adams, (2) Etta Adams, and (3)
  Sara Adams.
 Frank, m. William Buchanan and had (1) Lewis J. Buchanan, m. Jennie
  Woodruff.
 Jefferson D.

169

HULDA^5 ADAMS (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Mary^4), b. Mar. 31, 1804,
m. June 29, 1822, Samuel D. Coykendall, b. Sept. 8, 1791, d. Sept.
12, 1837. Children (Coykendall):

 Simeon, b. Nov. 29, 1824, m. Oct. 27, 1858, Frances Wilson, dau. of
  John Wilson and Mary Fuller, of Deckertown. He is a lawyer of
  Deckertown, N. J., and d. Mar. 12, 1872.
 Ellis M., b. April 15, 1828, m. (1) Grace Pridham and had (1) Louisa
  Coykendall, (2) Adelia Coykendall, m. ____ MacGowan, (3) Samuel
  Coykendall, m. (2) Sara Titus and had (4) Oliver Coykendall.
 Adams D., b. July 5, 1831.

170

ISAIAH^5 ADAMS (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Mary^4), m. Eliza Hall.
Children (Adams):

 Samuel,^6 m. (1) Mary Smith, m. (2) Addie Crans.
 Mary, m. John G. Truesdell and had (1) Harry Truesdell, (2) Chas. G.
  Truesdell, (3) Ette M. Truesdell, (4) John G. Truesdell, (5) Mary
  Truesdell, (6) Marzy Truesdell, (7) Mortimer Truesdell, (8) William
  Truesdell.
 Jennie, m. William G. Lauterman and had (1) Claude E. Lauterman, (2)
  Cora B. Lauterman, (3) Ernest E. Lauterman, (4) Alice W. Lauterman,
  (5) Tracy Lauterman.
 Mattie, m. William H. V. Reiner, and had (1) Belle Reiner, (2) Fred
  Reiner, (3) Arthur Reiner.
 Susan, m. William L. Higbie and had (1) Lizzie Higbie, (2) Lauterman
  W. Highbie, (3) Clara Higbie, (4) Ethel Higbie.

171

ENSLEY^5 ADAMS (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Mary^4), m. Ada Hall.
Children (Adams):

 Zillah,^6 m. Alanson Stevens.
 Philah, m. ____ Decker.

172

JOHN S.^5 ADAMS (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 Mary^4), m. Margaret
Bailey. Children (Adams):

 Theresa, m. (1) ____ Palmer, m. (2) ____ Bailey.
 Mary, m. ____ Adamy.

173

LYDIA^5 CUDABACK (Jacob,^1 James,^2 James,^3 ____^4), m. Robert
Tisdell. Children (Tisdell):

 James.^6
 Wilson.

174

BELINDA^5 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph,^3 Jacob^4), m. Judge
Martin Westbrook Dingman, b. 1799, son of Daniel Westbrook Dingman
and Mary Westbrook. See No. 75. Children (Dingman):

 Priscilla Maria,^6 b. Oct. 17, 1820.
 Solomon Hornbeck, b. Sept. 19, 1822, d. Aug. 17, 1892, m. (1) Sarah
  Elizabeth Beemer, d. 1867, m. (2) Beemer, dau. of Jacob and Zilla
  (Adams) Beemer, and had (1) Jacob Dingman, (2) Albert Stoll Dingman,
  b. May 9, 1854, d. Aug. 20, 1892, (3) Sarah W. Dingman.
 Margaret Jane, b. Sept. 15, 1824.
 Leah Elizabeth, b. May 15, 1827, m. Albert S. Stoll.
 Mary D., m. Rev. Gilbert S. Garretson and had (1) Harry Garretson,
  (2) Fannie B. Garretson, Franklin Furnace, N. J.
 Frances C., d. June 25, 1911.

175

MARIA^5 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph,^3 Jacob^4), b. Oct. 28,
1804, d. May 1, 1883, m. Feb. 19, 1826, Judge Oliver S. Dimmick, b.
July 11, 1804, d. Oct. 4, 1877. He was a lawyer and farmer of
Milford, Pa. Children (Dimmick):

 Priscilla.^6
 Mary T., m. Lucien F. Barnes and had (1) Edward Barnes, m. Josephine
  Brodhead.
 Leah Lucinda, m. Samuel Otis Dimmick, of Port Jervis, son of Samuel
  S. Dimmick, and had (1) Edward Dimmick, (2) Samuel Dimmick, b.
  1870, d. July 29, 1879, (3) Maria Dimmick, (4) Grace Dimmick, (5)
  Seward Dimmick, (6) Blanche Dimmick.
 Jacob H., of Chicago.
 Mild H., of Winnipeg, Manitoba.
 William H., m. Annie Russell. He was a lawyer of Honesdale. They had
  (1) Lucy Dimmick and Russel Dimmick, a lawyer at Scranton, b. 1870,
  d. Mar. 24, 1912.
 Blanche, m. Isaac Squires and had (1) Oliver Squires, who m. ____
  Conkling, child, Hope Squires, (2) Isaac Squires, (3) Mary Squires.

175A

PHOEBE^4 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph,^3 Benjamin^4), m.
William Posten, a farmer at Montague. Children (Posten):

 Phoebe,^6 m. Dec. 4, 1862, Jacob Cuddeback, b. Aug., 1840, d. Jan.
  9, 1867.
 Mary, lived at Philadelphia, Pa.
 Jane, m. John Martin.
 Jacob.
 Edward.
 James, m. Emma Decker.

176

JOSEPH^5 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph,^3 Saffrein^4), m. Ella
Clark, dau. of Isaac Clark and Patience Young. Children (Hornbeck):

 William P.,^6 m. Esther Losey and had (1) William Hornbeck, (2)
  Hannah Jane Hornbeck, (3) Belle Hornbeck.
 Joseph S., m. Emma Westbrook.
 Isaac.
 George Y., m. Christie Layton.
 Saffrein, m. ____ Cole.

177

JAMES^5 BENNETT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph,^3 Lydia^4), b. April 14,
1804, d. Mar. 9, 1869, m. May 17, 1828, Sally Westfall, b. Mar. 29,
1802, d. Feb. 22, 1895. See No. 46 Children (Bennett):

 286 David,^6 b. Oct. 28, 1829, m. Lena Enness.
 287 Saffrein (Soveryne), b. Aug. 25, 1831, m. Jane Frances Newman.
 288 Wilhelmus Westfall, b. Oct. 2, 1833, m. Amanda Hilferty.
 289 Galen, b. Mar. 1, 1838, m. Elizabeth Conkling.
 Esther, b. Sept. 14, 1840, d. Nov. 10, 1840.
 Benjamin, b. Jan. 15, 1841, a soldier, killed April 10, 1864.
 Sarah, b. Feb. 24, 1842, d. Nov. 3, 1873.
 290 James, b. Jan. 20, 1845, m. Alice Styles.

178

SAFFREIN (SOVERYNE)^5 BENNETT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph,^3
Lydia^4), b. 1806, d. Feb. 20, 1880, m. Sept. 11, 1833, Caroline
Snyder; he was a farmer at Canisteo, N. Y. Children (Bennett):

 James,^6 b. Feb., 1834, d. Aug. 25, 1862.
 Henry, m. ____. Lived at Canisteo, N. Y.
 John.
 Harvey.
 Sarah.
 Lydia, b. Feb., 1843, d. June 20, 1852.

179

MARY^5 BENNETT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph,^3 Lydia^4), m. George
Westfall. Lived at Phillipstown. Children (Westfall):

 Mary,^6 m. James Kipp.
 Samuel, m. Mary Brink.
 Lydia, m. Henry Barrick and had (1) Mary Barrick, who m. Chas. Van
  Inwegen, one child: Myron B. Van Inwegen, who m. Maggie M.
  Patterson, d. May 7, 1910, at Valler, Mont., their children were:
  Eva May Van Inwegen, Mary Elizabeth Van Inwegen and Jennie Van
  Inwegen, who m., Mar. 18, 1903, Mark Leon-guest, at Great Falls,
  Mont., (2) Sarah Barrick, (3) Catherine Barrick, (4) Ellen Barrick.
 Nancy.
 Cynthia.
 Sally, m. Hubbard Van Auken.

180

SALLY^5 BENNETT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph,^3 Lydia^4), m. May 1,
1819, Nicholas Van Noy. He was a farmer at Montague, N. J. Children
(Van Noy):

 Joseph,^6 b. Dec. 11, 1819, m. Jane Humphrey, lived at Port Jervis
  and had (1) James Van Noy, (2) Frank Van Noy, (3) Guy Van Noy, (4)
  Lizzie Van Noy, (5) Nettie Van Noy, and (6) Catherine Van Noy.
 Eleanor, m. (1) Joseph Westbrook and had (1) George Westbrook, m.
  ____ Barnes, (2) Lewis Westbrook, (3) Wade Westbrook, m. 1885,
  Adelia Van Noy, d. Aug., 1915, (4) Nicholas Westbrook, (5) Coe
  Westbrook, m. ____ Barnes. Eleanor, m. (2) Daniel Westbrook and had
  (6) Joseph Westbrook, d. Oct. 16, 1917, at Honesdale, (7) Linn
  Westbrook, (8) Hattie Westbrook.
 Lanche, b. Jan. 8, 1823.

181

JOSEPH^5 BENNETT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph,^3 Lydia^4), m. Mary Van
Noy. Children (Bennett):

 William,^6 b. Aug. 24, 1814, m. Nellie Drake, and had (1) Harrison
  Bennett.
 James, b. May 22, 1819, m. Betsy Westfall.
 Burnett, b. Oct. 26, 1821, m. Margaret Nyce.
 Lydia, m. Nicholas Norwin.
 Peter, b. July 20, 1824, m. Nancy ____. Lived at Waverley, N. Y.
 Sally.
 Hannah, m. ____ Brady.
 Elizabeth.

182

CLARISSA^5 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert,^3 Jacob^4), m. James
Niven, of Monticello, N. Y. Children (Niven):

 Collin C.^6
 William B., m. ____ Dill.

183

LOUIS^5 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert,^3 Jacob^4), m. Eliza
Lydia Stanton. Children (Hornbeck):

 Mary,^6 d. April 28, 1910, m. Sept. 21, 1870, William H. De Witt,
  and had (1) William De Witt, (2) Charles De Witt, b. Jan., 1876,
  (3) Sarah Ann De Witt, b. Nov. 3, 1874.
 Eleanor, m. Geo. De Witt, b. 1839, and had (1) Mable De Witt, b. May
  30, 1875, (2) Harvey De Witt, b. Mar. 29, 1878, (3) Neil De Witt,
  b. Sept. 15, 1879, (4) George De Witt, b. Aug. 3, 1881.
 Sarah, m. William De Witt, b. 1845, d. June 27, 1898.

184

EVERT^5 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert,^3 Jacob^4), b. Mar. 27,
1817, d. Jan. 30, 1889, m. Apr. 23, 1840, Sarah Maria Masten, b.
1823, d. Dec. 4, 1897. Residence Wurtsboro, N. Y. Children
(Hornbeck):

 Caroline,^6 m. Mar. 3, 1872, Wymand Jenkins, b. Dec. 12, 1835, d.
  Oct. 1, 1893, and had (1) Louise A. Jenkins, d. Feb. 27, 1912.
 Evaline, m. William H. Waterbury, of Stamford, Conn.
 Cyrus, b. Oct. 19, 1843, d. Feb. 8, 1914. Lived at Wurtsboro.
 Delia, m. L. T. Loder, residence Middletown, N. Y.
 Alice, m. Joseph H. Clark, of Ellenville, N. Y.
 Mary, residence Wurtsboro.

185

HESTER ANN^5 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert,^3 Jacob^4), m. Matt
Le Fevre. Resided at Wurtsboro, N. Y. Children (Le Fevre):

 Mary,^6 m. Louis Gumaer.
 Andrew.

186

MARIA^5 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert,^3 Jacob^4), m. Louis N.
Weed. Resided at Wurtsboro, N. Y. Children (Weed):

 Lewis.^6
 Rosa.

187

LAURA^5 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert,^3 Jacob^4), m. John A.
Van Keuren, and lived at Bridgeport, Conn. Children (Van Keuren):

 Lewis.^6
 Evert.

188

JACOB^5 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert,^3 Jacob^4), b. Dec. 19,
1827, d. Apr. 22, 1901, m. Dec. 23, 1854, Abbie Eustick of
Brownsville. They lived at Port Jervis, N. Y. Children (Hornbeck):

 Edson De Witt.^6 Lived at Port Jervis.
 Judson L.
 Mariet.
 George E., m. Sept. 8, 1887, Carrie L. Miller, and had: (1) Elmer G.
  Hornbeck, b. Aug. 4, 1888, m. Dec. 9, 1911, Hazelle Artis, of
  Boone, Iowa, (2) Edna May Hornbeck, m. Feb. 17, 1919, John E.
  Cuddeback, b. June 15, 1890, (3) Leone Hornbeck, b. Feb. 4, 1892,
  m. June 19, 1916, Harry S. Johnson, (3) Jacob Hornbeck, b. Mar. 20,
  1897, (4) Elson Hornbeck, b. Aug. II, 1900, (5) George Hornbeck, b.
  Aug. 7, 1902, (6) Richard Hornbeck, b. May 18, 1910.
 Adella, m. Galen Whitney and had (1) Edson Whitney, m. (1) June 15,
  1911, Lillian S. Van Akin, m. (2) Nov. 25, 1915, Genevieve
  Connelly, (2) Eugene Whitney.
 Ida K., b. April 25, 1864, d. Nov. 17, 1915. A teacher of drawing in
  Port Jervis schools for 25 years.
 William, m. Georgia Decker.

189

DELIA^5 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert,^3 Jacob^4), m. David
Smith. Residence, Middletown, N. Y. Children (Smith):

 Gabriel.^6
 William.
 Legrand.
 Clarence.
 Mary.

190

BENJAMIN^5 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert,^3 Benjamin^4), b.
1842, at Huguenot, d. Dec. 31, 1911, at Matamoras. Pa., m. Jan, 29,
1873, Prudence Ackerman, of Huguenot, who d. Nov. 20, 1904. Children
(Hornbeck):

 Wilhamina.^6
 William H., m. Sept. 3, 1876, Bella Cutler, of Narrowsburgh, and had
  (1) Elsie Hornbeck, of Hillside, N. J.
  ____, m. Valentine Reugger, of Matamoras, Pa., and had (1) Walter
  Reugger.

191

JAMES^5 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert,^3 Cornelius^5), b. Jan.
24, 1820, d. Jan. 28, 1898, m. Susan Drake, b. 1833, d. Mar. 18,
1906. Residence, Montague, N. J. Children (Hornbeck):

 M. Estella.^6
 Aldie.
 Ina.
 Alda.
 Cyesta.
 Edson.
 Lyman.
 Elizabeth, m. W. H. Elmendorf.

192

ESTHER^5 HORNBECK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Evert,^3 Cornelius^4), m.
Almerin James Taylor, Children (Taylor):

 Orletta,^6 m. Rev. W. C. Oliver, lived Catskill, N. Y., and had (1)
  William Taylor Oliver, d. Sept. 29, 1900, (2) Francella Taylor, m.
  Frank Oliver, of Catskill, and had (1) Bessie Louise Oliver, m.
  W. R. Anderson, of Kingston, N. Y., and had (1) Francella C.
  Anderson, and (2) Frank Oliver Anderson, (3) Lavema Taylor, m, Dr.
  A. B. Allyn, of St. Louis, Mo., (4) Adella Taylor, m. Edgar S.
  Chubbock, of Bradford Co., Pa., (5) Evelyn Taylor.

193

LENA^5 DECKER (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Maria,^3 Catherine^4), b. May 6,
1799, d. Feb. 28, 1859, m. May 7, 1820, John D. Everitt, b. Mar. 23,
1798, in Montague, d. Nov. 15, 1876. Children (Everitt):

 291 Caty Jane,^6 b. July 11, 1821, m. Feb, 11, 1841, John B. Layton.
 292 Daniel Davis, m. Anna Maria Creveling.
 293 Isaac J., b. Dec. 5, 1825, d. Nov. 11, 1875, m. Feb. 13, 1850,
  Martha Armstrong.
 294 Martin Cole, b. Feb. 4, 1828, m. Oct. 9, 1860, Louisa Armstrong.
 295 Robert Haggerty, b. June 13, 1830, d. Dec. 23, 1907, m. June 2,
  1859, Savilla Stoll.
 James Allen, b. Dec. 5, 1832, d. July 23, 1851.

194

ELIZABETH MARIA^5 BULL (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Maria,^3 Catherine^4), b.
June 10, 1813, d. April 22, 1903, m. Dec. 30, 1841, Eli Van Inwegen,
b. April 23, 1816, d. May 17, 1897, son of Benjamin, b. Sept. 26,
1787, d. 1855, m. Oct. 1, 1810, Charity Cole, b. 1792, d. 1816, and a
grandson of Harmonas Van Inwegen, who was b. 1734 and m. Aug. 17,
1759, Margeritta Kool. Children (Van Inwegen):

 Julia,^6 b. 1843, d. 1845.
 Cornelius Cole, b. Jan. 26, 1845, d. June 4, 1866.
 296 Charles F., b. Sept. 13, 1849, m. June 6, 1876, Emma Van Etten.

195

LYDIA^5 VAN AUKEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Margaret,^3 Evert^4), m. David
G. Finch, a farmer, at Finchville, N. J. Children (Finch):

 Galen.^6
 Horace.
 Catherine, m. John Woodward and had (1) Washington Irving Woodward,
  (2) Anne Eliza Woodward, (3) Josephine Woodward, m. (1) Rufus
  Ferguson, m. (2) ____ Hollenbec, and had one child: Josephine
  Hollenbec.

196

MARY^5 VAN AUKEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Margaret,^3 Evert^4), m. Col.
Benjamin Woodward. He was a farmer at Mount Hope, N. J. Children
(Woodward):

 Munson.^6
 Charles.
 Jane, m. ____ Terry, M. D., of Goshen.
 Everitt.
 Frances, m. ____, and lived in New York City.

197

JACOB^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Jane^4), bap. Oct.
29, 1780, m. Charity Gumaer and was a farmer at Owasco, N. Y.
Children (Van Etten):

 Henry,^6 m. ____, and lived at Moravia. He had (1) Mary Van Etten,
  (2) Peter Van Etten, (3) Cornelius, Van Etten, m. ____, one child:
  Wilfred Van Etten.
 Hulda, m. ____ Wilson.
 Hannah.
 Priscilla, m. Lewis Van Inwegen, b. 1811, d. Dec. 3, 1898, in Red
  Wing, Minn, They had (1) Charity Van Inwegen, m. Anthony Van Auken
  in Minn., (2) Henry Van Inwegen, m. ____, one child: Priscilla Van
  Inwegen, (3) Hannah Van Inwegen, (4) George Van Inwegen.

198

SOLOMON^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Jane^4), b. Jan.
25, 1782, d. May 12, 1870, m. Sept. 18, 1806, Jemima Gumaer, b. Jan.
19, 1788, d. April 9, 1866, dau. of Peter Gumaer and Margery Decker.
He was a farmer on portion of Caudebec patent at Deerpark. Children
(Van Etten):

 297 John,^6 m. Margaret Carpenter.
 Jane, b. Feb. 8, 1809, m. Nov. 4, 1828, Peter G. Cuddeback, see
  No. 111
 298 Sally, b. July 22, 1813, m. Joseph Whitlock.
 299 Peter, b. July 30, 1824, m. Sarah Ann Campbell.
 300 Levi S., b. May 16, 1829, m. Emily L. Clarke.

199

LEVI^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Jane^4), b. Aug. 13,
1790, d. July 7, 1865, m. Dec. 12, 1811, Eleanor Carpenter, d. July
3, 1872. A farmer in Deerpark on homestead. Children (Van Etten):

 Margaret,^6 b. Mar. 11, 1813, m. Simon Westfall, see No. 258.
 John, b. Feb. 14, 1815, m. Mary Cuddeback, see No. 97.
 Jacob, b. Mar. 10, 1817.
 Alva.
 301 Benjamin, m. Prudence De Witt.
 Levi, b. April 12, 1822, d. Oct. 29, 1908, m. 1876, Mrs. Mary
  Elizabeth Chapman Green, b. Sept. 16, 1826, d. July 12, 1911, who
  m. (1) in 1850, James Green, d. 1855.
 302 Ann Eliza, b. Dec. 18, 1827, m. Archibald M. Campbell, of Port
  Jervis.
 303 Solomon, b. July 30, 1829, m. (1) Hattie Westbrook, m. (2) Maria
  Bristol Sawyer.
 Ellen, b. Dec. o.'j, 1836, d. Mar. 19, 1918, m. (1) Solomon V.
  Cuddeback, see No. 111 She m. (2) Oct. 22, 1870, Chas. R. Bodle,
  b. 1839, d. Jan. 17, 1890, and had child: (1) Howard C. Bodle, who
  m. ____ Bogert, one child: David W. Bodle.

200

THOMAS^5 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Jane^4), b. May 4,
1795, d. Aug. 12, 1861, m. Aug. 12, 1816, Sally Van Auken, b. April
11, 1800, d. Dec. 5, 1871, dau. of Evert and Sarah Westbrook Van
Auken. He was a farmer at Deerpark. Children (Van Etten):

 Lydia,^6 b. May 29, 1817, m. Jan. 8, 1839, Martin Cole, b. April 9,
  1817. See No, 102.
 Sarah, m. Thomas J. Lyon and had (1) Emma M. Lyon, who m. Aug. 18,
  1885, Dr. F. O. Stewart, of Cedarville, Ohio.
 Isaac, m. Jemima Ocks, resided Minn.
 Anna, b. 1829, d. June 28, 1914, m. Feb. 2, 1861, John Morrison, b.
  1827, d. 1875, a son of Dr. John Morrison, of Wurtsboro. They had
  (1) Sally Morrison, (2) Kate Nyce Morrison, (3) George Morrison, b.
  Aug. 18, 1871, (4) Delia Morrison.
 Belinda.
 Thomas, b. Sept. 20, 1836, d. Nov. 21, 1913, m. (1) Georgiana
  Hughes, m. (2) 1885, to Tillie Krueger. Lived from 1882-1913 at
  Saunk Falls, Minn. He had (1) ____, m. George S. Parker, of Rainey
  River, Ont., (2) ____, m. C. W. Wood, of Williamsburgh, Ky., (3)
  Kittie Van Etten, lived Pullman, Wash., (4) Marion Van Etten, res.,
  Duluth, Minn., (5) Hughes Van Etten, of International Falls, (6)
  William Van Etten, of Nebish, (7) Otto Van Etten, of Chester, Pa.,
  (8) George Van Etten, res., St. Vincent, No. Dakota, (9) Elsie Van
  Etten, res., Saunk Rapids, (10) Jane Van Etten, res., Saunk Rapids.
 Cornelia, b. Jan. 1, 1838, d. Sept. 20, 1913, m. Jan. 28, 1863,
  Reuben Floyd Gardner, a farmer near Middletown, N. Y., and had (1)
  Annie G. Gardner, m. Lauren T. Cole, of Montague, their children
  were: Cornelia G. Cole, Elizabeth D. Cole, James E. Cole, Jr., of
  Montague.
 Mark, m. Mary Jane Cuddeback, see No. 107.
 Hudson, d. July 5, 1880, m. Lydia Cuddeback, see No. 129.

201

BLANDINA^5 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Maria^4), b. Dec.
31, 1784, m. Isaiah (Zoy) Van Etten. Children (Van Etten):

 Cornelius,^6 m. Hester Westbrook.
 Henry, bap. Jan. 13, 1811, m. Hulda Van Etten, and had (1) ____ Van
  Etten, and (2) Mary Van Etten.
 Peter, bap. Feb. 14, 1814, m. Eliza Gumaer.
 Jeptha, m. M____ elsenea, and had (1) Carrie Van Etten.
 Elizabeth, m. Samuel Clark, and had (1) Isaiah Clark, (2) Mary
  Clark, (3) Wade Clark, (4) Belinda Clark.
 Mary, b. Sept. 7, 1808.

202

PETER^5 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Maria^4), b. May 2,
1794, m. Elsie Westbrook. Children (Westbrook):

 Mary.^6
 Eleanor, m. Simeon Clark and had (1) ____ Clark, m. ____ Knapp, (2)
  Rebecca Clark, m. ____ Knapp, (3) Belle Clark, (4) Hattie Clark,
  res., Westbrookville.
 Belinda, m. Reuben Dewitt.
 Johanna.
 Louisa.

203

HESTER^5 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 John^4), m. 1803, Dr.
Jacob Hornbeck, d. Sept. 12, 1859, son of Philip Hornbeck of
Rochester, Ulster Co., N. Y. They were located in Montague in 1802.
Children (Hornbeck):

 John Westbrook,^6 a lawyer of Allentown, Pa., d. 1848.
 Ebenezer, lived in Honesdale, Pa.
 Cornelius, m. ____ Whittaker and lived in Honesdale.
 Maria (Polly), m. James Bassett, of Honesdale, Pa.
 Sally, m. 1854, Dr. Cornelius Stillwell, of Caroline, N. Y.
 Elizabeth, m. Archibald Drake.
 Margaret, m. William Courtright.
 Jacob E., b. Mar. 20, 1820, m. (1) Mary D. Armstrong, of Montague,
  m. (2) Jan. 3, 1856, Zilla M. Whittaker, of Deckertown. He was a
  miller and merchant of Deckertown, N. J. Children were: (1) Maggie
  E. Hornbeck, m. Whitfield Gibbs, of Deckertown, (2) Samuel W.
  Hornbeck.

204

ABRAM I.^5 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 John I.^4), m.
Phebe Enness. Was a farmer at Montague, N. J. Children (Westbrook):

 304 John A., bap. July 21, 1807, m. Jane Fisher.
 Hester, bap. April 4, 1809.

205

MAJOR JACOB^5 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Solomon^4), b.
Jan. 30, 1786, d. 1847, m. Hannah Van Auken, b. 1786, d. 1858.
Children (Westbrook):

 Margaret,^6 b. May 31, 1808, m. Hugh Westbrook, b. Mar. 26, 1804, d.
  Feb. 16, 1849, and had (1) Jacob Westbrook, m. Ellen Westfall, see
  No. 319, (2) Anna Maria Westbrook, b. Mar. 12, 1831, d. Mar. 22,
  1856, m. Wade Buckley, who later m. (2) Mar. 15, 1870, Emaline
  Whittaker, b. 1840, d. Jan. 9, 1908, dau. of Jonathan Whittaker and
  Emaline Pellet, (3) Eliza Ann Westbrook, b. Nov. 7, 1836.
 Maria, b. 1810, d. 1826.
 Solomon, b. 1812, d. 1826.
 Levi, b. 1814, d. 1831.
 John I., b. May 11, 1817, d. May 3, 1897, m. June 19, 1850, (1)
  Clarissa Ann Buckley, b. 1818, d. Feb. 1, 1852, m. (2) Mar. 15,
  1855, Hortense Pinchet Stoll, b. April 28, 1820, d. in Port Jervis,
  Mar. 17, 1902. He was a merchant of Port Jervis, N. Y.
 Hannah, b. Dec. 30, 1819.
 Severyne, b. Feb. 19, 1823, d. 1826.
 Hyman, b. Nov. 14, 1826, d. Jan. 19, 1908, m. Bertha Buckley, b.
  1833, d. Oct. 16, 1896, dau. of Simon and Jane Buckley, and had (1)
  John I. Westbrook, (2) Charles B. Westbrook, (3) Florence J.
  Westbrook, b. 1875, d. Dec. 29, 1911, m. June 20, 1900, George E.
  Rosencrans, their child was Charles R. Rosencrans.

  206

COL. JOHN^5 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Solomon^4), b.
Jan. 9, 1789, d. Oct. 8, 1852, m. Feb. 14, 1808, Sarah Brodhead, b.
Feb. 12, 1792, d. Jan. 21, 1879. He was a Congressman from Pike Co.,
Pa., for 1840-41. She was dau. of Judge Richard Brodhead. Children
(Westbrook):

 Hannah,^6 m. William T. Wilson, of Dingmans, and had (1) George
  Wilson, (2) Dr. Wilson.
 305 Jacob B., b. Nov. 28, 1815, d. Jan., 1853, m. Oct. 24, 1838,
  Hannah Jane Van Gorden, b. Nov. 20, 1819, d. Dec. 13, 1896.
 Richard B., b. Feb. 8, 1820, m. (1) Sarah Lee, m. (2) Henrietta
  Payne. Lived in Philadelphia.
 306 Jane B., b. Mar. 22, 1824, m. Dr. Vincent Emerson, of Milford,
   Pa.

207

CAPT. SOLOMON^5 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Solomon^4),
b. April 5, 1794, d. 1852, m. Hannah Coolbaugh, b. 1790, d. 1874.
Children (Westbrook):

 Margaret,^6 b. Nov. 16, 1817, m. John B. Stoll. Hiram, b. July 26,
  1822, d. Aug, 20, 1892. Residence, Ridgewood, N. J.
 Capt. Lafayette, b. Dec. 15, 1824, m. Emma Hill, res., Stroudsburgh,
  N. J.
 307 John Coolbaugh, b. May 24, 1820, m. Jane Wells.
 308 Moses W., b. Feb. 4, 1827, m. Emily Jones.
 Susan, m. Dec, 1876, Theodore Grandin, of Burlington, N.J.

208

MARGARET^5 WESTBROOK (Jacob.^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Solomon^4), m.
William H. Nyce. Children (Nyce):

 Solomon Westbrook,^6 b. Sept. 28, 1820.
 Saffrein.
 John.
 Susan Van Campen, b. July 24, 1824, d. Jan. 7, 1900, m. Dec. 24,
  1824, John La Forge Bonnell, b. Nov. 24, 1820, d. May 20, 1891, son
  of Isaac Bonnell and Ros-anna Brink and grandson of Capt. James
  Bonnell. Their children were: (1) Elizabeth Bonnell, m. Thomas
  Quick and had Susan B. Quick, m. Oct, 5, 1887, Charles Everett,
  2 children: Hazel and Charles Everett, Edward Quick, m. Ida Cook,
  one child: Edna Quick, Grace Quick, m. Fred Hammond, one child:
  David Hammond, (2) Emma Bonnell, m. Ed. N. Robinson and had
  Gertrude Robinson and Mary Alice Robinson, who m. Jan. 18, 1896,
  Eugene T. McCarthy, of Wellsboro, N. Y., (3) Mary Bonnell, m.
  Robert Millard.

209

SALLY^5 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Soveryn^4), d. Sept.
3, 1876, m. Jacob Shimer, b. 1790, d. Feb. 9, 1874, son of Capt.
Abraham Shimer, who m. Mar. 3, 1749, Lena Westbrook, dau. of Anthony
Westbrook. Jacob was a farmer at Montague, N. J. Children (Shimer):

 Jacob,^6 m. ____, and had (1) Jacob Shimer, (2) Joseph Shimer, (3)
  Isaac Shimer, (4) Abram Shimer.
 Joseph, b. 1818, d. Feb. 11, 1908, m. ____, and had (1) Electus
  Shimer, (2) Joseph Shimer, who had ____ Shimer, m. Thos. Van Etten
  Cole, of Montague, N. J., (3) Thomas Shimer, of Sussex, N. J., and
  (4) ____ Shimer, who m. George E. Martin, of Huguenot, and had
  Elvina Martin, m. George Munson Bennet.
 Hester, m. Cornelius Van Etten.
 Polly, m. John Hornbeck.
 Caty, m. Benjamin Carpenter and had (1) Margaret Carpenter, m. ____
  Higby, of Binghamton, N. Y., (2) Lydia Carpenter, m. ____, of
  Binghamton.
 Mary, m. Peter Swartwout, a farmer at Deerpark, and had (1) Jacob
  Swartwout, b. Nov. 9, 1874, d. Nov. 8, 1914, m. Nov. 5, 1872,
  Lillie Decker, dau. of John B. Decker and Charity Kilpatrick,
  farmer at Wantage, and had Alice Decker Swartwout, d. April 2,
  1914, (2) Sarah Alice Swartwout, b. 1848, d. Feb. 11, 1909, m.
  1870, Otis A. Browning, of Toledo, Ohio.
 Margaret, b. 1825, d. Feb. 12, 1905, at Binghamton, N. Y., m. Dec.
  11, 1841, Joel Swartwout, b. 1819, d. Dec. 1, 1879, at Union,
  N. Y., son of Samuel Swartwout. Their children were: (1) Jemima
  Swartwout, (2) Jacob Swartwout, b. 1843, d. Oct. 20, 1911, at
  Hooper, N. Y., m. ____, and had ____, m. W. S. Robinson,
  Binghamton, N. Y., ____, m. Claude Dodge, N. Y. City, Augusta
  Swartwout, Wilford Swartwout, (3) ____ Swartwout, m. Henry De Voe,
  of Binghamton, N. Y., (4) ____ Swartwout, m. Warren Morse, of
  Greeley, Colo.
 Abram, b. July 23, 1826, d. Jan. 20, 1892, m. (1) Jan. 24, 1850,
  Adeline Cuddeback, see No. 99, m. (2) May 18, 1886, Jennie Kelley,
  d. Jan. 29, 1918, dau. Daniel Kelley and Frances Bodle.

210

SALLY ANN^5 ENNES (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Eleanor,^3 Alexander^4), m.
Joseph J. Westbrook, who was a farmer at Sandyston, N, J. Children
(Westbrook):

 Wilmelmus,^6 m. Maria Davis and had (1) George, d. April 30, 1917,
  m. (1) Elsie Terwilliger, m. (2) Elsie ____, child: Anna Westbrook,
  m. Samuel Cashey and had 3 children, (2) Joseph J., m. Aseneth
  Caskey, one child: ____ Westbrook, who m. Mabel Taylor. They lived
  in Port Jervis, N. Y., (3) John, of Newton, N. J., (4) Townsend, b.
  1843, d. Nov. 6, 1912, m. Civila Lundy and had Allen Westbrook,
  Clayton Westbrook, ____ Westbrook, who m. Jacob M. Schoonmaker, 2
  children: Russel Schoonmaker and Hazel Schoonmaker, (5) Lydia, m.
  ____ Shay, (6) Mary Jane, m. George Dorr and had Ada Dorr and Percy
  Dorr, (7) Esther, (8) Isaac, m. ____ Schoonmaker, (9) Alexander, m.
  Elizabeth Sheets, (10) Sarah, m. Richard Andrews, of Lockwood,
  N. Y., (11) Anson, (12) Ella, m. Arthur Myers.
 Esther, m. Joseph Fisher.
 Lydia, b. Sept. 20, 1814.
 Alexander, m. Hannah Youngs and had (1) Alexander, (2) E. Stacey, m.
  ____ Raymond, their children were: Stacey Westbrook, m. April 28,
  1913, Nellie Emerson, Halsey Westbrook, Alva Westbrook, Eva
  Westbrook, who m, Fred Terwilliger, (3) Daniel, m. Emma Price,
  their child was Daniel Westbrook, who m. ____ Ellis, had 2
  children.
 Benjamin, m. Margaret Gumaer, dau. of Jeremy Gumaer, and had (1)
  Oscar, (2) ____, (3) Martin.
 Polly, m. John Jagger, and had (1) Westbrook Jagger, m. Harmonas
  Gumaer, (2) Julia Westbrook Jagger, m. ____ Courtright.

211

HUGH B.^5 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Dinah,^2 Margaret,'3 Abraham^4), b.
Mar. 26, 1804, d. Feb. 16, 1849, m. Mar. 9, 1830, Margaret Westbrook,
b. May 21, 1808. See No. 205. Children (Westbrook):

 Anna Maria,^6 b. Mar. 22, 1831, m. Mar. 30, 1856, Wade Buckley.
  Residence, Port Jervis. He m. (2) Mar. 15, 1870, Emaline Whittaker,
  b. 1840, d. Jan. 9, 1908, dau. of Jonathan Whittaker and Emaline
  Pellet.
 Jacob, b. Nov. 17, 1833, m. Feb. 28, 1861, Ellen Westfall, see No.
  319.
 Eliza Jane, b. Nov. 7, 1836.

212

JOHN^5 CONKLING (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,3 Hester^4), m.
____. Children (Conkling):

 Barton,^6 m. ____ Lefever.
 Martin.
 Amanda.
 Julia.
 Jane, m. George Van Dyne.

213

JANE^5 CONKLING (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Hester^4), m. James
Slover. Children (Slover):

 Horace,^6 m. ____ Ward.
 Morris, m. Jane Cox.
 Ward.
 Newell, m. ____ Garlock, resided Moravia.
 Hester, m. Henry Hunziger and had (1) Barton Hunziger, m. ____
  Green, (2) Martin Hunziger, and (3) Louisa Hunziger, m. Arthur
  Haut.

214

EMALINE^5 CONKLING (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,'3 Hester^5), m.
Cornelius Adriance. Children (Adriance):

 John,^6 m. Rosanna Post.
 Carrie, m. Warren Birch.

215

HESTER^5 CONKLING (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Hester^4), m. ____
Hunsicker. Child (Hunsicker):

 Barton.^6

216

CAROLINE^5 CONKLING (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Hester^4), m.
____ Brinkerhoff. Children (Brinkerhoff):

 George,^6 m. Sarah Marion.
 Sarah, m. John Duryea.
 Vera, m. Byron Van Derbilt.

217

DE WITT CLINTON^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3
Isaiah^4), m. Caty Ann Lefevre. He was a farmer in Michigan. Children
(Cuddeback):

 Lefevre,^6 resided in California.
 Wells.
 Orson.
 Monroe.

218

ENOS^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Isaiah^4), m. ____
Servin. Resided Cayuga Co. Children (Cuddeback):

 Sarah Ann,^6 m. ____. Lived in California.
 Jane, m. ____. Lived in Cayuga Co., N. Y.
 George. Lived in Cayuga Co., N. Y.

219

MARIA^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Isaiah^4), m. ____
Dowlan. Child (Dowlan):

 JOHN.^6

220

ISAIAH^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Isaiah^4), m.
Esther C ____. Children (Cuddeback):

 Frank L.^6
 Hattie.

221

NORMAN^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Isaiah^4), m.
____ Servin. Lived in Illinois. Children (Cuddeback):

 William.^6
 Henry.
 Gemalia.

222

HANNAH^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Isaiah^4), m.
Baker. Resided in Cayuga Co., N. Y. Children (Baker):

 Lillie Cuddeback.^6

223

DAVID^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Jacob^4), b. 1811,
d. 1875, m. Fannie Spaulding. They lived at Skaneateles, N. Y.
Children (Cuddeback):

 Mary,^6 b. 1848, m. (1) Henry Welling, and had (1) Grace Welling, m.
  Wm. Stewart, (2) Irving Welling. She m. (2) Mr. K. Smith.
 Martha, b. 1852, m. (1) Chas. Hoagland and had (1) Ernest Hoagland,
  (2) William Hoagland, (3) Ralph Hoagland, (4) Arthur Hoagland, (5)
  Fannie Hoagland. She m. (2) William Weeks and had, (6) Nellie
  Weeks, (7) Theodore Weeks, (8) Margaret Weeks.
 Jane.
 George D., b. 1858, m. Lettie Thornton and had (1) Eugene A.
  Cuddeback, b. 1883, m. 1908, Pearl Porter, they lived in
  Skaneateles, (2) Dr. Willis D. Cuddeback, b. 1878, m. 1902, Marie
  Hilt, resides in Aurora, N. Y., and had one child: Willis D.
  Cuddeback, Jr., b. 1906, (3) David Cuddeback.

224

MARY^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Jacob^4), b. 1813,
m. Ambrose Spurbeck. They resided in Fairport, N. Y. Children
(Spurbeck):

 Nettie,^6 m. Thos. H. Arnold, and had (1) Jennie Arnold, who m.
  ____, and had Arnold, (2) Willie Arnold.
 Jane, m. Warner Hatch, of Skaneateles.
 Ellen, m. Orvil Tallman and had (1) George Tallman. Reside Fairport.
 David J., m. ____, and had (1) Alice Spurbeck.

225

JANE^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Jacob^4), b. 1815,
m. Dwight Church. Resided Skaneateles, N. Y. Children (Church):

 David S.,^6 m. Lydia Lovett and had (1) Homer Lovett Church, (2)
  Raymond Lovett Church.
 Mary Jane, m. John Gillett, resided in Indiana, and had (1) Grace
  Gillett, (2) Almond Gillett.
 Frank, m. Eliza Hoagland and had (1) Delbert Church.
 Louisa, m. Leonard Peck.
 Albert C.

226

ELIZABETH^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob.^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Jacob^4), b.
1825, m. C. C. Wycoff. Child (Wycoff):

 Sarah,^6 m. Joseph Shotwell.

228

JANE^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Egbert D.^4), b.
Sept. 27, 1821, m. Mar. 25, 1847, Norman Rundle. Lived in Iowa.
Children (Rundle):

 Helen.^6
 Ella, m. ____ Simpson.
 Mary, m. ____.
 Martha.
 Sarah.
 Egbert.
 James.
 Ida.
 William,
 Eva.

229

LAURA^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Egbert^5), b. May
14, 1823, m. Feb. 15, 1849, Newel Turner; resided Skaneateles.
Children (Turner):

 Sarah.^6
 George, m. Laura Lawton and had (1) Warren Turner.

230

LAFAYETTE^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Egbert D.^4),
b. June 3, 1825, m. Jan. 5, 18--, Cornelia Davis, d. Oct. 17, 1872.
Residence, Baldwinsville, N. Y. Children (Cuddeback):

 Emma.^6
 Carrie.
 Minnie.
 Egbert.
 Edwin.

231

EGBERT GUERDON^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3
Egbert D.^4), b. Sept. 18, 1833, d. Mar. 24, 1902, m. April 22, 1860,
Ellen S. Cuddeback, b. April 22, 1840. He was a farmer at
Skaneateles, N. Y. See under No. 85. Children (Cuddeback):

 Willis F.,^6 b. May 6, 1852, m. (1) Sept. 5, 1873, Helen Thornton,
  d. Aug. 23, 1894, m. (2) 1898, Elsie B. Earll.
 Morton S., b. Nov. 21, 1866, d. April 23, 1867.
 Clarence Simeon, b. Jan. 19, 1878, m. Julia Thomas.

232

JANE W.^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Moses^4), m. Ira
Cheesbro, of Utica, N. Y. Child (Cheesbro):

 Hettie,^6 m. ____ Dailey and had (1) Jennie Dailey.

233

ALFRED^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Levi^4), m.
Esther Brooks. Residence Skaneateles, N. Y. Children (Cuddeback):

 Dora,^6 m. Hicks Lowe and had (1) Eva Cuddeback Lowe.
 Pearl.
 Grove.

234

LYDIA^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Abram A.,^3 Levi^4), m.
Charles Smith. Child (Smith):

 Almond.^6

235

JACOB^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Peter,^3 Moses^4), m. Annie
Gumaer; resided in Wayne Co., N. Y. Children (Cuddeback):

 Samuel.^6
 Moses.

236

PETER^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Peter,^3 Moses^4), m. Maria
Smith. They lived in Skaneateles, N. Y. Child (Cuddeback):

 Porter,^6 m. Betsey Gay and resided in Skaneateles.

237

NATHAN^5 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 Abraham,^2 Peter,^3 Moses^4), m. Martha
Hall and resided in Wayne Co., N. Y., later of Spring Lake, N. Y.
Children (Cuddeback):

 Mary,^6 m. John Shoemaker and had (1) Irving.
 Irving.
 Thylo, m. Elizabeth Abrams and had (1) Charles Cuddeback and (2)
  Jennie Cuddeback.




SIXTH GENERATION



LIVING APPROXIMATELY 1820 to 1900


238

AMOS^6 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Maria,^2 Marretjen,^3 Johannes,^4
Cornelius^5), b. Sept. 25, 1808, d. Oct. 15, 1889, m. Dec. 15, 1841,
Lydia C. Thrall, d. Dec. 1, 1898. Children (Van Etten):

 Edgar,^7 m. (1) 1867, Emma Lawrence, b. Aug. 16, 1815, d. ____6,
  1895, m. (2) June 30, 1897, Florence Lillian Cramblatt. Their
  children are: (1) Nellie Holmes Van Etten, m. Oct. 10, 1894,
  Charles Broderick Riseley, (2) Edna Laurence Van Etten, m. Mar. 3,
  1904, Charles Taylor Slauson, and had Edgar Van Etten Slauson, and
  Lawrence Taylor Slauson.
 John T., m. Laura Losey.
 Samuel S., m. Aug. 25, 1881, Ella Campbell.
 Anna Caroline, b. May 5, 1850, d. April 11, 1873.
 Emma, m. Charles F. Van Inwegen, see No. 296.
 Amos, Jr., m. May 7, 1879, Olive Caskey, of Kingston, N. Y. Their
  children are: (1) Luella Van Etten, m. June 10, 1907, Joseph
  Herbert, (2) Kate Van Etten, m. Mar. 28, 1916, Dodd Chambers, (3)
  Jane Van Etten.

239

ROBERT KENNEDY^6 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Maria,^2 Marretjen,^3
Johannes,^4 Cornelius^5), b. May 6, 1816, d. Aug. 20, 1899, m. Eliza
Palmer, b. July 21, 1821, d. Mar. 20, 1899. Lived at Connesburgh.
Children (Van Etten):

 John Pinchot,^7 b. Dec. 15, 1858, m. Nov. 5, 1889, Susan Dusinberry,
  d. Feb. 11, 1889.
 James Pinchot, b. Jan. 11, 1862, m. Nov. 30, 1899, Anna Louisa
   Weightman, and had 2 children.
 ____, m. James T. Brown, of Stroudsburgh.
 Lydia A., m. Frank Fingmaster, of Washington, D. C.
 Hannah.
 Emma.
 Cornelius, m. Helen Gordon. Live at Stroudsburgh.
 Maggie, m. Frank Kerr. Live at Newark. Their child is: (1) Carrie
  Kerr.

240

LEWIS^6 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Catherine^5), b. Jan. 31, 1838, d. Nov. 13, 1903, m. June 10, 1863,
Marilla Ann Chapman, b. June 3, 1848, d. Feb. 19, 1897. She was a
dau. of Silas and Keturah Chapman. He was a farmer at Cuddebackville.
Children (Cuddeback):

 James Chapman,^7 b. Nov. 1, 1864, m. Sept. 25, 1907, Ida Caroline
  Seybolt.
 Blanche, b. Mar. 26, 1866, m. April 14, 1905, Samuel E. Coldwell, of
  Stamford, Conn.
 309 Howard, b. Sept. 1, 1867, m, Helen White. Catherine E., b. Sept.
  27, 1869.
 Julia, b. Dec. 14, 1871.
 Ann Eliza, m. Oct. 8, 1906, Charles Van Houten, of Paterson, N. J.

241

BENJAMIN^6 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Catherine^5), b. May 23, 1840, d. Sept. 21, 1908, m. Dec. 2, 1863,
Eliza V. Whitlock, b. Feb. 27, 1841, d. Oct. 30, 1912. He was a
farmer at Cuddebackville. Children (Cuddeback):

 Joseph Whitlock,^7 b. Jan. 24, 1865, d. May 31, 1865.
 310 Elting, b. Mar. 29, 1867, m. Emma Jackson.
 Myron Whitlock, b. Dec. 28, 1868, m. Georgia May Smith.
 Sarah Catherine, b. June 14, 1871, m. Jan. 3, 1900,
  Lyman Rose Mitchell.

242

WILLIAM ELTING^6 JOHNSON (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Jane^5), b. Oct. 17, 1837, d. Dec. 16, 1912, m. May 1, 1873, Mattie
Maria Fuller, b. 1847, d. July 29, 1914. He was a physician at
Waverly, N. Y. Child (Johnson):

 Mary,^7 m. May 6, 19--, William B. Stanford, of Waverly, N. Y., and
  had (1) Martha Stanford. Mary was an adopted daughter of Dr.
  William E. Johnson.

243

BLANDINA ELLEN^6 JOHNSON (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Jane^5), b. Mar. 29, 1841, d. Mar. 20, 1897, m. Jan. 29, 1871,
Benjamin F. Dunning, d. Oct. 8, 1918. A farmer at Ridgebury. Children
(Dunning):

 Jane Cuddeback,^7 b. Nov. 21, 1872, m. Nathaniel Conn, of
  Susquehanna, Pa. They had (1) Jane Isabella Conn, (2) Elizabeth
  Conn.
 Henrietta Barstow, b. April 20, 1875, m. Dec. 13, 1894, Raymond
  Wilbur Carr, b. June 13, 1869, d. April 12, 1911. A lawyer of
  Albany. They had: (1) Ruth Dunning Carr, d. Feb. 14, 1899, (2)
  Raymond Carr, b. Oct. II, 1898, (3) Blandina Frances Carr, b. May
  13, 1905.

244

THOMAS BENJAMIN^6 JOHNSON, M. D. (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Benjamin,^4 Jane^5), b. May 14, 1844, m. (1) Nov. 15, 1871, Henrietta
Barstow, b. Mar. 14, 1845, d. May 2, 1892. He m. (2) June 29, 1897,
Mrs. Nellie Nightingale Lesher, d. Mar. 12, 1899. He m. (3) Oct. 16,
1902, Carrie Barstow. Residence was at Towanda, Pa. Children
(Johnson):

 Carrie Barstow,^7 b. Sept. 12, 1872, m. Dec. 28, 1897, John Harris
  Murray, Jr., of Waverly. They have (1) Henrietta B. Murray, (2)
  John H. Murray, Jr., b. Mar. 6, 1901, (3) Jane Murray.
 Alexander T., b. Mar. 25, 1876, m. April 28, 1909, Marion Stanard
  Scott, of Dallas, Texas, dau. of Samuel Beverly Scott. Alexander is
  a mining engineer, of Tonopah, Nev. They have: Alexander T.
  Johnson, Jr., b. Mar. 13, 1910.
 Thomas B., b. Oct. 18, 1879, m. April 16, 1914, Marion Louise
  Kingsley. He is a physician of Towanda, Pa.

245

MARY JANE^6 FARNUM (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Aseneth^5), b. Nov. 8, 1837, m. May 17, 1860, Russel F. Lord, b. Oct.
2, 1838, d. July 12, 1899. A civil and mining engineer. Children
(Lord):

 Samuel Farnum,^7 b. April 5, 1861, m. 1890, Corrineta Brouni, he is
  a mining and civil engineer, of San Miguel, Salvador, Central
  America.
 Lottie Aseneth, b. at Honesdale, June 16, 1862, d. Sept. 11, 1863.
 Russel Henry, b. at Honesdale, Sept. 16, 1863, d. June 11, 1883, at
  Cheyenne, Wyoming. A civil and mining engineer.
 Kate Farnum, b. Dec. 11, 1865, d. Mar. 26, 1866.
 Benjamin Garret, b. Feb. 18, 1867, m. Gertrude Farnum. They have one
  child, Russel Lord.
 James H., b. at Brentwood, Cal., July 7, 1875.
 Mariana, b. Sept. 16, 1877.

246

BENJAMIN CUDDEBACK^6 FARNUM (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin^3
Benjamin,^4 Aseneth^5), b. at Mongaup, Sept. 20, 1839, d. Mar. 11,
1911, m. Jan. 21, 1863, Emma McCormick, b. May 26, 1840. Children
(Farnum):

 William Miller, b. Oct. 21, 1864, d. Oct., 1902.
 Della McCormick, b. June 27, 1867.
 Samuel Barnard, b. Mar. 28, 1869.
 Mary Gertrude, b. Dec. 17, 1874.
 Russell Henry, b. Dec. 16, 1875.

247

HENRY HARRISON^6 FARNUM (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Ben-jamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Aseneth^5), b. April 3, 1844, m. Dec, 1887, Elizabeth Beattie, b.
Oct. 26, 1843. Child (Farnum):

 Dr. Waldo Beattie,^7 b. Oct. 23, 1892, m. July 2, 1918, Grace
  Fisher.

248

LIZZIE^6 FARNUM (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Aseneth^5), b. Oct. 4, 1846, d. Jan. 31, 1906, m. June 5, 1873,
Albert Stoll, b. Oct. 5, 1842, d. Dec. 7, 1915. He was son of George
Stoll and Hortense Pinchot, dau. of Constantine Pinchot, a French
emigrant. Children (Stoll):

 John Westbrook,^7 b. June 7, 1877, d. Jan. 18, 1879.
 Dr. Henry Farnum, b. May 25, 1878, m. Sept. 19, 1911, Eleanor
  Roberts. Residence, Hartford, Conn.
 J. Westbrook, b. June 25, 1883.
 Hortense Pinchot, b. Oct. 4, 1885, d. Oct. 10, 1892.
 Augustine Barnard, b. Nov. 21, 1887.

248A

CORNELIUS ELTING^6 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Benjamin,^4 Elting^5), b. Mar. 10, 1849, d. Sept. 18, 1918, m. Oct.
5, 1875, Esther Mills, b. Jan. 7, 1848, dau. of Rev. Dr. S. W. Mills
and Almeda Bailey. He was a lawyer and resided at Port Jervis, N. Y.
Children (Cuddeback):

 312 Samuel Mills,^7 b. Feb. 17, 1877, m. Anna Van Inwegen.
 Elting, b. Oct. 16, 1878, d. May 1, 1883.
 Anna Mills, b. Oct. 12, 1881.
 Harry, b. Nov. 18, 1879, d. Oct. 19, 1880.
 Cornelius E., b. Nov. 21, 1883, d. Oct. 14, 1899.
 Nellie, b. Aug. 4, 1887, d. Feb. 7, 1888

249

BENJAMIN ELTING^6 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Benjamin,^4 Elting^5), b. Mar. 29, 1851, d. June 17, 1892, m. Nov.
24, 1880, Clara Augusta Conkling, b. June 21, 1849, d. June 12, 1915,
dau. of Dr. John Conkling and Eleanor Dodge, b. June 21, 1849.
Children (Cuddeback):

 313 Benjamin Elting,^7 b. Sept. 2, 1881, m. Mary Barnett McCombs.
 Caroline Martha, b. Dec. 11, 1882.
 Eleanor Ann, b. Mar. 10, 1886, d. Oct. 22, 1918.
 John Elting, b. July 2, 1890, m. Feb. 17, 1919, Edna May Hornbeck.

250

WILLIAM LOUIS^6 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Benjamin,^4 Elting^5), b. April 26, 1854, m. Oct. 14, 1880, Ajice D.
Malven, b. Nov. 17, 1852, d. Oct. 24, 1915, dau. of George Malven and
Philenda St. John. He is a physician. Residence, Port Jervis, N, Y.
Children (Cuddeback):

 314 Frank Elting,^7 b. Aug, 17, 1881, m. Helen Catherine Hardin.
 315 Edgar Gordon, M. D., b. Sept. 11, 1882, m. Jennie Linn Denton.
 316 Elizabeth (Lizzie), b. Feb. 21, 1884, m. Harold Edward Green.
 317 Alice Malven, b. June 5, 1885, m. George M. Green.
 Philenda Ann, b. Oct. 22, 1890.
 Amelia Marvin, b. Jan. 23, 1896, d. Feb. 2, 1896.

251

BLANDINA MARIA^6 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Benjamin,^4 Elting^5), b. Sept. 28, 1856, m. Sept. 18, 1884, Rev.
John L. Stillwell, b. Dec. 17, 1859. Children (Stillwell):

 Elting Cuddeback,^7 b. May 26, 1888, m. Sept. 9, 1916, Faith
  Thompson.
 Aaron Longstreet, b. Mar. 13, 1891, d. July 5, 1905.

251A

CATHERINE^6 SWARTWOUT (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Hannah^5), b. Sept. 21, 1843, m. Nov. 10, 1863, Daniel De Witt, b.
Feb. 23, 1832, d. Sept. 3, 1887, son of Evi and Prudence Stoddard
De Witt. Children (De Witt):

 Peter Swartwout,^7 b. Dec. 11, 1865, m. 1890, Emily Jane Bullington,
  a farmer, of Kansas. Their children are: (1) Evi De Witt, b. Nov.
  20, 1891, (2) Daniel S. De Witt, b. ____, d. ____, (3) Catherine
  Almeda De Witt, b. April 15, 1892.
 Anna, b. April 18, 1870, m. Dec. 9, 1891, Thomas Low, b. Nov. 14,
  1870.
 Minnie, b. Nov. 28, 1867, d. Oct. 12, 1874.
 Lucy, b. Mar. 24, 1873, d. April 3, 1873.
 Jennie, b. Aug. 17, 1875.
 Hettie, b. Mar. 24, 1873. Ida, b. Sept. 27, 1877.
 Nettie, b. Jan. 7, 1883, d. Feb. 4, 1883.

252

JEMIMA^6 SWARTWOUT (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Hannah^5), b. Nov. 14, 1845, d. Sept. 10, 1874, m. Dec. 21, 1871,
Stoddard Van Inwegen, b. Oct. 3, 1834, d. ____, 1899. Child
(Van Inwegen):

 Stoddard, b. Nov. 24, 1873, d. Aug. 16, 1874.

252A

JANE^6 SWARTWOUT (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Hannah^5), b. Oct. 30, 1847, d. Feb. 5, 1908, m. Dec. 29, 1875,
Hector J. Bidwell, b. ____, d. ____. Children (Bidwell):

 Charles, b. Oct. 25, 1876, m. Susan Clute.
 Peter, b. ____, 1878.
 Jessie, b. Oct. 9, 1884.

253

ESTHER^6 SWARTWOUT (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Hannah^5), b. April 12, 1854, d. Jan. 23, 1892, m. Sept. 10, 1886,
Henry D. Hebert, of Oswego, Ill. Children (Hebert):

 Edith Hannah,^7 m. June 8, 1912, Clarence Howe.
 Ellen Swartwout.

253A

ELLEN^6 SWARTWOUT (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Hannah^5), b. April 28, 1856, m. Sept. 8, 1889, Charac J.
Van Inwegen, b. April 14, 1851. He is a merchant, has a general
store, and is also a farmer in Huguenot. Children (Van Inwegen):

 Lyman.^7
 Harold, m. Feb. 14, 1917, Mildred Margaret Swinton,
 Allen, m. Dec. 28, 1916, Marion Woods Swinton.
 Ada.
 Ralph.

254

BENJAMIN CUDDEBACK^6 SWARTWOUT (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Benjamin,^4 Hannah^5), b. Sept. 2, 1858, m. Oct. 6, 1884, Blanche
Cuddeback, b. Sept. 11, 1860. Children (Swartwout):

 Willard Henry,^7 b. June 15, 1885, m. Nov. 14, 1917, Mae Barkman,
  son Benjamin, b. Jan. 14, 1919.
 Nina Blanche, b. May 28, 1887.
 Harry Coleman, b. Oct. 4, 1888.
 Van Etten, b. Dec. 24, 1891, m. June 21, 1916, Edna Sarah Swinton.
  They have: (1) Margaret Wood, b. Oct. 4, 1917.
 Charles Howard, b. July 1, 1897.
 Frank Benjamin, b. Feb. 16, 1895.

254A

HENRY BRINCKERHOFF^6 SWARTWOUT (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Benjamin,^4 Hannah^5), b. Feb. 4, 1861, m. Mar. 10, 1886, Carrie B.
Peck, b. Feb. 17, 1863. Children (Swartwout):

 Florence,^7 b. Feb. 12, 1888, m. April 17, 1915, Francis Falgoner
  Thomassen, child, Henry Swartwout Thomassen, b. Jan. 16, 1919.
 Henry Lewis, b. July 29, 1889, d. Aug. 2, 1890.
 Charlotte, b. Nov. 28, 1893.
 Herbert Brinckerhoff, b. Sept. 17, 1896.

255

ELLEN^6 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Thomas^6), b. April 20, 1850, d. ____, m. Mar. 6, 1877, John Ralph
Minier, b. July 17, 1847, d. Aug. 14, 1911. He was a merchant. Lived
at Big Flats, N. Y. Children (Minier):

 Emma.^7
 Thomas Cuddeback.
 Edward E.

256

IRVING GRASSIE^6 CHAPIN (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,'3 Benjamin,^4
Jemima^5), b. Nov. 7, 1859, at Wattsburg, Pa., m. Mar. 26, 1890,
Elizabeth Barbara Davies, b. Feb. 12, 1865, at Aylburton, England,
They live at Lincoln, Neb. Children (Chapin):

 Helen Davies,^7 b. Mar. 16, 1891, m. June 17, 1913, Silas Henry
  Bumham, Jr.
 Lillian Farnum, b. July 22, 1892, m. Sept. 15, 1917, Doyle Dixon
  Rector.
 Harriet Cuddeback, b. April 13, 1894, m. Aug. 24, 1917, Robert
  Harris Talbot.
 Irving Steele, b. Nov. 5, 1897.

257

WALTER WALLACE^6 TITSWORTH (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Benjamin,^4 Lydia^5), b. Feb. 6, 1870, m. Oct. 23, 1902, Grace Ann
Condict, b. June 20, 1866. He is a farmer at Clove Valley, N. J.
Children (Titsworth):

 Julia,^7 b. Sept. 17, 1903.
 Olive De Witt, b. July 5, 1904.
 Grace Lydia, b. Oct. 7, 1906.
 Margery, b. Jan., 1912.

258

SIMON^6 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin^5), b. Nov. 27, 1810, d. Sept. 23, 1881, m. Margaret
Van Etten, b. Mar. 11, 1813, d. Dec. 20, 1887. See No, 199. He was a
farmer on homestead. Children (Westfall):

 318 Benjamin^7 b. June 3, 1834, m. (1) Sarah A. Swarts, m. (2)
  Frances Van Auken.
 Catherine, b. Feb. 8, 1836, d. Mar. 21, 1897.
 John Van Etten, b. Feb. 4, 1838, d. Jan. 1, 1915, m. Portia Ellis.
  He was a farmer at Barton, near Waverly. N. Y.
 William E., m. June 27, 1900, Gertrude D. Lytle, of Elmira.
 319 Ellen, b. Sept. 29, 1840, d. April 14, 1906, m. Jacob Westbrook.
 320 Cynthia, b. April 12, 1842, m. Benjamin S. Van Inwegen.
 Levi, b. Feb. 8, 1844, d. July 29, 1917.
 Josephine, b. Sept. 11, 1849, m. Sept. 8, 1881, William Henry
  Nearpass, b. May 9, 1840.
 Van Etten, b. June 7, 1848, d. Oct. 16, 1848.
 Margaret Anna, b. June 1, 1852, d. Jan. 12, 1912, m. Oct. 18, 1877,
  John Spencer Murray.

259

RUSILLA^6 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin^5), b. April 14, 1816, d. 1885, m. Oct. 6, 1836, Jonathan
Bonnell of Montague. They lived at Elmira, N. Y. Children (Bonnell):

 Isaac,^7 resides at Montague.
 321 Benjamin W., b. Aug. 1, 1837, m. Frank Leavenworth.
 Lansing, b. Mar. 23,1839, m. Emeline ____, d. April 12, 1870.
 322 Myra, b. 1840, m. George Grafft.
 323 Sarah Frances, m. William C. Buck.
 324 Joseph, m. Alice Buck.
 325 Jennie, m. John T. Decker.

260

SALLY^6 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin^5), b. July 14, 1818, m. William Martin of Mount Hope. Child
(Martin):

 William B.,^7 b. Mar. 13, 1844, d. July 8, 1846.

261

JEMIMA^6 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin ^5), b. Dec. 5, 1820, d. April 24, 1857, m. Dec. 31, 1840,
Thomas J. Lyon, b. June 21, 1817, d. April 10, 1889. Children (Lyon):

 326 Annie Marjorie,^7 b. Sept. 26, 1843, m. Edward A. Brown.
 Sarah, b. ____, 1844, d. Mar. 28, 1892.
 Emma C., b. Oct. 7, 1845, d. Sept. 7, 1849.
 Thomas J., b. Sept. 22, 1847, d. May 22, 1851.
 327 John W., b. Oct. 16, 1849, m. Lillie D. Biddis.
 Thos. J., b. Jan. 17, 1853, d. Aug. 7, 1854.
 Benjamin, b. July 27, 1856, d. Jan. 27, 1857.

262

LEVI^6 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin^5), b. April 13, 1827, m. Feb. 19, 1855, Ann Jackson, of
Sparrowbush. They lived at Waverly, N. Y. Children (Westfall):

 Laura,^7 m. Feb. 2, 1887, Samuel M. Gaines, of Washington, D. C.
 Cynthia, m. Rev. John Rust, of Louisville, Ky., and had three
  children.
 Charles, lived at Beardsley, Minn.
 Frank, lived at Beardsley, Minn.
 Mary, m. Col. Howard Black, of Louisville, Ky.
 Howard.
 Annie.
 Levi, lived in Minn.

263

LEVI^6 WHITLOCK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Sally^5), b. July 5, 1812, d. July 19, 1879, at Lyons, N. Y., m. Feb.
5, 1840, Charlotte Hartman, d. Nov. 20, 1869. Children (Whitlock):

 Louisa W.,^7 b. June 30, 1846, d. Aug. 11, 1846.
 George, b. May 8, 1848, d. Dec. 5, 1848.
 Mary Helen, b. Sept. 16, 1849.
 Edward, b. July 18, 1853, d. Aug. 15, 1853.
 Hattie, b. Mar. 19, 1855, m. June 21, 1877, Louis C. Bagley and had
  one child, b. Sept. 18, 1878, d. Oct. 7, 1878.
 Charles, b. Oct. 3, 1857.

264

NANCY^6 WHITLOCK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Sally ^5), b. Aug. 26, 1814, d. April 10, 1861, m. Jan. 9, 1833,
Daniel Van Anken. Children (Van Anken):

 Sarah,^7 b. Mar, 15, 1834, d. Sept. 27, 1871, m. Jan. 17, 1855,
  Adams Shelden. Their children are: Jasper W. Shelden, b. Feb. 22,
  1861, (2) Carrie Shelden, b. July 18,1864, (3) Sarah Aseneth, b.
  Sept. 22, 1871.
 Rachael, b. Oct. 8, 1836, d. Oct. 29, 1844.
 Josephine, b. Sept. 4, 1839, d. Oct. 24, 1855.
 Helen, b. May 16, 1842, d. Nov. 1, 1844.
 Benjamin F., b. May 5, 1845, d. May 17, 1863.
 Aseneth, b. Oct. 23, 1846, m. April 5, 1870, William A. Benedict,
  and had (1) Roger W. Benedict, b. Nov. 14, 1877, d. Nov. 17, 1877.
 Louise, b. Sept. 23, 1849, d. April 8, 1851.
 Emmett, b. Mar. 11, 1852, d. Feb. 22, 1853.
 Duane, b. July 30, 1855, d. Jan. 13, 1856.

265

BENJAMIN^6 WHITLOCK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Sally^5), b. Sept. 17, 1816, d. Mar. 11, 1885, m. Oct. 10, 1837,
Jane Swartwout, b. Sept. 6, 1819, d. Jan. 21, 1903, dau. of Philip
Swartwout and Esther Westbrook, of Huguenot. They lived at Lyons,
N. Y. Children (Whitlock):

 Daniel,^7 b. Aug. 13, 1838, d. Nov. 3, 1847.
 Celina, b. Jan. 26, 1840, d. Feb. 1, 1840.
 Elletta, b. Oct. 27, 1841, m. Jan. 21, 1874, Dr. E. Ware Sylvester,
  b. April 28, 1814, d. Mar. 29, 1879. They had: (1) Elbert Ware
  Sylvester, b. Nov. 17, 1874.
 Catherine, b. Aug. 31, 1843, m. Aug, 15, 1877, James Forfor, of New
  Rochelle. They had: (1) Lulu Forfor, b. May 4, 1878, (2) Vernon
  Forfor, b. July 10, 1888.
 Philip, b. Jan. 25, 1846, d. Feb. 12, 1847.
 Sarah, b. May 29, 1848, m. Feb. 20, 1885, Henry G. Cuddeback.
 Henry A., b. Feb. 6, 1850, m. May 25, 1876, Mittie Hammond.
 Levi J., b. Dec. 3, 1855. Lived at Lyons, N. Y., and m. June 1,
  1877, Grace Cuddeback and had: (1) Cornelius Whitlock, (2) Nina C.
  Whitlock, b. June 3, 1878, (3) Hope Whitlock, b. June 30, 1880.
 William, b. Aug. 26, 1854, d. Sept. 30, 1854.
 Joseph, b. June 4, 1875, d. Aug. 11, 1875.
 Coe H., b. Mar. 20, 1878.

266

JOEL^6 WHITLOCK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Sally^5), b. Nov. 8, 1818, m. June 27, 1839, Hannah Merritt. They
lived in Michigan. Children (Whitlock):

 Nelson D.,^7 b. Mar. 30, 1845, d. June 22, 1864.
 Clara L., b. June 7, 1850, m. Jan. 1, 1871, James Churchill, and had
  (1) Frank Churchill, b. April 16, 1877, (2) Nellie B. Churchill, b.
  April 16, 1877.

267

NELSON^6 WHITLOCK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Levi^5), b. Mar. 20, 1821, d. Dec. 24, 1855, m. June 21, 1843, Sarah
Hartman. Child (Whitlock):

 Stephen Edward,^7 b. Mar. 1, 1846, d. Feb. 29, 1872.

268

ASENETH^6 WHITLOCK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin^3 Cynthia,^4
Sally^5), b. May 6, 1863, m. Nov. 14, 1849, Daniel R. Roselle.
Children (Roselle):

 Julius,^7 b. Oct. 6, 1852, d. May 16, 1854.
 Julien, b. Oct. 6, 1852, d. Sept. 27, 1853.
 William, b. Sept 18, 1856.
 Jane, b. Sept. 5, 1860.

269

CATHERINE^6 WHITLOCK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Sally^5), b. Sept. 17, 1828, d. Mar. 14, 1892, m. Oct. 23, 1852,
William B. Miner. Child (Miner):

 Carrie Louise,^7 b. Dec. 18, 1855.

270

CHAUNCEY^6 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Levi^5), b. June 13, 1818, d. Feb. 18, 1862; m. Aug. 2, 1843, Philena
Odell. Children (Westfall):

 Charles R.,^7 b. July 22, 1847, d. Aug. 10, 1865.

271

ANNA^6 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4 Levi^5),
b. Aug. 30, 1820, m. Nov. 2, 1842, John C. Odell. Children (Odell):

 Levi W.,^7 b. April 25, 1844, m. Jan. 20, 1869, Sophie Alwood. Their
  children are: (1) Edith Odell, b. Nov. 9, 1869, (2) Lillie Odell,
  b. Sept. 20, 1872, (3) Chauncey H. Odell, b. Oct. 1, 1874.
 Volney, b. Mar. 5. 1846, d. Feb. 15, 1876, m. Julia Taber, Nov. 12,
  1867. Their children are: (1) Anna Laura Odell, b. Dec. 6, 1868,
  (2) Volney Odell, b. Oct. 26, 1876.
 Henry, b. Nov. 12, 1849, m. Nov. 12, 1873, Franc Rooks. Their child
  is: Milton R. Odell, b. Sept. 25, 1875.
 Alice E., b. Aug. 7, 1857, m. Oct. 10, 1877, Stephen Thornton. Their
  children are. (1) Henry Thornton, (2) Dewitt Thornton.

272

ASENETH^6 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Levi^5), b. April 1, 1829, m. June 24, 1851, Hector H. Tuthill of
Moravia. Children (Tuthill):

 Julia E.,^7 Dec. 25, 1856, m. Delbert Chamberlain.
 Sallie, b. Dec. 31, 1858, d. Oct. 9, 1880.
 Annie Laurie, b. June 1, 1865.

273

ASENETH^6 CARPENTER (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Catherine^5), b. Nov. 25, 1818, d. Nov. 22, 1900, m. July 23, 1840,
Nathan Skinner, b. Sept. 7, 1816, d. Mar. 1, 1891. Children
(Skinner):

 John Nelson,^7 b. June 13, 1844, d. Aug. 30, 1910, m. June 3, 1865,
  Anna M. Malven, b. Feb. 16, 1843, d. Sept. 14, 1896. Their children
  are: (1) Dr. Charles N. Skinner, b. Mar. 7, 1866, m. June 9, 1892,
  May C. Hiller, (2) John Malven Skinner, b. May 18, 1871, d. Oct. 4,
  1893, m. Nov. 27, 1890, Kate Van Etten and have Mary Aseneth
  Skinner, b, Jan. 5, 1892, and Anna Van Inwegen Skinner, b. Jan. 5,
  1892.
 Charles Nathan, b. Nov. 22, 1853, d. Mar. 29, 1861.
 Martha Ellen, b. July 20, 1862, d. July 20, 1862.

274

JAMES^6 CARPENTER (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Catherine^5), b. Oct. 13, 1820, m. Jan. 15, 1848, Elizabeth House, b.
Dec. 9, 1827. Lived in Iowa. Children (Carpenter):

 Phoebe C.,^7 b. Mar. 30, 1894, d. Oct. 6, 1862.
 Levi H., b. Nov. 14, 1850, d. ____.
 Sarah A., b. Oct. 23, 1852, d. June 22, 1874.
 James W., b. Aug. 7, 1857.
 Louisa M., b. Aug. 24, 1866.

275

ELEANOR^5 CARPENTER (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Catherine^5), b. Oct. 22, 1822, d. July 12, 1912, m. Cornelius
Swartwout, b. Aug. 20, 1820, d. Mar. 19, 1883. A farmer, at Dingmans,
Pa. Children (Swartwout):

 James D.,^7 m. Libbie Weed. Lived at Hainesville, N. J. Their
  children are: (1) George Swartwout, m. Oct. 2, 1912, Mary Bevans,
  of Sandyston, N. J., (2) Reeves Swartwout, m. Anna Knight, (3) Ella
  Swartwout.
 Sarah Catherine, m. Tuttle Decker, of Westtown, N. Y. Their children
  are: (1) Augustus Decker, of Middletown, N. Y., (2) John Decker, of
  Ogdensburg, N. J., (3) Ellen Decker, m. Charles Crane, of Sussex,
  N.J.
 John C, m. Dec. 11, 1878, Aramantha Cole, lived in Hasbrouck
  Heights, N. J. Their child is: Amanda C. Swartwout, m. Jan. 1,
  1902, Fred B. Kinnie, of Lafayette, N. J.
 Naomi.
 Charles, m. Feb. 18, 1880, Mary Elizabeth Whitesell. Lived at
  Dingmans Ferry, Pa. Their children are: (1) Catherine Swartwout, m.
  Andrew Millspaugh, of Milford, Pa., (2) Laura Swartwout, (3)
  Madeline Swartwout, (4) Paul Swartwout, (5) Benjamin Swartwout.
 Eleanor, m. Oct. 27, 1880, O. P. Huston, M. D., of Stroudsburgh, Pa.
 Cornelius, m. Alice Drymple. Lived at Augusta, N. J. Their children
  are: (1) Cornelius Swartwout, (2) Eleanor Swartwout, (3) Mabel
  Swartwout.

276

LEVI WESTFALL^6 CARPENTER (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,'3 Cynthia,^4
Catherine^5), b. May 24, 1829, d. July 28, 1886, m. July 1, 1856,
Elizabeth Malven, b. June 18, 1835, d. ____. Resided in Iowa.
Children (Carpenter):

 Sarah Catharine,^7 b. May 28, 1857, m. Jan. 17, 1878, Dr. Joseph T.
  Lambert.
 Malven David, b. Feb. 12, 1859.
 Ellen Margaret, b. Jan. 8, 1864.

277

SOLOMON^6 CARPENTER (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Catherine^5), b. May 27, 1833, m. (1) Aug. 15, 1855, Mary Dunn, b.
Nov. 11, 1833, d. Dec. 5, 1871, m. (2) Feb. 19, 1874, Margaret Clark,
b. July 10, 1838. Lived in Iowa. Children (Carpenter):

 John Thackeray,^7 b. May 24, 1857.
 Laura Ida, b. Nov. 15, 1860, m. Sept. 17, 1878, John W. Armstrong.
 Nathan Skinner, b. Dec. 9, 1862.
 Martha Jane, b. Nov. 28, 1871.
 Mary Dunn, b. ____, d. Dec. 5, 1871.

278

JOHN WESLEY^6 CARPENTER (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Catherine^5), m. Louisa Carpenter. Lived in Iowa. Children
(Carpenter):

 William,^7 m. Ada Holbert.
 Joseph.

279

CATHERINE AMANDA^6 CARPENTER (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Cynthia,^4 Catherine^5), b. Feb. 3, 1837, m. Dec. 27, 1860, Philip
Smith Malven, b. Jan. 14, 1837. Lived in Iowa. Children (Malven):

 Samuel John,^7 b. Mar. 27, 1862, d. May 23, 1863.
 Anna Bell, b. Aug. 28, 1863.
 Joseph Wesley, b. Aug. 8, 1865.
 Martha Jane, b. Aug. 10, 1867.

280

MARTHA ELIZABETH^6 CARPENTER (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Cynthia,^4 Catherine^5), b. May 27, 1843, m. Nov. 21, 1867, William
W. Prather, b. June 25, 1842, d. April 24, 1870. Children (Prather):

 William B.,^7 b. Aug. 24, 1868, d. Feb. 3, 1869.
 Frank C., b. Dec. 6, 1869, d. Sept. 17, 1871.

281

MARGARET^6 DE WITT (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^5
Jemima^6), m. Moses Dewitt. Lived at Tunkahannock, Pa. Children
(Dewitt):

 Libbie,^7 m. Chauncey Reed. Their child was (1) Spencer Reed.
 John, m. ____.
 Jacob.
 George, m. ____.

282

BENJAMIN^6 DE WITT (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Jemima^5), m. ____. Lived in Illinois, Children (De Witt):

 Grace.^7
 Jacob.

283

ASENETH^6 DE WITT (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Jemima^5), m. Benjamin Hall. Lived at Tunkahannock, Pa. Children
(Hall):

 Jennie.^7
 Louis.

284

OLIVE^6 DE WITT (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Jemima^5), m. Wilmot Carpenter. Lived at Tunkahannock, Pa. Child
(Carpenter):

 Levi.^7

285

JACOB^6 DE WITT (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Jemima^5), m, Mary Renshaw. Lived at Towanda, Pa. Child (De Witt):

 Alexander.^7

286

DAVID^6 BENNETT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph,^3 Lydia,^4 James^5), b.
Oct. 28, 1829, d. Jan. 9, 1902, m. July, 1857, Lena Enness, b. Dec.
12, 1828, d. Jan. 21, 1882. Lived at Tri States, N. Y. Children
(Bennett):

 Wilton,^7 b. July 20, 1858, d. Jan. 10, 1917, m. Sept. 29, Ada L.
  Baird. He was a lawyer at Port Jervis, N. Y., Their children are:
  (1) Olive Bennett, (2) Bessie Bennett, (3) Wilton Randolph Bennett,
  m. Feb. 21, 1917, Henrietta Grosswein, of Jersey City, N. J., (4)
  Hazel Bennett.
 Blanche.
 Mary.
 David.

287

SAFFREIN (SOVERYNE)^6 BENNETT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph,^3
Lydia,^4 James^5), b. Aug. 25, 1831, d. Nov. 5, 1910, m. Nov. 20,
1856, Jane Frances Newman, b. June 2, 1835, d. May 3, 1906. He was a
miller at Port Jervis, N. Y. Children (Bennett):

 Ida,^7 b. Nov. 21, 1857.
 Jane, b. ____, m. Egbert E. Nearpass, May 20, 1886. Resides Port
  Jervis, N. Y. Their children are: (1) Egbert Nearpass, (2)
  Jeannette Nearpass, (3) Laura Nearpass, (4) Harold Nearpass.
 George, b. April 3, 1861, m. ____. Child (1) Denton Bennett.
 Laura, b. Nov. 7, 1865, m. Mar. 19, 1913, John S. Murray.
 Sarah, m. Osmer Cuddeback. Their children are: (1) Frances
  Cuddeback, (2) Augusta Cuddeback.

288

WILHELMUS WESTFALL^6 BENNETT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph,^3 Lydia,^4
James^5), b. Oct. 2, 1833, d. Jan. 25, 1910, m. Oct. 7, 1868, Amanda
Hilferty, b. Jan. 13, 1833, d. Jan. 20, 1897, dau. of Daniel and
Hester Hilferty of Carpenter's Point. He was a sailor during the
Rebellion; after, a miller and merchant of Carpenter's Point.
Children (Bennett):

 Edith,^7 m. Edward Babcock. Their children are: (1) Kenneth Babcock,
  (2) Hugh Babcock, (3) Howard Babcock. Lived at Orland, Pa.
 Emma, m. Benjamin Coss. Resided Tri States, N. Y.

289

GALEN^6 BENNETT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph,^3 Lydia,^4 James^6), b.
Mar. 1, 1838, d. June 22, 1911, m. Dec. 16, 1864, Elizabeth Dodge
Conkling, b. Feb. 14, 1837, d. Feb. 7, 1899, dau. of Dr. John
Conkling and Eleanor J. Dodge. Children (Bennett):

 Anna,^7 b. Sept. 19, 1864, m. Almarin Phillips. Their children are:
  (1) Edgar Wendell Phillips, b. July 5, 1892, m. July 30, 1917,
  Hazel Elizabeth Billett, (2) Robert Conkling Phillips, b. April 29,
  1898.
 Clara Conkling, b. Mar. 23, 1867, d. May 15, 1884. John Edgar, m.
  Oct. 19, 1898, Mary Elizabeth Hornbeck. Their childreen are: (1)
  Agnes Bennett, b. July 11, 1900, (2) John Edgar Bennett, b. Oct.
  11, 1908.
 Howard G., Great Falls, Montana.
 Emma Elizabeth, d. Oct. 31, 1897.

290

JAMES^6 BENNETT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Joseph,^3 Lydia,^4 James^5), b.
Jan. 20, 1845, m. Nov. 24, 1869, Alice Style, b. June 10, 1846.
Children (Bennett):

 William Styles,^7 b. Nov. 15, 1870, m. June 30, 1896, Gertrude
  Witschief. Their children are: (1) Augustus Bennett, (2) Sarah
  Bennett, (3) Florence Bennett, (4) Grace Bennett.
 James Edgar, b. April 10, 1872, m. 1904, Mary Elizabeth Morris.
  Their child is: (1) James Edward Bennett, b. 1905.
 Howell S. Bennett, b. 1874, m. June 29, 1898, Margaretta Agnes
  Hornbeck. Their child is: (1) Alice b. 1901.

291

CATY JANE^6 EVERITT (Jacob.^1 Eleanor,^2 Maria,^3 Catherine,^4
Lena^5), b. July 11, 1821, m, Feb, 11, 1841, John B. Layton.
Children (Layton):

 Joseph Everitt,^7 m. Elizabeth Tuttle. Their children are: (1)
  Roanna I. Layton, (2) Lacy Layton, m. Frank Smith, (3) Everitt
  Layton, (4) Jason Layton, (5) Cornelia Layton, (6) Caty Layton, (7)
  Fred Layton, (8) Mida Layton.
 Davis, m. Hannah ____. Their children are: (1) Jennie Layton, (2)
  John Layton.
 Everett Sabina, m. Dr. ____ Hawkins. Their child is: (1) Layton
  Hawkins, of Hammondsport, N. Y.

292

DANIEL DAVIS^6 EVERITT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Maria,^3 Catherine,^4
Lena^5), b. June 3, 1823, d. Dec. 8, 1903, m. Mar. 15, 1858, Anna
Maria Creveling. Children (Everitt):

 Roanna Decker,^7 m. John Wood, of Port Jervis, N. Y.
 John Allen, m. Carrie Kerr, d. April 28, 1912, m. (2) Ella Van Ness.
  Child: Harold Everitt.
 Mary Elizabeth, m, Alfred Struble. Their children are: (1) Gladys
  Struble, (2) Daniel D. Struble.
 Sarah Jane, m. L. Skenk Merrill.
 Harvey Creveling, m. Maggie Bevans. Their children are: (1) Nellie
  Marie Everitt, (2) Roland Davis Everitt.

293

ISAAC J.^6 EVERITT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Maria,^3 Catherine,^4
Lena^5), b. Dec. 5, 1825, d. Nov. 11, 1875, m. Feb. 13, 1850, Martha
Armstrong. Children (Everitt):

 Edward,^7 m. Nellie Fields, Live at Orange, N. J.
 Minnie, m. ____ Mix. Reside East Orange, N. J.
 John D., Reside East Orange, N. J.
 Robert, Reside East Orange, N. J.
 Fannie A., Reside East Orange, N. J.
 Willis, Reside East Orange, N. J.

294

MARTIN COLE^6 EVERITT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Maria,^3 Catherine,^4
Lena^5), b. Feb. 4, 1828, m. Oct. 9, 1860, Louisa Armstrong. Children
(Everitt):

 John Elsworth,^7 m. Claude Medrick. Their children are: (1) Mary
  Everitt, (2) Martin Everitt.
 Charles, m. Susie Quick. Their children are: (1) Hazel Everitt, (2)
  Charles Everitt.
 George.

295

ROBERT HAGGERTY^6 EVERITT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Maria,^3 Catherine,^4
Lena^5), b. June 13, 1830, d. Dec. 23, 1907, m. June 2, 1859, Savilla
Stoll. Children (Everitt):

 Mary Frances,^7 m. Lester Smith. Their child is: (1) Mabel Smith.
 John Elmer, m. Fannie Kyte. Their children are: (1) Robert Everitt,
  (2) P____ Everitt, (3) Murlin Everitt.

296

CHARLES F.^6 VAN INWEGEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Maria,^3 Catherine,^4
Elizabeth M.^5), b. Sept. 13, 1849, m. June 6, 1876, Emma Van Etten.
Children (Van Inwegen):

 Cornelius,^7 m. Oct. 10, 1911, Emma W. Horn, of Catasauqua. Pa.
 Willard B.
 Barentsen.
 Anna, m. Samuel M. Cuddeback, see No. 314.

297

JOHN^6 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Jane,^4 Solomon ^5),
b. Nov. 20, 1806, d. April 14, 1889, m. July 11, 1828, Margaret
Carpenter, b. Dec. 20, 1809, d. Sept. 2, 1898, dau. of Benj.
Carpenter. Children (Van Etten):

 Jane,^7 b. July 10, 1829, m. Dec. 1, 1852, Benjamin Van Fleet, see
  No. 117.
 Margaret.
 Margery, b. Feb. 22, 1833, d. April 14, 1904, m. July 23, 1886,
  Marshall Gere, d. Nov., 1902.
 Sally, b. Aug. 3, 1836, d. Mar. 6, 1918, m. June 27, 1885, Jessie
  Tillison, d. 1916. Resided Deerpark.
 Jemima, b. May 13, 1839, d. Mar. 7, 1919, m. Feb. 13, 1862, Simeon
  Westfall. See No. 96.
 Chauncey, b. April 16, 1835.
 Mary Ellen, b. Mar. 21, 1842.
 George, b. Jan. 3, 1845, m. Feb., 1871, Ann Durland, d. Aug. 24,
  1904. Their child is: (1) Clement Van Etten.
 Aseneth, b. Nov. 10, 1851, m. May 27, 1885, George Langton.

298

SALLY^6 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Jane,^4 Solomon^5),
b. July 22, 1813, d. Jan. 11, 1873, m. Nov. 17, 1836, Joseph
Whitlock. Children (Whitlock):

 Jane,^7 b. Feb. 13, 1843, m. Dec. 26, 1860, Job Van Inwegen, b.
  Sept. 23, 1826, d. Oct. 25, 1914. He was a farmer and merchant at
  Cuddebackville. Their children are: (1) Mary Van Inwegen, b. Mar.
  13, 1863, m. Sept. 12, 1891, Bainbridge Winfield Burdick and had
  Edna Burdick, b. July 25, 1892, and Ralph Burdick, b. April 2,
  1894. Live at Albany, N. Y., (2) Eliza Van Inwegen, b. June 30,
  1865, m. April 26, 1893, William Jackson, of Cuddebackville, and
  had Job V. I. Jackson, b. July 7, 1895, and Frank Jackson, b. July
  24, 1898, (3) Joseph Inwegen, b. 1867, d. Oct. 7, 1885, (4) Ruth
  Van Inwegen, b. Feb. 20, 1873, m. Oct. 1, 1896, Frank L. Wilcox and
  had Lewis Van Inwegen Wilcox, b. April 18, 1901.
 Jemima, b. April 12, 1839.
 Eliza, b. Feb. 27, 1841, d. Oct. 30, 1912, m. Dec. 2, 1863, Benjamin
  Cuddeback. See No. 236.
 Jemima, b. June 10, 1845, m. William Morris. See No. 90.

299

PETER GUMAER^6 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Jane,^4
Solomon^5), b. July 30, 1824, d. June 28, 1897, m. Nov. 10, 1853,
 Sarah Ann Campbell, b. April 4, 1833, d. Nov. 27, 1894. Children
(Van Etten):

 Alva,^7 b. April 20, 1858, d. Sept. 21, 1908, m. Jan. 2, 1889, Anna
  L. Tymeson, b. Nov. 12, 1866, d. Aug. 3, 1914. Their children are:
  (1) Genevieve Van Etten, b. Jan. 23, 1890, (2) Leroy Truman
  Van Etten, b. Jan. 28, 1892, (3) Frank Alva Van Etten, b. Jan. 29,
  1895.
 Ada, b. Feb. 3, 1856, m. Aug. 9, 1882, Walter McFarlane. A school
  teacher at Waterman, Ills.
 Solomon, b. July 26, 1860, d. May 24, 1868.
 Archibald C., b. Aug. 13, 1865, m. Jan. 13, 1892, Laura M.
  Van Inwegen, b. May 22, 1866. Their child is: Stoddard Van Etten,
  b. June 8, 1894, Matamoras, Pa.
 Solomon, b. April 9, 1868.
 Frank, b. Oct. 9, 1870, d. Oct. 20, 1872.
 Ellen S., b. June 14, 1874, m. Jan. 23, 1899, Walter Bartholomew.
  Live in Texas.
 Wilmot, b. Oct. 21, 1862, m. June 13, 1888, Jessie G. Trumbe, of
  Batavia, Ill. They live in Mendota, Ill. Their children are: (1)
  Claire T. Van Etten, b. May 13, 1889, (2) Walcott G. Van Etten, b.
  July 23, 1891, (3) Frank C. Van Etten, b. Nov. 3, 1899.

300

LEVI S.^6 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Jane,^4 Solomon^5),
b. May 16, 1829, d. Oct. 27, 1906, m. Mar. 25, 1852, Emily L. Clarke,
d. Nov. 21, 1895, in Los Angeles, Cal. He was a farmer in Huguenot.
Children (Van Etten):

 Veranus,^7 b. Aug. 25, 1855, d. Nov. 6, 1907, m. June, 1888, Nettie
  Maynard, of Los Angeles, Cal.
 Jemima, b. Oct. 19, 1857.
 Roswell C., b. Dec. 21, 1859.
 Edith Ellen, b. Nov. 5, 1864. Lived at Hillsboro, Texas.

301

BENJAMIN^6 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Jane,^4 Levi^5),
d. Nov., 1851, m. Oct. 28, 1841, Prudence De Witt, b. Sept. 23, 1822,
d. Nov. 14, 1897, dau. of Evi De Witt and Prudence Stoddard. Child
(Van Etten):

 Ann Eliza,^7 m. Aug. 12, 1874, John Mather Dolph, b. Oct. 18, 1845,
  d. Dec. 20, 1910, son of Chester Valentine Dolph and Elizabeth
  Vanderbilt Steele, b. at Havana, N. Y. Their children are: (1) Dr.
  Benjamin Van Etten Dolph, b. Oct. 18, 1875, d. Mar. 26, 1913, m.
  Henrietta B. Snyder, of Lodus, N. Y., (2) Bertha Dolph, b. July 11,
  1878, m. Sept. 22, 1909, George Gumaer and had Dolph Gumaer, (3)
  Ada Isabel Dolph, b. June 16, 1880.

302

ANN ELIZA^6 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Jane,^4 Levi^5),
b. Dec. 18, 1827, d. Dec. 15, 1901, m. Mar. 21, 1848, Archibald M.
Campbell. Resided Port Jervis, later a farmer at Mount Hope.
Children (Campbell):

 Augusta,^7 m. George N. Cobb. Their children are: (1) Nina Cobb, m.
  C. Fred Hess, Jan. 14, 1890, d. Jan. 8, 1892. Resided Binghamton,
  N. Y., (2) Lena Cobb, m. Sept. 5, 1900, Royal Arch Gunnison.
 Ella, d. Sept. 29, 1918, m. Aug. 25, 1881, Samuel Southmayd
  Van Etten, reside Pittsfield, Mass.
 John Van Etten, b. 1885, d. Aug. 24, 1910.
 Levi Van Etten, m. June 5, 1879, Carrie Overheiser. Their children
  are: (1) Leon Campbell, (2) May Campbell, m. June 19, 1912, George
  Jacob Schwaderer, Jr., and reside at Valentine, Texas.

303

DR. SOLOMON^6 VAN ETTEN (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Jane,^4
Levi^5), b. July 30, 1829, d. July 7, 1894, m. (1) Feb. 21, 1856,
Hattie Westbrook, b. 1824, d. July 13, 1857, dau. of Col. Levi
Westbrook of Waverly. He m. (2) Sept., 1865, Maria Bristol Sawyer, b.
1836, d. April 17, 1917, dau. of Hon. Nathan Bristol, of Waverly,
N. Y. Child by first marriage (Van Etten):

 Howard,^7 b. July, 1857, d. Sept. 1, 1857.

Children by second marriage (Van Etten):

 Nathan B., M. D., m. (1) May 17, 1893, Josephine Swinton, b. 1866,
  d. Jan. 3, 1912. Resided N. Y. City. Their children are: (1)
  Eleanor Van Etten, b. 1895, (2) Catherine Van Etten, b. 1897, (3)
  John Swinton Van Etten, b. 1906.
 Dr. Nathan B. Van Etten, m. (2) July 10, 1918, Elizabeth Read, of
  Bridgeton, Me.
 Eleanor Bristol, m. June 1, 1911, Archibald Mulford Woodruff, of
  Newark, N. J., and have Archibald Van Etten Woodruff.

304

JOHN A.^6 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 John L,^4
Abram I.^5), bap. July 21, 1807, d. May 1, 1870, m. Jane Fisher.
Children (Westbrook):

 328 Phoebe,^7 d. Oct. 16, 1908, m. William Henry Bennett.
 329 Maria, b. 1831, m. Samuel Corwin.
 330 Sarah J., m. Horace St. John.

305

JACOB B.^6 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Solomon,^4
Col. John^5), b. Nov. 28, 1815, d. Jan., 1853, m. Oct. 24, 1838,
Hannah Jane Van Gorden, b. Nov. 20, 1819, d. Dec. 13, 1896.
Children (Westbrook):

 Sarah J.,^7 b. Feb. 20, 1840, m. Obadiah Hornbeck.
 Susan, b. July 10, 1842, m. Hon. Everett Hornbeck. Their children
  are: (1) Harvey Hornbeck, (2) Frank Hornbeck, (3) Allen W.
  Hornbeck, (4) Anna Hornbeck, (5) Frazier Hornbeck, (6) Ross
  Hornbeck.
 Isaac V., b. Feb. 12, 1847, m. Marcena Hornbeck. Their children are:
  (1) Mabel Westbrook, b. May 4, 1872, (2) Lucian Westbrook, b. Mar.
  17, 1874.
 Jacob B., b. April 9, 1853, m. Oct. 23, 1878, Sarah Cole. Lived at
  Dingmans. Their children are: (1) Ella Westbrook, m. William Lucas,
  (2) Philip Westbrook, (3) Howard Westbrook, (4) Fred Westbrook, (5)
  James Westbrook.

306

JANE B.^6 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Solomon,^4
Jacob B.^5), b. Mar. 22, 1824, m. Dr. Vincent Emerson, b. June 1,
1822, d. Aug. 1, 1896. Residence, Milford, Pa. Children (Emerson):

 H. Everitt,^7 M. D., b. Oct. 26, 1866, at Milford, Pa., m. Oct. 9,
  1885, Nellie A. Burbage, b. Jan. 15, 1867, d. Nov. 18, 1904. Their
  children are: (1) Alicia Jane Emerson, b. Dec. 10, 1886, m. Jan. 4,
  1912, Dr. William Denton, (2) Gouverneur Emerson, b. Mar. 8, 1889,
  (3) Nellie Emerson, b. April 27, 1890, m. April 28, 1913, Stacy
  Westbrook, (4) Madge Emerson, b. May 21, 1892.
 Vincent.
 Elizabeth.

307

JOHN COOLBAUGH^6 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 Solomon,^4
Solomon^5), b. May 24, 1820, d. June 30, 1906, at Branchville, N. J.,
m. Dec. 30, 1850, Jane Wells. Children (Westbrook):

 Lafayette.^7
 Alice, m. (1) Dr. Gove Emerson, m. (2) Aug. 23, 1888, Milton
  Dimmick Mott, b. Jan. 31, 1852, d. ____, and had (1) Virginia
  Barton Mott, (2) Gertrude Brodhead Mott, (3) John C. Mott.  Alice
  m. (3) Dr. J. C. Price of Branchville, N. J.
 Hannah, m. (1) John Williamson, m. (2) Arthur N. Roe, of
  Branchville, N. J., and had (1) Bertha Williamson, m. George
  Rosencrans, July 16, 1913.

308

MOSES W. COOLBAUGH^6 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3
Solomon,^4 Solomon^5), b. Feb. 4, 1827, m. Emily Jones, b. Aug. 22,
1827. Children (Westbrook):

 William B.,^7 m. Ella Wall. Their children are: (1) Blanche
  Westbrook, (2) Ethel Westbrook.
 Carrie.
 John C.
 Moses C., Jr., m. Nettie Bishop.
 Fred L.,




SEVENTH GENERATION




LIVING APPROXIMATELY 1840 to 1920


309

HOWARD^7 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Catherine,^5 Howard^6), b. Sept. 1, 1867, m. Dec. 31, 1897, Helen
White, b. Sept. 27, 1869. Children (Cuddeback):

 Mary,^8 b. Mar. 3, 1899.
 Lewis, b. Jan. 16, 1905.

310

ELTING^7 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Catherine,^5 Benjamin^6), b. Mar. 29, 1867, m. Dec. 30, 1896, Mary
Emma Jackson, b. Feb. 6, 1873. Children (Cuddeback):

 Wilbur Elting,^8 b. Mar. 29, 1898.
 Marion Eliza, b. June 7, 1905.

312

SAMUEL MILLS^7 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Benjamin,^4 Elting,^5 Cornelius^6), b. Feb. 17, 1877, m. May 10,
1906, Anna Van Inwegen, b. June 13, 1877. Children (Cuddeback):

 Cornelius Elting, 3rd,^8 b. Feb. 26, 1907.
 Charles Van Inwegen, b. Dec. 22, 1908.
 Samuel Mills, b. Feb. 12, 1912.
 Cynthia Van Etten, b. June 26, 1915.

313

BENJAMIN ELTING^7 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Benjamin,^4 Elting,^5  Benjamin^6), b. Sept. 2, 1881, m. April 10,
1907, Mary Bamett McCombs, d. July 25, 1912. Child (Cuddeback):

 Clara Alice,^8 b. Feb. 4, 1911.

314

FRANK ELTING^7 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Benjamin,^4
Elting,^5 William L.^6), b. Aug. 17, 1881, m. May 20, 1908, Helen
Catherine Hardin, b. Dec. 26, 1880. Child (Cuddeback):

 William Louis, 2nd,^8 b. Aug. 4, 1910.

315

DR. EDGAR GORDON^7 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Benjamin,^4 Elting,^5 William L.^6), b. Sept. 11, 1882, m. Oct. 9,
1915, Jennie Linn Denton, b. July 21, 1887. Child (Cuddeback):

 Alice Linn,^8 b. July 25, 1916.
 Julia Denton, b. Mar. 13, 1919.

316

ELIZABETH (LIZZIE)^7 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Benjamin,^4 Elting,^5 William L.^6), b. Feb. 21, 1884, m. June 15,
1910, Rev. Harold Edward Green, b. Dec. 16, 1880, Children (Green):

 Harold Edgar,^8 b. April 30, 1911.
 William Cuddeback, b. Mar. 28, 1913.
 Elizabeth Ann, b. Feb. 7, 1917.

317

ALICE MALVEN^7 CUDDEBACK (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3
Benjamin,^4 Elting,^5 William L.^6), b. June 5, 1885, m. Dec. 27,
1915, George M. Green, b. Dec. 8, 1884. Children (Green):

 Alice Caroline,^8 b. Dec. 28, 1916.
 George Garret, b. Oct. 23, 1918.

318

BENJAMIN^7 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin,^5 Simon^6), b. June 3, 1834, d. Aug. 1, 1888, m. (1) Sarah
A. Swarts, b. Feb. 3, 1836, d. Dec. 21, 1882. Lived at Wantage. He m.
(2) Jan. 20, 1886, Frances Van Anken. He was a farmer on homestead.
Child (Westfall):

 Melvin.^8

319

ELLEN^7 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin,^5 Simon^6), b. Sept. 29, 1840, d. April 14, 1906, m. Feb.
28, 1861, Jacob Westbrook, b. Nov. 17, 1833, d. June 23, 1888. He was
a farmer at Sandyston, N. J. Children (Westbrook):

 Anna M.,^8 b. Jan. 3, 1862, d. Jan. 27, 1862.
 Isabella, b. Jan. 16, 1863, m. Feb. 7, 1883, Emmet H. Bell, of
  Walpeck, N. J. Their child is Ellen Bell.
 ____, b. April 15, 1865, d. April 30, 1865.
 Anna B., b. Feb. 9, 1868.
 Bert Hugh, b. Feb. 22, 1870, m. Minnie Jagger. Their child is Velma
  Westbrook. They live at Sandyston.
 Margaret Luella, b. Mar. 28, 1874, d. April 29, 1913, m. Oct. 5,
  1905, Rev. Walter S. Mains, of Mahwah, N. Y.
 Levi, b. April 1, 1876.
 Jacob Westfall, m. Dec. 6, 1900, Maggie Cole, of Montague.

320

CYNTHIA^7 WESTFALL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin,^5 Simon^6), b. April 12, 1842, d. June 14, 1908, m. Mar. 4,
1868, Benjamin S. Van Inwegen, b. Sept. 24, 1843, d. Sept. 18, 1888.
Children (Van Inwegen):

 John,^8 b. Aug. 20, 1871, d. Sept. 3, 1872.
 Simon Westfall, b. 1874, d. 1875.
 Lewis Solomon, m. Nellie Patterson. Their child is Lewis Benjamin
  Van Inwegen, b. Oct. 1906.
 Benjamin Roy, b. 1883, d. 1884.
 Maggie May, b. Dec. 2, 1872, d. Jan. 1, 1894.

321

BENJAMIN W.^7 BONNELL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin,^5 Rusilla^6), b. Aug. 1, 1837, m. Frank Leavenworth. They
reside at Waverly, N. Y. Children (Bonnell):

 Guy.^8
 Cornelia. A missionary, d. in China, Oct. 12, 1916, age 42 years.
 Nancy, m. ____ Valentine, 1870.

322

MYRA^7 BONNELL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin,^5 Rusilla^6), b. 1840, m. George Grafft of Waverly, N. Y.
He m. (2) Stella Phillips. Children (Grafft):

 Annie.^8
 Rose, m, Ed. Vanatte. Their child is: Virginia Vanatte.
 Jennie, m. ____. Child: ____.
 Rusilla.
 Isaac.
 George.
 Margaret.
 Edward.

323

SARAH FRANCES^7 BONNELL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin,^5 Rusilla^6), m. William C. Buck. Lived at Waverly, N. Y.
Children (Buck):

 Wilmot.^8
 Walter, m. ____.
 William.

324

JOSEPH^7 BONNELL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin,^5 Rusilla^6), m. Alice Buck. They lived at Horseheads,
N. Y. He was killed by cars. Children (Bonnell):

 Harry.^8
 Josephine.

325

JENNIE^7 BONNELL (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin,^5 Rusilla^6), m. John T. Decker. They lived at Wellsburg,
N. Y. Child (Decker):

 George.^8

326

ANNIE MARJORIE^7 LYON (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin,^5 Jemima^6), b. Sept. 26, 1843, d. May 8, 1907, m. Jan. 10,
1866, Edward A. Brown, b. 1838, d. April 16, 1914. They lived at
Middletown, N. Y. Children (Brown):

 Harry,^8 m. Kate Walsh, reside, San Diego, Cal. Their children are:
  (1) Edward A. Brown, and (2) Marjorie Brown.

327

JOHN W.^7 LYON (Jacob,^1 William,^2 Benjamin,^3 Cynthia,^4
Benjamin,^5 Jemima^6), b. Oct. 16, 1849, m. June 9, 1880, Lillie D.
Biddis. Resides Port Jervis, N. Y. Children (Lyon):

 Fanny D.,^8 b. Mar. 20, 1881.
 Thomas, b. Aug. 12, 1882, d. Nov. 12, 1888.
 Robert Earl, b. Sept. 14, 1884, d. Nov. 4, 1888.
 Josephine Westfall, b. Nov. 5, 1889.

328

PHOEBE^7 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 John I.,^4
Abram I.,^5 John A.^6), d. Oct. 16, 1908, m. Wm. Henry Bennett, b.
Sept. 5, 1824, d. May 6, 1890. Resided Port Jervis, N. Y. Children
(Bennett):

 331 Alice,^8 m. (1) Sept. 11, 1874, Bayard Goodale and m. (2) Irwin
  Young.
 332 Emma, m. Hamilton Ruddick. Florence, m. C. F. Adams, of Chicago,
  Ills.
 John B., m. July 25, 1889, Josephine Everson, of Chicago.
 Col. Edward Ellsworth, of Geneva.
 Grace, m. 1891, Augustus Hamilton Peck, b. Sept. 11, 1824, d. Mar.
  27, 1907.
 Maria.
 Louisa, m. J. M. Steele, of Chicago.
 William Edgar, d. Jan. 10, 1917, m. April 24, 1882, Anna D. Hopkins,
  of Harrisburg, Pa.
 Lena.

329

MARIA^7 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 John I.,^4
Abram I.,^5 John A.^6), b. 1831, d. July 11, 1893, m. 1852, Samuel
Corwin. Children (Corwin):

 H. Scott,^8 lived at Marlboro, N. Y.
 E. W., lived at Roseton, N. Y.
 ____, m. Harry Whitney, of Brooklyn, N. Y.
 ____, m. ____ Joseph, of Roseton, N. Y.

330

SARAH J.^7 WESTBROOK (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 John L,^4
Abram I.,^5 John A.^6), d. at Denver, Sept. 3, 1903, m. Sept. 25,
1854, Horace St. John. Children (St. John):

 Stephen,^8 d. Jan. 1, 1895, at Pueblo, Colo., m. ____ Decker, and
  had three children.
 Frank.
 Abigal.




EIGHTH GENERATION



LIVING APPROXIMATELY 1860 to date


331

ALICE^8 BENNETT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 John I.,^4 Abram I.,^5
John A.,^6 Phoebe^7), m. (1) Sept. 11, 1874, Bayard Goodale, m. (2)
April 9, 1885, Irwin Young, b. 1842, d. April 12, 1915. He was son of
Isaac Young and Maria Irwin. Child by first marriage (Goodale):

 Edna,^9 m. James Stevens, of Midland, Md., and had one dau.: ____
  Stevens, b. Sept., 1913.

Children by second marriage (Young):

 Leila,^9 m. Nov. 24, 1907, James B. Bradley, of Chicago, Ills., and
  had one son: Martin Bradley, of New York City.
 H. Willard, m. Sept. 2, 1914, Margarette E. Dee, of Yonkers, N. Y.

332

EMMA^8 BENNETT (Jacob,^1 Eleanor,^2 Lydia,^3 John I.,^4 Abram I.,^5
John A.,^6 Phoebe ^7), m. Hamilton Ruddick. Child (Ruddick):

 Florence,^9 m. ____ Wheedon, d. April 12, 1902, in Colorado.




PEDIGREES OF ALLIED FAMILIES



NEARPASS FAMILY.


1. JOHN NEARPASS, was the first of his family to come to America. He
was a Major in the Revolutionary war and was at one time a prisoner
at Beaver Brook. His son

2. John Nearpass, m. Sarah Squirrel and they lived on a farm in New
Jersey. His son

3. Michael Nearpass, m. Jemima Cuddeback and at her death m.
Charlotte Stewart. They lived on a farm in New Jersey. His son

4. William Henry Nearpass, m. Sept. 8, 1881, Josephine Westfall.



THE LOW FAMILY.


PIETER CORNELLISSE LOUWE came from Holstein, Holland in Feb., 1659,
in the ship Faith. On Oct. 27th, 1668, he married Elizabeth Blanshau,
who came from Artoise, France, in 1660. His son

Tys (Matthias) Louw, of Rochester, Ulster Co., married Jannetje Van
Harring. His son

Abraham Louw, married Dinah Codebec.



THE WESTFALL FAMILY


1. JURIAN WESTPHAEL came to Ulster County in 1657, m. Marytje Hansen.
His son

2. Symen Westphael, bap. Sept. 30, 1663, m. Neltje Quackenboss. His
son

3. Jurian Westfael, bap. Sept. 27, 1696, m. Oct. 14, 1719, Blandina
De Witt. His son

4. Simon Westfall, bap. July 30th, 1721, m. April 17, 1743, Jennetje
Westbrook. His son

5. Simeon Westfall, bap. Feb. 12, 1745, m. Sarah Cole.

His son

6. Simon Westfall, bap. Feb. 4th, 1766, m. Syntje Cuddeback, of the
fourth generation.

6. Another son, David Westfall, m. Jemima Cuddeback, of the fourth
generation.



THE GUIMAR FAMILY.


PIERRE GUIMAR m. Anne Damor, of the Province of Saintonge, France.
His son

1. Pieter Guimar, the emigrant, was a companion Huguenot refugee with
Jacob Caudebec, d. 1732, m. April 18, 1692, at Kingston, Esther
Hasbrook. His son

2. Pieter Gumaer, b. Nov. 15, 1708, d. 1779, m. Mar. 7, 1730, Charity
(Traagie) De Witt, b. 1710, d. Nov. 12, 1756. His son

3. Ezekiel Gumaer, b. Dec. 29, 1742, d. Mar. 17, 1823, m. June 27,
1770, Naomi Louw. His son

4. Peter Gumaer, b. Mar. 28, 1771, d. Dec. 18, 1869, m. Esther
Cuddeback, of the fifth generation.



FAMILY OF THE EMIGRANT ANCESTOR.


1. ROELOFF SWARTWOUT, b. 1634 in Amsterdam, came to America in 1655,
m. Aug. 13, 1657, Eva Alberts. His son

2. Anthony Swartwout, bap. May 11, 1664, m. Jannetje Jacobs. His son

3. Jacobus Swartwout, bap. Mar. 29, 1696, m. May 30, 1721, Annie
Gumaer, d. 1746, m. second, Oct. 15, 1747, Deborah Schonover. His son

4. Peter Swartwout, m. June 24, 1788, Jannetje Westfall. His son

5. Philip P. Swartwout, m. Esther Westbrook. His son

6. Peter P. Swartwout, b. May 25, 1817, d. 1885, m. Hannah Cuddeback.



THE ELTING FAMILY


1. JAN ELTING, a Justice of the court of sessions at Kingston, was
born at Beyle, Holland, on July 29, 1632. He was a son of Roelof
Elting, m. 1677, Jacomyntje Schlecht. His son

2. Rorlif Elting, bap. Oct. 27, 1678, m. June 13, 1703, Sarah DuBois.
They lived at New Paltz. His son

3. Josias Elting, a captain during the Revolution, bap. Oct. 12,
1712, m. July 15, 1734, Magdalena Du Bois. His son

4. Cornelius Elting, b. Nov. 13, 1744, m. April 28, 1776, Blandina
Elmendorf. They settled at Hurley. His son

5. Rev. Cornelius Elting, b. Jan. 1, 1792, d. Oct. 24, 1843, m. Dec.
15, 1818, Ann Maria Bevier, b. Feb. 2, 1791, d. Oct. 15, 1868. His
daughter

6. Ann Bevier Elting, b. April 29, 1820, d. Jan. 20, 1862, m. Sept.
18, 1844, Elting Cuddeback.



THE TITSWORTH FAMILY.


The name spelling Tiertsoo--Tietsoo--Titso--Titsoort--Ditsoort--
Tietzoo.

1. WILLIAM TIETZOO, the emigrant, came from near Schenectady, where
several of his children were born, and settled near Oesopus, where he
remained many years. Of his children,

2. Stephanus Tietsoort, m. Sara Hornbeck, Oct. i8, 1702, his son,

3. William Tietsoort, died Mar. 4, 1791, was the settler at
Meckheckemeck valley at the bend of the Neversink river, about two
miles north of Port Jervis, in little Menissing. With his sister and
families he fled from the valley during the French and Indian war,
and with his brother-in-law Hendrick Decker and others founded
Deckertown. He married Sarah Decker. His son,

4. Stephen Titsworth, b. April 3, 1734, d. April 17, 1787, m.
Catherine Coykendall, d. Nov. 17, 1800. His son,

5. Amos Titsworth, b. June 23, 1787, d. Feb. 19, 1856, m. Olivy
De Witt, b. Jan. 7, 1785, d. Mar. 30, 1871, dau. of Moses De Witt. He
lived in the Clove valley in New Jersey. His son,

6. Walter Wallace Titsworth, b. Dec. 21, 1822, d. Mar. 21, 1914, m.
Lydia Cuddeback.



ST. JOHN FAMILY


1. MATTHIAS ST. JOHN (Sension) (Sention), b. in England, came to
Dorchester, Mass., 1632, moved to Windsor, Conn., in 1640, d. 1669.
His son,

2. Matthias St. John, b. 1630, d. 1728, m. Elizabeth ____. His son,

3. James St. John, b. 1674, d. 1754. His son,

4. James St. John, b. Mar. 30, 1708, d. 1756, m. Mar. 30, 1738,
Abigail Parsons. His son,

5. Isaac St. John, b. April 15, 1739, d. June 16, 1799, m. Jan.
15, 1761, Deborah Guernsey, b. June 26, 1741, d. Sept. 14, 1799. His
son,

6. Jonathan St. John, b. Jan. 26, 1762, d. July 6, 1826, m. Elizabeth
P. Williams. His son,

7. Stephen St. John, b. Nov. 26, 1788, d. Aug. 30th, 1870, m. Oct.
22, 1816, Abigail Horton of Neversink, Sullivan Co. His dau.,

8. Philenda St. John, b. Sept. 27, 1827, m. Oct. 31, 1848, George
Malven. Her dau.,

9. Alice D. Malven, m. William L. Cuddeback.



MALVEN FAMILY


1. JOHN MALVEN, b. Oct. 1, 1797, d. April 7, 1869, came to America
at the age of 18 from Wigton, near "Balfem," County of Ayr, Scotland.
His parents were David Malven, who was a mason by trade, and Jane
Malven. He m. Elizabeth Michael, b. 1812, d. April 9, 1874, and they
lived near Stroudsburgh, Pa. His son,

2. George Malven, b. Dec. 25, 1827, d. August 24, 1894, m. Philenda
St. John, b. Sept. 27, 1827, d. July 14, 1901. His dau.,

3. Alice Dimmick Malven, m. Dr. William Louis Cuddeback.



VAN INWEGEN FAMILY


1. HEROMANDUS BARENTSEN VON INWEGEN, b. in Nimwegen in province of
Gelderland, Holland, m. Jan. 19, 1701, Jannetje Coobes Swartwout.
His son,

2. Gerardus Van Inwegen, bap. May 10, 1702, m. Aug. 22, 1731, Jane
De Witt, bap. Feb. 13, 1704, lived on Gumaer farm. His son,

3. Harmonus Van Inwegen, b. 1733, m. Margaret Cole. His dau.,

4. Hannah Van Inwegen, bap. 1767, m. William Cuddeback of the 4th
generation.



VAN ETTEN LINE


1. JACOB JANSEN VAN ETTEN came from Etten, North Brabrandt, Holland.
He died at Hurley, Ulster County, in 1693. He m. on Dec. 28, 1664,
Annatje Adriance of Amsterdam. His son,

2. Jan Van Etten, bap. Jan. 3, 1666, m. 1692, Jannetje Rossa. His
son,

3. Jacob Van Etten, bap. Dec. 25, 1696, m. April 22, 1719, Antjen
Westbrook. His son,

4. Anthony Van Etten, b. at Naponach, bap. at Kingston, June 12,
1726, d. 1778, m. Aug. 3, 1750, at Nameneek, Annatje (Hannah) Decker.
His son,

5. Anthony Van Etten, m. Jemima Cuddeback of the fourth generation.
Another son,

5. Levi Van Etten, bap, Feb. 12, 1758, m. Nov. 27, 1777 Jane
Westbrook. His dau.,

6. Blandina Van Etten, m. Dec. 26, 1805, Benjamin Cuddeback of the
fourth generation.




[Illustration: CAUDEBEC, FRANCE]

[Illustration: CUDDEBACKVILLE, AMERICA]

[Illustration: TRADITIONAL ANCESTRAL HOME]




CAUDEBEC IN NORMANDY, FRANCE


The home of our ancestor, from which he fled, a Huguenot refugee in
1685, is a small town on the right bank of the Seine, about midway
between Havre and Rouen. At this point the river St. Gertrude,
flowing down between the two mountain peaks Mt. Calidee and Mt.
Vignette, empties into the Seine.

Caudebec, the capital of Caux, is within a triangle, its base the
bank of the Seine on which is a wharf 13.78 ft. above sea level and
on which runs the government road toward Havre. The apex of the
triangle lies at a point along the St. Gertrude river between the
mountain peaks which have an altitude of about 500 ft.

The region has a light, alluvial, productive soil--soft, mild
temperature and is most healthful.

The valley of the Seine through Normandy is one of the most beautiful
in France, rich in memories, a paradise for the artist and
archaeologist.

For centuries Caudebec was a seaport. The incoming tide, a wall of
water 5 or 6 ft. high, was forced upstream with great rumbling. This
alternating with the natural flowing downstream has caused the river
to become shallow. These factors together with the building of larger
ships have caused the abandonment of Caudebec as a seaport.

As to the origin of the name Caudebec, authorities differ. It is
thought to be of Norse or Icelandic origin, coined by the Normans.
Kalder--Kalt--cold, and Bek meaning a rivulet--Kalt bek (Caudebec)
meaning cold brook and applying it to the St. Gertrude river as it
flows into the Seine.

Traces of former occupation of this region and of varying degrees of
civilization are abundant. For centuries the land was occupied by
barbarous, wandering tribes of various origin. They were continually
disputing, fighting and exterminating one another. About 49 B. C. the
Romans were attracted to this region. They conquered and subdued the
tribes and continued to control that part of Normandy for about five
centuries. There are yet evidences of Roman occupation in and about
Caudebec and of the occupancy of it by barons, dukes and other
royalties. Fragments of Gallo-Roman potteries are found at Caudebec,
also coins stamped with Calidu upon them. Calidu was the chief tribal
town of the Caletes at the time of the Roman conquests of France.
Julius Caesar conquered these people and constituted a Roman colony
on the site of Caudebec about 648 A. D. St. Vandrille founded a
monastry "near a sparkling stream in the forest" which under the
influence of Charlemange grew rapidly. It had many students, at one
time over three hundred. The village of Caudebec was formed below it
and the town developed rapidly in population and importance. This
condition continued until late in the 9th century.

Following this the Franks gained control and established their first
monarchy and with their feudal rules controlled the country and the
people. In the ninth century the Norsemen--Northmen (Normans)
established their colonies and took possession of the fertile valleys
of northern France, where their aggressive industry and assertive
ways enabled them to possess the land. They adopted civilized
manners, language, customs and pursuits and became an energetic,
skillful, warm-hearted, patriotic people--the best sailors, fishermen,
agriculturists, and manufacturers in all France.

In the 11th century Caudebec became the commercial town and the
central market in the land of Caux.

In the 16th century tanneries were established and the manufacture of
gloves and hats developed extensively, becoming the chief industry.
The black hat of Caudebec with the large black feather was made here
as was most of the headgear worn in France. The French court adopted
this Caudebec hat, a large black beaver with a long feather, and
later it was used almost universally in France.

The church at Caudebec is said to be one of the finest in Normandy.
It has suffered greatly by reason of the sectional wars that have
repeatedly devastated the country, especially those of the 16th and
17th centuries. It was built originally in the 11th century and has
been enlarged and repaired repeatedly. The splendid tower was
completed in 1491.

On August 15th, 1415, Henry V of England caused the land of Caux to
be the seat of war, which lasted several years. In May, 1418, the
town of Caudebec, besieged by the English army under generals Warwick
and Talbot, made a heroic defence, but surrendered in September. It
remained in English hands until 1435 when the peasantry of Caux
rebelled against English rule. A protracted war followed which caused
famine and plague and the land was reduced almost to a desert. The
province remained the seat of war until 1499 when Charles VII took
Rouen by storm and later made triumphal entry into Caudebec with an
army of 12,000 men. The country prospered, Caudebec grew--most of the
houses in the town date to that period of the 15th century.

[Illustration: Caudebec, France]

[Illustration: Caudebec, France]

[Illustration: Market Place, Caudebec]


There are few changes in them, as new windows, new doors, but they
remain the same old wooden buildings with wooden galleries suspended
over the narrow, irregular, oddly paved streets. Today in Caudebec
one breathes the air of the middle ages.

The Reformation--the great religious awakening of the 16th
century--developed great sympathy in Caudebec. The Protestants, the
Huguenots (a term borrowed from Switzerland, meaning bound together
by oath) were quite numerous. Religious wars followed. The English
assisted the Protestants--the Spanish, the Catholics. Rival dukes and
princes sought to take advantage of these conditions and conflicts
followed from which pillage, incendiarism, and destruction resulted.

On April 24, 1592, Caudebec capitulated to the Duke of Palma, On May
15th it capitulated a second time to Henry IV of France amid the
cheers of the people.

On April 15th Henry IV issued the "Edict of Nantes" and established
universal liberty and equality as to religious professions and
worship. Great general prosperity followed, especially in manufacture
and agriculture.

On Oct. 17, 1685, Louis XIV revoked "the Edict of Nantes." This was
followed by persecution, pillage, and destruction of property and
people, especially of the Huguenots. Great numbers of people fled
from France and among them our progenitor Jacques Caudebec.

On Sept. 19, 1749, Louis XV visited Caudebec with all the splendor of
the French court. With their enthusiastic Royalist spirit the people
unharnessed the horses and they themselves drew the royal carriage.

Caudebec is to-day a noted summer resort with a population of about
2,000, with fairs three times a year, with annual boat regattas, with
provision for pleasure and entertainment. The people of nearby cities
may thus enjoy its healthful climate and its hospitality.

A recent traveller has thus viewed Caudebec as approached from the
sea by river. "Between the great forest of Maulevrier on our left and
the green meadows on our right is the great broad Seine, fringed with
shady arbors and with rows of modest homely hotels. The graceful
church spire dominates the town which is in the midst of rising green
hills. The old Caudebec, one of the oldest of Norman towns, with its
medieval houses, narrow, crooked, ill-paved streets, was built on the
site of the Roman settlement, Lotum and gives unmistakable evidence
of its antiquity. The quaint windows and doorways, the overhanging
and irregular roofs almost against one another are everywhere visible
and are covered with creeping vines and climbing flowering plants."

[Illustration: View. Entrance to the Church, Caudebec]

[Illustration: Street Scene. Caudebec, France]

[Illustration: VIEW OF CAUDEBEC ALONG RIVER FRONT]

  "A LITTLE THING IS A LITTLE THING, BUT FAITHFULNESS IN LITTLE
  THINGS IS A GREAT THING."

  MAY SOME MEMBER OF THE FAMILY COMPLETE AND CONTINUE THIS RECORD,
  AND MAY THE STERLING WORTH AND CHARACTER OF OUR ANCESTORS ENDURE
  THROUGH THE COMING GENERATIONS.

  "RIGHT LIVING IN ITS SILENCE IS MORE POWERFUL THAN WORDS, AND
  CHARACTER, WHEN TOUCHED, RINGS OUT TRUE SWEET MUSIC."

  Port Jervis, N. Y.,

  July 4th, 1919





INDEX

[Transcriber's Note: This is William L. Cuddeback's original index
except the numbers after names in this index have been changed from
page numbers.  They are now the reference number for the lineage
paragraph(s) in which a person of that name is discussed or a key to
a listing in the table of contents. Again, superscripts are given to
indicate the generation. A question mark in brackets indicates the
entry could not be verified.  If a number precedes the [?], there is
a possible, though not exact name in that lineage paragraph.]

[Key to Table of Contents]

 {[1gen]      The narrative following lineage paragraph 1.
 [deed]      Deeds, Lands, Papers, Etc.
 [pat]       The Cuddeback Patent Dissolved
 [ped: name] Pedigrees of Allied Families
 [pion]      Pioneer Days}


 Aartss, Garrett, deed
  Jacob, deed
 Abrams, Elizabeth, 237
 Ackerman, Prudence, 63, 190
 Ackerson, Catherine, 55, 157, 165
 Adams, Ann Eliza, 163
   C. F., 328
   Charles A., 168
   Elizabeth, 166
   Emerson H., 140
   Ensley,^5 56, 171
   Etta, 168
   Frank, 168
   Fred, 168
   Georgetta, 168
   Hannah, 163
   Harry, 140
   Havilah, 168
   Hulda,^5 56
   Hulda, 166, 169
   Ida, 168
   Isaiah,^5 56
   Isaiah,^5 170
   James,^5 56
   James, 168
   James B., 168
   Jennie, 170
   John, 168
   John S.,^5 56
   John S., 172
   Josephine, 163
   Lucy, 167
   Maria, 166
   Mary, 167
   Mattie, 170
   M. Estella, 168
   Philah,^5 56
   Philah, 167
   Robert, 163
   Samuel, 21, 56, 170
   Sara, 168
   Sarah H., 168
   Spencer, 140
   Susan, 166, 170
   Sylvanus,^5 56
   Sylvanus, 166
   Warren, 140
   Zilla, 171
 Adkins, Ada Grace, 155
   Joseph L., 155
 Adriance, Annetje, 12, [ped: Van Etten]
   Carrie, 214
   Cornelius, 78, 214
   John, 214
 Aelberts, Elsje, [pion], [1gen]
 Alberts, Eva, [ped: Swartout]
 Alexander, Lizzie, 98
 Allen, Hattie, 125
 Allyn, A. B., Dr., 192
 Alwood, Sophie, 271
 Anderson, Anna Mabel, 95
   W. R., 192
 Andrews, Richard, 210
 Angelo, Harry, 154
   Pearl, 154
 Angle, Catherine, 67
 Ammerman, Hannah R., 15
 Armstrong, John W., 277
   Lancelot W., 112
   Louisa, 193, 294
   Martha, 193, 293
   Mary Agnes, 112
   Mary D., 203
 Arnold, Jennie, 224
   Thos. H.,224
   Willie, 224
 Arnst, Elizabeth M., 126
 Artis, Hazel, 188
 Atchison, William Melville, 101
 Augustine, Linus, 118
 Austin, Annettie, 140
   Anthony, 140
   Cornelia, 140
   Dorr, 140
   Fred C, 140
   George, 140
   Henry Warren, 140
   James, 140
   James B., 140
   Mabel, 140
   M. Estelle, 140
   Miriam, 140
   Ogden, 140
   Warren, 50, 140

 Babcock, Ann, 118
   Betsy, 118
   Catherine, 117
   Edward, 288
   Howard, 288
   Hugh, 288
   Kenneth, 288
 Bacon, Charles L., 123
   Lewis Earl, 123
   W. N., 123
 Bagley, Louis C, 263
 Bailey, Eliza, 102
   Margaret, 56, 172
 Baird, Ada L., 286
 Ballance, Mary, 146
 Barber, Alfred, 154
    Cora, 154
 Barents, Sara, [1gen]
 Barker, Anna, 140
 Barnes, Edward, 175
   Lucien F., 175
 Barrick, Catherine, 179
   Ellen, 179
   Henry, 179
   Sarah, 179
 Barstow, Carrie, 133, 244
   Henrietta, 133, 244
 Bartholomew, Walter, 199
 Bartlet, Eliza, 155
 Bassett, James, 203
 Bate, Clara, 152
 Beaks, John G., 102
 Beattie, Elizabeth, 134, 247
 Beatty, Louise Beckwith, 95
 Beemer, Sarah E., 174
 Beers, Isabella, 104
 Bell, Berteha C., 103, 131
   Emmet H., 319
   Esther, 131
   Margaret, 131
   Reuben, 131
   Sarah, 104
 Benedict, Amanda, 96
   Roger W., 264
   Sally, 25, 62
   William, 95, 96
   William A., 264
 Benjamin, Joshua, 57
   Margaret, 157
 Bennett, Agnes, 112, 289
   Augustus, 290
   Alice, 112, 290, 328, 331
   Almeda, 118
   Anna, 289
   Benjamin, 177
   Bessie, 286
   Blandina, 48, 61
   Burnett, 181
   Clara C., 289
   David, 65, 177, 286
   Denton, 287
   Edith, 288
   Edward E., 213
   Emma, 198, 213, 217
   Emma E., 328
   Esther, 177
   Florence, 290, 328
   Galen, 177, 289
   George, 287
   George M., 209
   Grace, 290, 328
   Hannah,^5 61
   Harrison, 181
   Henry,^5 61
   Henry, 178
   Howard, 289
   Howell S., 120, 290
   Ida, 197
   Jane, 119, 197
   James,^4 68
   James, 81
   James,^5 87, 155
   James, 132, 155, 156, 157, 198
   James Edgar, 199
   John B., 213
   John E., 112, 198
   John Edgar, 112
   Joseph,^5 61
   Joseph, 181
   Laura, 198
   Lena, 287
   Louisa, 328
   Lydia, 181
   Mary,^5 61
   Mary, 96, 179
   Olive, 286
   Peter, 181
   Saffrein, 178, 287
   Sally, 180, 181
   Samuel, 179
   Sarah, 177, 287, 290
   Soveryn,^5 61
   William, 182
   William E, 328
   William H., 205, 304
   William S., 290
   Wilhelmus Westfall, 177, 288
   Wilton Randolph, 286
 Berg, Christian, 103
 Berger, Ralph, 131
 Bevans, Libbie, 102
   Maggie, 291
   Mary, 275
 Bevier, Ann Maria, [ped: Elting]
 Biddis, Lillie D., 327
 Bidwell, Charles, 252a
   Hector J., 136, 252a
   Jessie, 252a
   Peter, 252a
 Billet, Hazel E., 289
 Bishop, Nettie, 308
   Oscar, 109
   Samuel, 109
 Black, Howard (Col.), 262
 Blanchau, Elizabeth, 8, [ped: Low]
 Blizzard, Kate, 107
 Blood, Charles Kenneth, 129
   James Herbert, 129
   LeRoy, 129
   Nelson, 129
   Raymond C, 129
   Sarah Helen, 129
   William Wallace, 129
 Bodle, Chas. R., 111, 199
   David W., 199
   Howard C, 199
 Bogert, Adelaide, 152
   Adelia, 152
   Cora, 152
   John, 152
   Katie, 152
   Maude, 152
   Peter, 52, 152, 152
   Rachel, 152
 Bonnell, Benjamin W., 259, 321
   Clarence (M. D.), 112
   Cornelia, 321
   Elizabeth, 208
   Emma, 208
   Florence, 112
   Fraser C., 112
   Isaac, 95, 259
   Jennie, 259, 325
   John L., 208
   Jonathan, 147, 259
   Joseph, 259, 324
   Lansing, 259
   Mary, 208
   Myra, 259, 322
   Nancy, 321
   Sarah F., 259, 323
   Thomas J, 112
 Bradley, Armitta, 54, 156
   James B., 331
   Martin, 331
 Brando, Arthur, 127
   Catherine, 123
   George, 123
   Osmer, 123
   Pearl, 123
 Brant, Jessie, 123
 Brink, Lydia, 179[?]
   Manuel, 26
 Brinkerhoff, George, 216
   Sarah, 216
   Vera, 216
 Bristol, George, 167
 Brodhead, Garret, 75
   Josephine, 175
   Sarah, 206
 Brooks, Esther, 233
 Brouni, Corrineta, 245
 Brown, Edward A., 261, 326
   Harry, 326
   James T., 239
   John V., 103
   Marjorie, 326
   Willis LeRoy, 103, 131
 Browning, Belle Prince, 146
   Otis A., 117, 209
 Buchanan, Lewis, 168
   William, 168
 Buck, Alice, 259, 324
   William C, 259, 323
 Buckley, Bertha, 205
   Clarissa Ann, 205
   Nancy Anne, 32, 76
   Reuben, 76
   Wade, 205
 Bull, Anna C., 126
   Cornelius, 126
   Crissie, 26, 66
   Cyrus, 126
   Elizabeth Maria.^5 66
   Elizabeth M., 194
   George R., 126
   Hannah^5 R., 66
   Hulda, 126
   James, 66
   Jarvis Crissie, 126
   Jemima, 126
   John, 66
   Maria, 126
   Peter, 66
   Rosencrance C, 126
   Sarah Elizabeth, 126
   William, 66
 Bullington, Emily Jane, 251a
 Burbage, Nellie A., 306
 Burchard, Emily, 102
   Irving, 102
   Jessie, 102
   Nathan E., 102
 Burdick, Bainbridge W., 298
   Charles D., 48
   Edna, 298
   Ralph, 298
 Burkhardt, Sarah, 152
 Burnett, Anson, 109
 Burnham, Silas Henry, 256
 Burr, John C, 102
 Buskirk, Ellen, 117

 Cain, Francis, 55
 Campbell, Agusta, 302
   Archibald, 199, 302
   Ella, 238, 302
   John, 302
   Leon, 302
   Levi, 302
   May, 302
   Sarah Ann, 198, 302
 Carman, Jennie, 102
 Carmer, Isaac, 76
 Canfield, Peter G., 126
 Carey, Emily, 166
 Carnick, Harry, 161
   Mary, 161
   Webster, 161
 Carpenter, Aseneth, 150, 273
   Benjamin, 150, 209
   Catherine A., 150, 279
   David M.[M. David?], 276
   Eleanor, 108, 150, 275
   Ellen E, 276
   James, 150, 274
   John, 131
   John D., 51, 150
   John J., [?]
   John W., 150, 278
   Laura I., 277
   LeRoy, 102
   Levi, 150, 284
   Levi W., 276
   Louisa, 150, 278
   Margaret, 131, 150, 198, 209, 297
   Martha Elizabeth, 150
   Martha J., 277, 279
   Mary D., 277
   Nathan S., 277
   Oliver L., 102
   Sally, 149
   Sarah C, 276
   Simon, 150
   Solomon, 150, 277
   William, 278
   William W., 155
   Wilmot, 151, 284
 Carr, Blandina Frances, 243
   Martha, 56, 166
   Raymond, 243
   Raymond Wilbur, 243
   Ruth Dunning, 243
 Carry, John, 107
 Carter, Charles B., 108
   Josephine, 151
 Carwithen, Amy, 96
 Case, Andrew, 124
   Anna B., 124
   Benjamin,^6 124
   Blake, 124
   Blanche, 124
   Catherine^6 124
   Charles, 124
   Clarence, 126, 124
   Florence, 124
   Henry, 124
   Horton, 124
   Jacob, 122
   Jacob N., 124
   Jerry Gumaer,^6 124
   Johanna, 95
   John J., 75
   Kate, 95
   Levert, 124
   Mary, 15
   Maude, 124
   Oscar, 124
   Samuel, 124
   Sanford, 124
   Sarah, 122, 124
   Sylvester, 95
   Sylvester Benedict, 95
   Virgil, 124
   Wallace, 124
   Willard, 95, 124
   William, 95, 124
   William Nearpass, 47, 124
 Caskey, Aseneth, 210
   Clark, 111
   Olive, 238
   Sally, 67
   Samuel, 210
 Caswell, Elizabeth, 103
   Fred M., 103
 Caudebec, Abraham,^2 1
   Abraham,^3 4
   Benj.,^1, 4
   Dinah,^2 1
   Eleanor,^2 1, 7
   Elsie,^2 1
   Hendricus,^3 6
   Jacob (Jacques), [pion], [pat]
   Jacob,^1 1, [1gen]
   Jacob,^2 1
   Jacob, [deed], [pion], [ped: Guimar]
   James,^2 1, 6
   James,^3 6, 9
   James, [pion]
   Magdelena,^2 1
   Maria,^2 1, 2
   Roeloff Elting,^3 4
   Sarah,^3 4
   William,^2 1, 4
 Chamberlain, Delbert, 272
 Chambers, Dodd, 238
 Chapin, Aseneth Farnum, 138
   Benjamin Steele, 138
   Harriet Cuddeback, 256
   Helen Davies, 256
   Irving Grassie, 138, 256
   Irving Steele, 256
   Joseph Agustus, 138
   Lemuel Steele, 49, 138
   Lillian Farnum, 256
   Mary Blandina, 138
 Chapman, Adeline, 95
   Alice, 167
   Keturah, 240
   Marilla Ann, 132, 240
   Silas, 240
 Cheesbro, Hettie,^6 231
   Ira, 231
 Childs, Amy, 96
 Chubbock, Edgar S., 192
 Church, Albert C, 225
   David S.,^6 225
   Delbert, 225
   Dwight, 80, 225
   Frank, 225
   Homer Lovett, 225
   Louisa, 225
   Mary Jane, 225
   Raymond Lovett, 225
 Churchill, Frank, 266
   Nellie B., 266
 Clark, Abraham,^5 40
   Albert, 126
   Belinda, 202
   Belle, 202
   Carrie M., 40
   Clarence J., 108
   Charles M., 148
   Cole, 102
   Deborah, 108
   Elijah, 40
   Ella, 176
   Emily L., 300
   Emily S.. 198
   Hattie, 202
   Hulet D., 108
   Isaac,^5 78
   Isaac, 127
   Isaiah, 165
   Jacob,^5 78
   James, 110
   James Y., 40
   Jane, 102
   Jeptha, 70
   Johanna, 66
   Jonathan, 13, 40
   John Y., 40, 102
   Joseph, 184
   Luella, 123
   Margaret, 150
   Maria, 102
   Martha, 44, 102, 106
   Mary, 201
   Matthias, 76
   Naomi, 108
   Niven H., 108
   Samuel, 201
   Simeon, 202
   Wade, 201
   William, 102
   William C, 40
 Clase, Cornelius, [deed]
 Cleaves, Hiram T., 130
 Cleland, Mazie, 102
 Clifford, Annette Celestine, 131
 Clippenger, Edgar E., [?]
 Crissman, Arminda, 126
 Clute, Susan, 252a
   Sarah Elizabeth, 137
 Cobb, George N., 302
   Lena, 302
   Nina, 302
 Codebec, Abram^3 A., 9
   Abraham, [deed]
   Abraham,^2 9
   Annetje,^3 9
   Benj., [deed]
   Dinah,^2 8
   Dinah, [ped: Low]
   Elsie, [deed]
   Elsie,^2 3
   Esther,^3 9
   Helena, [deed]
   Heyltje,^3 58
   J., [deed]
   Jacob,^2 5
   Jacob, 35, [deed]
   Jacobus, [deed]
   Jacobus,^3 9
   Jacomyntje, [pion]
   James,^3 9
   Manual,^3 9
   Marytie, [deed]
   Naomi,^2 10
   Naomie, [deed]
   Peter,^3 9
   Petrus,^3 9
   Philip,^3 9
   William, [deed]
 Coddebeck, Jacob, [deed]
 Codebecke, James, [deed]
 Codeber, Jacob, [deed]
 Coe, Sarah A., 98
 Cogdill, Salley Jane, 95
 Coldwell, Samuel E., 240
 Cole, Amarantha, 275
   Benjamin, [?]
   Bessie, 102
   Blase, 102
   Blase, Dr., 102
   Carrie, 168
   Catherine,^6 102
   Cobus, 102
   Cornelia, 102, 200
   Diana,^6 102
   Eaton Shimer, 102
   Eleanor, 102
   Eleanor,^6 102
   Elias, 102
   Eliza, 98, 102
   Elizabeth D., 102, 200
   Frederick, 102
   Hannah Jane, 102
   Harry, 102
   Henrietta D., 102
   Isaac,^6 102
   J. Irving, 102
   Jacob,^6 102
   Jacob, 102
   Jacobus, 26
   Jacobus B., 44
   James,^6 102
   James E., 102, 114, 200
   James E., Capt., 102
   Jason, 106
   Judson, 106
   Lena,^3 2
   Leonard, 102
   Loren J., 102, 200
   Lydia, 106
   Margaret, [?]
   Margery,^5 46
   Maria,^3 57
   Maria, 2
   Martin, 26, 102, 200
   Martin V., 200
   Martin, V.^6 (Judge), 26, 200
   Martin, Dr., 102
   Mary, 102
   Merlin D., 102
   Moses Leonard, 102
   Peter,^6 102
   Petrus,^3 2
   Phoebe, 125
   Rachel, 34, 79
   Sally J., 102
   Sally Jane, 102
   Sarah, 51, 305, [ped: Westfall]
   Stelle, 102
   Thomas Van Etten, 102
   W. C., 67
   William,^2 1, 2
   William,^3 2
   William, 102
   Willis, 102
 Coleman, Mary, 150
 Collins, Constance Dorothy 146
   Gladys, 146
   Holdridge Ozro, 50, 146
   James Freymont, 146
   Rejoice Balance, 146
   Woolsey W., 146
 Condict, Grace Ann, 139, 253
 Conkling, Caroline,^5 78
   Caroline, 216
   Clara Agusta, 135, 249
   Egbert,^5 75
   Elizabeth, 177
   Elizabeth D., 289
   Emaline,^5 78
   Emaline, 214
   Hester,^5 78
   Hester, 213
   Jane,^5 78, 213
   Jane, 212
   John,^5 78
   John, 212
   John (Dr.), 249
   Louisa,^5 78
   Richard, 12, 78
 Conn, Elizabeth, 243
   Jane Isabella, 243
   Nathaniel, 243
 Connolley, Genevieve, 188
 Connor, William R., 67
 Cook, Ida, 208
 Cool, Marytje, 2
 Coolbaugh, Abram, 75
   Hannah, 91, 207
 Cooper, Arthur, 65
 Corbet, Charlotte, 96
   Cooper E., 96
   Jennie, 96
   William, 96
 Cornwall, Fannie, 102
 Corwin, Annie, 103
   Samuel, 304, 329
   Spencer, 96
 Courtright, Moses, 96
   William, 203
 Coss, Benjamin, 288
 Cowan, Dora, 156
   Ollie, 156
 Coykendall, Adelia, 169
   Adams, 152
   Catherine, [ped: Titsworth]
   Ellis M., 169
   Louisa, 169
   Oliver, 169
   Samuel, 169
   Samuel D., 56, 169
   Simeon, 169
 Cox, Elizabeth, 53
   Elizabeth,^4 21
   Emaline, 160
   Ruth, 54
   Ruth,^4 21
 Cramblatt, Florence L., 238
 Crane, Charles, 275
 Crawford, Hannah, 67
 Creveling, Anna Maria, 193, 292
 Croft, Hattie 105
 Cross, Julia A., 97
 Cudabac[(k)], Cora, 156
   Elber, 156
   Elton, 156
   Flora, 156
   Hidee, 156
   Jessie M., 156
   Matthew, 156
 Cudaback, Amanda,^5 53
   Asher T., 153
   Beardsley,^5 53
   Clark, 156
   Clinton G., 156
   Cornelia, 155
   Eleanor,^4  55
   Emma,^5 54
   Eva G., 155
   Grant, 155
   Harvey, 153
   Henry,^5 54
   Hiram, 156
   Jane, 153
   James,^4 53
   James,^5 54
   Jennie, 153
   John, 153
   John,^4 52
   John,^5 52
   John Siebold, 52, 153
   Louisa, 155
   Lydia, 154
   Lydia,^5 52
   Mary, 153
   Mary,^5 54
   Mary B., 155
   Mary Westbrook,^4 56
   Nathan,^5 53
   Nellie, [?]
   Nicholas,^5 54
   Rebecca,^5 54
   Richard,^4 54
   Richard,^5 54
   Roxana, 152
   Reuben,^5 53
   Samuel, 155
   Samuel Adams, 52, 155
   Sarah,^5 52
   Sophia, 153
   Sylvia, 152, 155
   Sylvia,^5 52
   Thomas, 156
   Vivian K., 156
   William, 153
 Cuddeback, Abram,^3 Capt., [pion], 9, 34
   Abram,^4 34, 88
   Abram,^5 43, 95, 109
   Abram, 44
   Abram J., 127, 130
   Abram J., Jr., 130
   Abram Westbrook, 97
   Abraham, 109
   Abraham,^2 [pion], [pat]
   Abraham,^3 [pion], 19, 25
   Abraham,^4 A., [?]
   Ada,^6 109
   Ada, 107
   Adaline, 209
   Adeline,^6 99
   Augusta, 287
   Augustus,^6 101
   Albert LeRoy, 129
   Alfred,^5 233
   Alice L., 315
   Alice M., 250, 317
   Allen Winter, 95
   Alva, 111
   Alva Elston, 111
   Amanda, 130
   Amelia Marvin, 250
   Ann,^5 79
   Ann Eliza, 240
   Ann Maria, 135
   Anna, 111
   Anna Belle, 123
   Anna Mills, 248a
   Aseneth,^5 83, 134
   Aseneth J.,^6 123
   Blanche, 111, 136, 240, 254
   Blandina, 129, 135
   Blandina Maria,^6 251
   Benj.,^2 [pion], [pat]
   Benj.,^3 20
   Benjamin,^4 [pion], 20, 49
   Benj.,^5 47, 81
   Benjamin,^6 241
   Benjamin, 129, 132, 137, 298, [ped: Van Etten]
   Benjamin E., 69, 249, 313
   Benjamin Elting, 136
   Benjamin Elting,^6 249
   Benjamin^7 Franklin, 95
   Betsy,^5 88
   Blake, 130
   Burt, 123
   Caroline, 132
   Caroline Lee, 101
   Caroline Martha, 249
   Carrie, 123, 230
   Carrie E., 111
   Catherine, 43, 44, 45, 95, 100, 107, 130
   Catherine,^5 47, 48, 117, 132
   Catherine,^6 121
   Catherine E.,^7 240
   Catherine Duboise, 97
   Chad, 109
   Charlotte,^5 47, 122
   Charlotte,^6 95, 97
   Charlotte, 95
   Charles, 123, 237, 312
   Charles Burrel, 129
   Charles H., 111
   Christiana, 99
   Christie E., 111
   Clara A., 313
   Clarence, 123
   Clarence Simeon, 231
   Clement, 107
   Clinton G., 125
   Cornelius,^4 19, 45
   Cornelius,^6 98, 100, 109, 111
   Cornelius, 248a
   Cornelius Elting, 135, 248a
   Cornelius Whitlock, 131
   Cynthia,4 20, 51
   Cynthia,^5 48, 128
   Cynthia, 100, 312
   Daniel, 43, 76
   Daniel,^5 121
   Daniel,^6 99, 123
   Daniel Wesley, 156
   David, 129, 223
   David,^5 89
   Dayton, 106
   Deborah, 79
   DeWitt,^4 34
   DeWitt, 217
   DeWitt Clinton,^5 79
   Diana,^6 105
   Dina, 130
   Dora,^6 233
   Edgar, 97
   Edgar G. (Dr.), 250, 315
   Edgar L., 156
   Edna, 100
   Edna M., 123
   Edward Elting, 137
   Edwin, 230
   Egbert, 230, 231
   Egbert,^4 34
   Egbert^4 D., 81
   Egbert Guerdon,^5 81, 85, 231
   Eleanor,^4 21
   Eleanor Ann, 249
   Eli, 129
   Elida Frieda, 123
   Eliza,^5 86
   Eliza,^6 106
   Eliza Jane,^5 79
   Elizabeth,^5 48, 125, 226
   Elizabeth^7, 250, 316
   Elizabeth, 110, 125, 126, 130
   Elizabeth,^5 80
   Elizabeth Ann, 127
   Ella Maude, 129
   Ellen, 137, 255
   Ellen,^5 54
   Ellen S., 81, 231
   Ellens^5 S., 85
   Elmeda M., 111
   Elmira Van Noy, 77
   Elsi,^6 97
   Elting, 309, [ped: Elting]
   Elting, 97, 135, 248a
   Elting,^5 [pion], 49
   Elting^7 241
   Emaline, 97
   Emily,^5 84
   Enos,^5 79
   Enos, 218
   Emma,^6 230
   Emma, 101
   Emma Sanford, 101
   Esther,^3 25
   Esther,^4 19, 35
   Esther, 7, 33, 77, 130, 131, [ped: Guimar]
   Esther,^5 86
   Eugene A., 223
   Eugenia Delia, 121
   Ezekiel, 43
   Ezekiel,^6 98
   Fannie, 95
   Florence E., 129
   Florence Fay, 123
   Florence, 127
   Floyd, 111
   Frances, 95, 287
   Francis,^7 [?]
   Frank,^7 95
   Frank, 100
   Frank E, 250, 314
   Franklyn, 129
   Fred, 107, 123
   George,^5 48, 131
   George, 97, 123, 127, 129, 131, 150
   Geo. D., 223
   George E., 127
   Geo. W.,^5 79
   Gertrude, 127
   Gilbert,^6 99
   Gladys, E., 123
   Grace, 109, 111, 265
   Grove,^6 233
   Hannah, [ped: Swartout]
   Hannah,^4 34
   Hannah,^5 49, 79
   Hannah,6 95
   Hannah J., 123
   Harmonas,^5 43, 47, 120
   Harmonas,^6 95
   Harold C, 129
   Harold J., 123
   Harry, 111
   Harry, 248a
   Harvey,^5 80
   Hattie, 97
   Hattie, 111
   Hazel, 123
   Hazel, P., 123
   Helen, 98, 130
   Henrietta,^5 88
   Henry,^4 20, 48
   Henry, 127, 129
   Henry G., 131, 265
   Herbert, 97
   Hester, 95
   Hester,^4 34, 78
   Hester,^5 44
   Horace, 97
   Howard, 240, 309
   Hulda, 46, 95
   Hulda,^6 96
   Hulda,^5 48, 126
   Ida, 137
   Ina, 109, 123
   Irene, 129
   Irving, 95, 106, 156
   Irving,^6 237
   Isaac,^5 44, 107
   Isaac, 107
   Isaiah,^4 34, 79
   Jacob, 77, 105, 175a
   Jacob,^4 34, 80
   Jacob,^5 44, 86, 235
   Jacob,^5 Jr., 105
   Jacob,^6 107, 111
   Jacob G., 44
   Jacob G.,^4 19
   Jacob Gumaer,^4 44
   Jacob G.,^5 48, 127
   Jacob H., 127
   Jacob M., 121
   James, 45, 49, 132
   James,^3 [pion], 21, 36
   James,^4 21, 34
   James,^5 43, 86, 100
   James,^6 95
   James Bennett, 129
   James Chapman,^7 240
   James David,^7 95
   James Joshua, 123
   Jane, 105, 132, 133, 223, 225
   Jane,^5 47, 49, 80, 81, 133, 225, 228
   Jane,^6 95, 109, 132
   Jane,^7 95
   Jane W.,^5 95, 232
   Jemima,^4 19, 20, 46, 50
   Jemima,^5 44, 45, 47, 48
   Jemima, 43, 47, 48
   Jemima, 99, 100, 105, 111, 126, 127, 138, [ped: Nearpass],
     [ped: Westfall]
   Jennie,^5 102
   Jennie, 106, 111, 123
   Jennie, 237
   Jessie,^6 123
   Jessie, 123
   Jesyns,^4 20
   Job, 99
   John,^4 21
   John,^5 87
   John,^6 123
   John, 97, 105, 119, 120, 121
   John D., 131
   John Elting, 188, 249
   John L., 120
   Joseph,^5 44, 106
   Joseph Whitlock, 241
   Julia, [?], 240
   Julia,^5 79
   Julia D., 315
   Katherine, 101
   Kenneth D., 111
   Lafayette,^5 81, 230
   Lata, 123
   Laura,^5 81, 229
   Leah, 105
   Lefevre, 217
   Legrand, 123
   Lena, 123
   Letitia, 130
   Levi,^4 20, 34
   Levi,^5 47, [?], 83, 123, 132
   Lewis^5 47, 101
   Lewis,^6 240
   Lewis, 43, 101, 105, 129, 132, 309
   Libbie, 123
   Livia, 79
   Locke,^5 86
   Louisa,^4 34
   Lulu, 109
   Luther L., 95
   Lydia,^5 49
   Lydia,^6 234
   Lydia, 129, 139, 200
   Maggie, 123, 130
   Margaret,^5 43, 45, 47, 86, 96, 110, 119
   Margaret, 49, 97, 125, [?], 130, 135
   Margaret,^6 98, 123
   Margret Alice, 131
   Margaret Ellen, 107
   Maria,^5 45, 79, 112
   Maria, 59, 105, 129
   Maria J., 129
   Marion E., [?]
   Martha,^5 45, 113
   Martha, 99
   Martha,^6 223
   Martha Elizabeth, 131
   Martha Jane, 95, 111
   Martin, 97, 123
   Martin,^5 82
   Martin V., 130
   Mary,^5 80, 82, 86, 223
   Mary,^6 98, 106, 237
   Mary Elizabeth, 155
   Mary Ellen, 131
   Mary J., 95
   Mary Jane, 107
   Mary Thompson, 101
   Mary Van Keuren, 97
   Mary Westbrook,^4 21
   Mary, 95, 97, 99
   Mary, 107, 123, 309
   Mary, 99, 223
   Maude,^7 95
   Milvin, 123
   Minerva,^6 97
   Minnie, 109, 230
   Morton S., 231
   Moses,^4 34, 82
   Moses,^5 86, 235
   Myron Whitlock, 241
   Myrtell, 111
   Naomi,^5 44, 108
   Nathan,^5 86, 237
   Nathanil, 99
   Nellie, 248a
   Nicholas,^5 156
   Norman,^5 79
   Olive,^6 109
   Olive, 95
   Oliver, 123
   Orange B., 123
   Osmer Beach, 111, 123, 287
   Paul Bennett, 129
   Pearl,^6 233
   Pearl, 123
   Peter,^3 [pion], 35
   Peter,^4 35, 96
   Peter,^5 86, 235
   Peter,^4 Col., [pion], 99
   Peter G.,^4 19
   Peter G.,^5 43, 45, 111
   Peter G., 111, 127, 198
   Philenda Ann, 250
   Philip,^4 34
   Philip Bevier, 135
   Porter,^6 236
   Reta Gladys, 123
   Richard,^4  21
   Roberta, 123
   Rosetta,^6 121
   Ruth, 111
   Ruth A., 95
   Ruami,^5 82
   Saffrein, 127
   Samuel,^5 43
   Samuel,^6 235
   Samuel, 47, 109, 209
   Samuel Mills, 183, 201, 312
   Sally, 124
   Sally,^5 45, 47
   Sally Ann,^5 88
   Sarah, 46
   Sarah,^3 17
   Sarah,^5 44, 104
   Sarah,^6 97
   Sarah Catherine, 95, 241
   Selah, 99
   Seth,^5 84
   Silas, 95
   Simeon,^4 34, 85
   Simeon,^5 47
   Simeon, 61, 129
   Simeon Frank, 129
   Simon,^5 47, 121
   Solomon, 105
   Solomon V., 111, 111, 199
   Solomon Van Fleet, 129
   Stephen, 129
   Syntje, [ped: Westfall]
   Theodore, 95
   Theron,^5 82
   Thomas, 95, 123, 129, 137
   Thomas,^5 49, 95
   Thomas,^7 95
   Thylo, 237
   Verna,^7 95
   Ward, 123
   Warren, 100
   Washington, 105
   Wickham, 107
   Wilbur E., 310
   Wilfred, 111
   William,^2 [pion], [pat]
   William,^4 20, 47
   William,^5 43, 97
   William, 109, 119
   William, 106, 123
   William, [ped: Van Inwegen]
   William,^6 95, 109
   William Abram,^4 19, 95
   Wm. Abram,^4 Col, 43, 95
   William D, 107
   William H, 129
   William Herman, Judge, 101
   William Louis,^6 135, 250, [ped: St. John]
   William Louis, 2nd, 314
   Willis D. (Dr), 223
   Willis D, Jr., 223
   Willis F, 231
   Yancey, 97
 Cudebec, Adelbert, 118
   Agnes, 118
   Albert B., 118
   Alice, 118
   Benjamin,^5 118
   Benjamin,^6 118
   Bertha, 118
   Cevira, 118
   Clarence L, 118
   Clinton, 118
   Clyde L, 118
   Elias,^6 118
   Ernest, 118
   Elsie, 118
   Estella, 118
   Fern, 118
   Floyd, 118
   Frank, 118
   Frank F., 118
   Fred, 118
   George,^6 118
   George W, 118
   Harriet, 118
   Hattie, 118
   Helen, 118
   Jacob M., 118
   Jemima, 118, 118
   Lea, 118
   Levi, 118
   Nancy,^6 118
   Nettie, 118
   Mary, 118, 118
   Miriam, 118
   Orlando, 118
   Rosa, 118
   Rosetta, 118
   Roy J, 118
   Vitellus, 118
   William,^6 118
 Cudney, Rebecca, 96
 Currie, Alexander, 111
 Cutler, Bella, 63, 190

 Dailey, Jennie, 232
 Damor, Anne, [ped: Guimar]
 Davies, Elizabeth Barbara, 138, 256
 Davis, Adelbert S, 121
   Cornelia, 230
   James, 118
   Samuel G, 153
 Dawson, Henry H, 155
 Deans, Anna, 102
   Carl, 102
   Dwight, 102
   Harry, 102
   J. William, 102
 De Camp, Alfred H, 140
 Decker, Abraham, 129
   Agustus, 275
   Catherine, 39, 91
   Christiana, 43
   Daniel, 26, 66
   Ellen, 275
   Eliza, 44, 106, 129
   Eliza Burrel, 129
   Emma, 175
   George, 122
   Georgia, 188
   Hannah, 50, 69, 149, [ped: Van Etten]
   Hendrick, [deed], [ped: Titsworth]
   Henry, [pion]
   Hulda, 96
   Johannes, Major, 150
   James R., 66
   John, 275
   John B., 209
   John T., 259, 325
   Lena,^5 66, 193
   Lillie, 108, 209
   Magdalena Jans, 32
   Margaret, 150
   Minnie, 123
   Neltje,^2 1, 6
   Rachel Williams, 12, 39
   Roanna,^5 66
   Sarah, [ped: Titsworth]
   Tuttle, 275
 De Duyster, Cornelius, [deed]
 Dee, Fannie, 156
   Margarette E, 331
 Dekator, Sarah, 96
 De Mill, Anthony, [1gen]
 Denigan, Lewis, 118
 Dennis, Andrew J., 125
 Denton, Harry, 107
   Harry C, 107
   Jennie L., 250, 315
   Louis A., 107
   Walter Edgar, 107
   William, Dr., 306
 De Puy, Abraham,^4 31
   Benj.,^4 31
   Benj., [pat]
   Martynas,^4 31
   Moses,^3 31
   Moses, 31
   Sarah, 122
 De Voe, Henry, 211
 DeWitt, Alexander, 285
   Anna, 251
   Aseneth, 151, 283
   Blandina, [ped: Westfall]
   Benjamin, 151, 282
   Catherine, 108
   Catherine Almeda, 251
   Charity, 33, [ped: Guimar]
   Charles, 183
   Clinton, 151
   Daisy, 129
   Daniel S., 108
   Daniel, 136, 251a
   Elizabeth, 34, 80
   Evi, 251a
   George, 183
   Hannah,^4 88
   Hannah, 35
   Harvey, 183
   Hattie, 251a
   Ida, 251a
   Jacob, 151, 285
   Jacob Rutsen, [pat]
   Jane, 34, [ped: Van Inwegen]
   Jennie, 251a
   John, 51, 151
   Libbie, 281
   Lodewyke, 41
   Lucy, 251a
   Mabel, 183
   Manning, 151
   Margaret, 28, 35, 72, 151, 281
   Maria A., 15
   Minnie, 251a
   Moses, 151, 281
   Nettie, 251a
   Olive, 151, 284
   Olivy, [ped: Titsworth]
   Peter Swartwout, 251a
   Prudence, 301
   Reuben, 202
   Sarah Ann, 183
   Simeon, 151
   Traaje, 103
   William, 183
   William H., 183
 Dingman, Abram Coolbaugh, Dr., 75
   Albert S., 174
   Andrew,^5 75
   Andrew S., 75
   Cornelia,^5 75
   Daniel (Judge), 32, 75
   Daniel W.,^5 75
   Evi Sayre, 75
   Frances C., 174
   Jacob, 174
   Jane, 75
   Leah E., 174
   Margaret,^5 75
   Margaret A., 75
   Margaret J., 174
   Martin Westbrook, 58
   Martin Westbrook.^5 75
   Mary, 75
   Mary D., 174
   Priscilla M., 174
   Sarah W., 174
   Solomon H., 174
   Susan E., 75
   Walter V., 72
   William H., 75
 Dimmick, Blanche, 174
   Edward, 174
   Grace, 174
   Jacob H., 174
   Lea Lucinda, 174
   Lucy, 174
   Maria, 174
   Mary T., 174
   Milo H., 174
   Oliver S., 58, 174
   Priscilla, 174
   Russel, 174
   Samuel, 174
   Samuel Otis, 174
   Seward, 174
   William H., 174
 Dircks, Magdelena, 3
 Dodge, Eleanor, 249
   John E., 64
 Doll, Diotta, 116
 Dolph, Ada, 301
   Benjamin, 301
   Bertha, 103, 301
   John M., 301
 Donaldson, Susan, 99
   Wm., 47
 Dorr, Ada, 210
   George, 210
   Percy, 210
 Dorrance, Hariet, 96
 Doyle, Agnes, 95
   Clement, 95
   Frank, 95
   Perry, 95
   Thomas, 95
 Drake, Archibald, 203
   Harriet, 100
   Nellie, 181
   Susan, 191
   William C, 130
 Drymple, Alice, 275
 Du Bois, Abraham, 4
   Magdalena, [ped: Elting]
   Sarah, 4, [ped: Elting]
 Dunn, Jefferson, 160
   Mary, 150, 277
 Dunning, Benjamin F., 133, 243
   Henrietta Barstow, 243
   Jane Cuddeback,^ 243
   Richard, 118
 Durland, Ann, 297
   Elmeda, 111
   George L., 108
 Duryea, John, 216
 Dusinberry, Antoinette, 102
   Susan, 239
 Dutcher, Henry, Rev., 108
   Ida, 108
   Jessie, 108

 Earll, Elsie B., 231
 Earnist, L. L., 106
 Edmunds, Herbert, 99
 Edsall, Eleanor, 96
   Florence, 102
   Fred Linn. 102
   Henry, Dr., 96
   Herbert, 102
   Jennie, 96
   Josephine, 96
   Linn, 102
   Mary, 96
   Norma, 96
 Ellis, Portia, 258
 Elmendorf, Blandina, [ped: Elting]
   Conrat, [deed]
 Elston, Anna Haines, 111
 Elting, Ann Bevier, 49, 135
   Cornelius, [ped: Elting]
   Cornelius C, Rev., [ped: Elting]
   Elting, Jan, [ped: Elting]
   Jemima,^2 1, 4
   Josias, [ped: Elting]
   Roelif, [pion], 4, [ped: Elting]
 Emory, Nettie, 123
 Emerson, Alicia Jane, 306
   Gouverneur, 306
   Gove, Dr., 307
   H. E., M. D., 306
   Madge, 306
   Nellie, 210, 306
   Vincent, Dr., 206, 306
 Ennes (Enness), Alexander, 26
   Alexander,^4 29, 74
   Alexander,^5 65
   Benj., 37
   Cobus,^4 29
   Daniel,^3 6
   Daniel, 25, 29, 65
   Daniel,^5 74
   Elizabeth,^4 29
   Esther,^5 65
   James,^4 29
   Lena,^5 65
   Lena, 177, 286
   Margaret,^3 22
   Phoebe, 71, 204
   Sally Ann, 210
   Sally Ann,^4 29
   Sally Ann.^5 74
   William, 29
 Everitt, Caty J., 193, 291
   Charles, 208, 294
   Daniel D., 193, 292
   Edward, 293
   Fannie A., 293
   George, 294
   Hannah Jennie, 114
   Harold, 292
   Harvey C, 292
   Hazel, 208, 294
   Isaac J., 193, 293
   James A., 193
   John A., 292
   John D., 66, 193, 293
   John E., 294
   Martin, 294
   Martin C, 193, 294
   Mary, 294
   Mary E., 292
   Mary F., 295
   Minnie, 293
   Murlin, 295
   Nellie M., 292
   Roanna D., 292
   Robert, 293
   Robert E., 295
   Robert H., 193, 295
   Roland D., 292
   Sarah J., 292
   Willis, 293
 Everson, Josephine, 328
 Eura, Clarence, 118
   George, 118
   Jemima, 118
 Eustick, Abbie, 62

 Falk, Henry I., 102
 Farnum, Abigal Ann, 134
   Benjamin Cuddeback, 134
   Catherine Cuddeback, 134
   Chloe, 134
   Delia McCormick, 246
   Gertrude, 245
   Henry Harrison,^6 134, 247
   Lizzie,^6 134, 248
   Mary Gertrude, 246
   Mary Jane,^6 134, 245
   Peter, 134
   Russell Henry, 245
   Samuel Bernard, 49, 134, 246
   Waldo Beattie (Dr.), 247
   Wm. Miller, 246
 Farrell, Frank, 95
   James, 95
 Fecart, Elizabeth, 75
 Fergusson, Emeline, 110
   Rufus, 195
 Fields, Aaron, 161
   Eva, 161
   John, 161
   Laura, 161
   Nellie, 293
 Finch, Catherine, 195
   David G., 68, 195
   Galen, 195
 Fingmaster, Frank, 239
 Fisher, Grace, 247
   Jane, 204, 304
   Joseph, 210
 Flemming, Burt, 122
   John, 122
 Fletcher, Benj., Col., [deed], [deed], [deed]
 Foote, Rudy, 34
 Force, Elizabeth, 169
   David, 55, 159
   Lorenzo, 159
   Morris, 159
 Forfor, James, 265
   Lulu, 265
   Vernon, 265
 Foster, William, 45
 Frevenmoet, Antje,^5 38
   Dorothea,^5 38
   Hyltje,^5 38
   Johannes Casperus, Rev., 12, 38
   Maria,^5 38
 Fraser, Edith Frances, 112
 Fredenstein, John L., 104
 Fuller, James B., 160
   John, 160
   Margaret, 160
   Mattie Maria, 133, 242
 Furth, Willard 97

 Gaasbeek, Abraham, [deed]
 Gaines, Samuel M., 262
 Gardner, Annie G.. 102, 200
   Reuben F., 200
 Garlock, Melissa, 140
 Garretson, Fannie B., 174
   Gilbert S., Rev., 174
   Harry, 174
 Gay, Betsey, 236
 Geege, Jane, 41
 Gemare, Peter, [pat]
 Gere, Marshall, 297
 Gibbs, Whitfield, 203
 Gillett, Almond, 225
   Grace, 225
   John. 225
 Gilson, Clarence A., 123
 Golden, Emily, 117
 Goldsmith, Oliver N., 103
 Gonsales, Maria, 12, [?], 39, [?]
 Goodale, Bayard, 328, 331
   Edna, 331
   Sarah Augusta, 99
 Gordon, Helen, 239
   Levi, 123
   Martha, 123
   Sallie, [?]
   Samuel, 123
 Graft, George, 259, 322
   Rose, 322
 Graham, Belle, 103
   Eleanor, 95
   Emaline J., 97
   Hattie, 132
   James, 96
   Mary, 96, 133
   Thomas, [?], [?]
 Grandin, Theodore, 207
 Graves, Adelia, 152
   Francis, 152
   George, 152
   Alyra, 152
 Green, Alice Caroline, 317
   Elizabeth Ann, 316
   George G., 317
   George M., 250, 317
   Harold E., Rev., 250, 316
   Harold Edgar, 316
   Jane E, 50
   Marie E., 199
   William C, 316
 Greenleaf, Jane, 129
 Griffin, Alice, 167
   Deborah, 124
   George, 67
   Harry, 167
   James, 167
   Joseph, 111
   Melvinia, 111
   Philah, 167
 Griswold, Archibald, 154
   Alice, 154
   Carrie, 154
   Charles, 154
   Claude, 154
   Cudaback, 154
   Eber, 154
   George, 154
   Harvey, 154
   Jessie B., 154
   Mary, 154
   Ray C., 154
   Roxie, 154
   Socrates, 52, 154
   Sylvia, 154
   Theda, 154
   Walter, 154
   William, 154
 Grosswein, Henrietta, 286
 Grover, Amanda, 50, 141
 Guernsey, Deborah, [ped: St. John]
 Guimar, Abraham, 48
 Guimair, Peter, [pion], [ped: Guimar]
   Pierre, [ped: Guimar]
 Guimard, Peter, [deed], [deed], [deed]
 Gumaer, Abraham, 33
   Adeline, 96
   Augustus, 103
   Alexander, 96
   Alice, 96, 96, 103
   Andrew Augustus, 103
   Andrew J., 103
   Andrew Jackson, 77
   Ann, 96
   Anna, 96, 96, 122
   Annie, 9, 86, 99, 235, [ped: Swartout]
   Annie E., 103
   Bennett. 96[?]
   Burt, 122
   Catherine, 96, 96
   Cecil E., 103
   Charity, 69, 197
   Charles C., 96
   Charlotte,^6 96
   Charlotte, 122, 124
   Chauncey I., 103
   Christiana, 96
   Cynthia, 51, 147
   Cyrus, 96
   DeWitt, 96
   Dolph, 103, 301
   Edsall, 96, 96
   Eliza, [?], [?]
   Elizabeth, 96, 103
   Ellen, 122
   Elmer, 122
   Esther, 48
   Esther,^3 4, 19
   Esther,^4 20
   Esther Harriet,^5 77
   Esther H., 103
   Eunice, 42, 122
   Ezekiel, [pion], 33, 99, 103, [ped: Guimar]
   Ezekiel,^3 8
   Ezekiel,^5 P., 77
   Ezekiel P., 103
   Florence, 96
   Frank, 103
   Franklin P., 103
   Franklyn Peter, 103
   Fred, 96, 96
   George, 301
   George,^6 96
   George S., 103
   Georgiana, 103
   Hannah E., 122
   Harmonas, 122, 210
   Harriet, 96
   Henry, 122
   Hiram, 96
   Hulda, 96
   Hulda,^6 96
   Isaac, 96, 122
   Isaac Elmer, 122
   Jacob, 43, 96, 96, 103
   Jacob,^6 96
   Jacob Cuddeback Elting, 103
   Jacob DeWitt, 96
   Jacob Elting,^5 77
   James,^6 96
   Jane, 96, 122
   Jane,^6 96
   Jane Whitehead, 42
   Jemima, 69, 111, 122, 198
   Jennie, 103
   Jerry, 47, 122, 122
   John, 96, 96, 122
   Laertes W.. 103
   La Monte, 96
   Leander, 96
   Leonard, 96
   LeRoy, 103
   Louis,^6 96
   Lewis, 96, 122, 185[?]
   Maggie Esther, 103
   Margaret, 96, 122, 210
   Margaret,^6 96, 122
   Marie Louise, 103
   Martha, 96, 103
   Mary, 96, 96
   Mary Ellen, 103
   Mary Holbert, 103
   Mary Louise, 103
   Mary S., 103
   Morgan,^5 77
   Morgan, 103
   Naomi,^6 103
   Naomi,^5 77
   Olive, 122
   Peter, [deed], [deed], [pat], 10, 19, 33, 103, [?]
   Peter,^6 96
   Peter E., 44, 102, [ped: Guimar]
   Peter E.,^4 33, 77
   Peter G., 42
   Peter Louw, 102
   Peter Louw,^5 77
   Pieter, [ped: Guimar]
   Pierre Laertes, 103
   Sarah Catherine. 103
   Sarah Eleanor, 122
   Sarah J., 103
   Spencer, 96
   Thomas, 96
   William, 96, 96, 122
   William C.,^6 122
   William E., 122
   William Irving, 103
 Gumhl, Thomas, [deed]
 Gunderman, Eliza, 123
 Gunnison, Royal A., 302

 Hadsall, Carrie E., 130
 Hall, Ada, 171
   Benjamin, 151, 283
   Eliza, 170
   Jennie, 283
   Louis, 283
   Martha, 86, 237
   Susan, 56
 Halstead, D. S., 119
   Mary Eugenia, 103
   Oscar, 103
   Sarah, 119
   Smith, 119
 Hamilton, Frances, 153
   Jane, 52, 153
 Hammond, David, 208
   Fred, 208
   Mittie, 265
 Hancock, Sylvia, 155
 Hansen, Marytje, 2, [ped: Westfall]
 Harden, Helen C., 250, 314
 Harding, Benjamin, 166
   Byron, 104
   Fred, 104
   Elisha O., 98
   Raymond, 104
 Hartman, Charlotte, 148, 263
   Sarah, 148, 267
 Hasbrouk, Esther, 19, 33, 103, [ped: Guimar]
 Hatch, Abbie, 118
   Marietta, 140
   Warner, 224
 Haut, Arthur, 213
 Havens, Annie, 160
   Barret D., 55, 160, 160
   Carrie, 160
   Elizabeth, 160
   Harriet, 168
   Hattie, 160
   Jennie, 160
   John, 160
   Otis, 160
   Robert, 160
   Samuel, 160
   William, 160
 Hazlett, Elizabeth, 67
 Hebert, Edith Hannah, 253
   Ellen Swartwout, 25
   Henry D., 136, 253
 Herbert, Joseph, 238
 Heindell, Alice, 128
 Helm, Elizabeth, 19
   Maria, 32
 Henderson, Charlotte, 96
   Fred, 96
   Henry, 96
   Louisa, 96
   Smith, 96
 Hennings, Frances H., 103
 Hess, C. Fred, 302
 Hewett, Ernest, 118
   Mary, 118
   William, 118
 Higbie, Clara, 170
   Lauterman, 170
   William, 170
 Hilferty, Amanda, 177, 288
 Hiles, Margaret Matilda,^5 55
   Margaret M., 164
   Matilda, 157
 Hill, Bessie, 112
   Leander, 166
   May H., 112
   Robert (Rev.), 112
   William, 112
 Hiller, May C, 273
 Hilt, Marie, 223
 Hine, Anna, 144
    Frank, 144[?]
 Hitchcock, Frederick, 152
   Harvey, 152
   Richard, 152
 Hodgkins, John, 95
 Hoagland, Arthur, 223
   Chas., 223
   Earnest, 223
   Eliza, 225
   Fannie, 223
   Ralph, 223
   William, 223
 Hoff, Elizabeth, 128
 Hoffman, Albert, 156
   Phoebe, 123
 Holbert, Ada, 278
 Holcott, John, 123
 Hollenbeck, Josephine, 195
 Holley, Carrie, 123
   Hannah, 66
 Holmes, Horace, 97
   Nellie, 97
 Honan, Dan, [deed]
 Hooper, Jennie, 109
 Hopkins, Anna D.. 328
 Horn, Emma W., 296
 Hornbeck, Abraham,^3 7
   Abraham,^4 25
   Abraham,^5 64[?]
   Adella, 188
   Alice, 184
   Allen W.. 305
   Belinda,^5 58
   Belinda, 75, 174
   Belle, 176
   Benj.,^3 7, [?]
   Benj.,^4 24, 25, 63
   Benjamin,^5 63
   Benjamin, [?], 190
   Bertha, 102
   Betsey,^4 26[?]
   Blandina, 48, 1
   Caroline, 184
   Clarissa,^5 62, 182
   Catherine,^4 26
   Cornelius,^4 25, 64
   Cornelius, 203
   Delia,^5 62
   Delia, 184, 189
   Diana,^4 26
   Ebenezer, 203
   Edna May, [?], 249
   Eleanor,^3 7, 29
   Eleanor,^4 [?]
   Eleanor, 183
   Elmer, 188
   Elson, 188
   Eliza,^5 64
   Elsie, 190
   Elizabeth,^3 7, 203
   Emma, 112, [?]
   Esther,^5 64
   Esther, 192
   Evaline, 184
   Evert,^2 1, 7
   Evert,^3 7, 22
   Evert, 19, 62, 184, 305
   Frank, 305
   Frazier, 305
   George, 188
   George Y., 176
   Hannah Jane, 176
   Harold, 112
   Harriet,^5 62
   Harrison, 112
   Harvey, 305
   Henry,^3 10
   Hester Ann, 62, 185
   Hulet, 108
   Ida K., 188
   Irvina, 112[?]
   Jacob, 10, 45, 188
   Jacob, 112, 112
   Jacob,^4 24, 58, 62
   Jacob,^5 62
   Jacob, Dr., 71, 203
   Jacob E., 203
   James,^3 7, 22
   James,^5 64
   James, 191
   Jay, 108
   Jemima,^4 25, 65
   Jemima,^5 64
   John,^5 60
   John, 209
   John W., 203
   Joseph,^3 7, 23
   Joseph,^4 25
   Joseph,^5 60
   Joseph, 102, 176
   Laura, 187
   Laura,^5 62
   Leone, 188
   Lodewyke,^2 1, 10
   Louis, 183
   Louis,^5 62
   Lydia, 23
   Lydia,^3 7, 28
   Lydia,^4 61
   Maggie E., 203
   Marcena, 305
   Margaret, 203
   Margaret,^3 7, 27
   Margaretta, 112, 290
   Maria,^3 7, 10, 26
   Maria,^5 58, 62
   Maria, 175, 186, 203
   Martha,^6 112
   Mary, 183, 184
   Mary,^5 62
   Mary,^6 112
   Mary E., 289
   Mary Elizabeth, 112
   Mary Jane, 62
   Obadiah, 305
   Phoebe, 175a
   Richard, 188
   Roanna,^4 26
   Ross, 305
   Saffrein, 23
   Saffrein,^4 60
   Sally, 203
   Samuel W., 108, 203
   Sara, [ped: Titsworth]
   Sarah, 183
   Wells, 119
   Wilhamena, 190
   Willhamena, 63
   William, 176, 188
   William H., 190
   William H.,^5 63
   William P., 176
   Hopkins, Emaline, 124
   Deborah, 124[?]
 Horton, Abigail, [ped: St. John]
   Mary, 108
 Hossey, Judith, 18
 House, Eliza, 274
   Elizabeth, 150
 Howard, DeWitt, 118
   Edward, 142
   Franklin, 142
   Mabel, 142
   Mark, 142
   Martha, 142
   Oscar, 142
   Orson, 142
   S. Vannette, 142
   William, 50, 142
 Howe, Clarence, 253
 Howes, Claude, 154
   Harold, 154
 Hoyt, Isadore, 98
 Hughes, Georgiana, 200
 Hulse, Charles, 163
   Grace H.. 163
   Henrietta. 163
   Ida M.. 163
   Minnie G.. 163
   Thomas, 163
   Humphrey, Jane, 180
 Hunt, A. M., 118
   Lois H. Cudebec, 118
   Jefferson Dunning, 104
   Mary Cudebec, 118
   Samuel, 104
 Hunziger, Henry, 213
   Louise, 213
 Huston, O. P., Dr., 275

 Ingersol, Harry, 162
   Wesley, 162

 Jackson, Ann, 147, 262
   Emma, 241
   Frank, 298
   Job V., 298
   Mary, 119
   Mary E., 310
   Robert, 98
   William, 298
 Jacobs, Jannetje, [ped: Emigrant]
 Jagger, Anson A., 122
   John, 210
   Julia W., 210
   Minnie, 319
 Jamisson, David, [deed], [deed], [pat]
 Jans, Aneke, 15
 Jansen, Hendrick, [deed]
 Jenkins, Louise, 184
   Wymand, 184
 Johnson, Alexander T., 49, 133, 244
   Alexander T., Jr., 244
   Blandina Ellen, 133, 243
   Carrie Barstow,^7 244
   Harry S., 188
   Lyman Hoyt, 133
   Mary,^7 242
   Thomas Benjamin,^6 133, 244
   William E. (Dr.), 133, 242
 Johnston, James, 133
   William, 133
 Jones, Ann, 99
   Edward Pierce, 99
   Emily, 207, 308
 Jordan, Florence, 112
   Jacob, 112
   Robert, Jr., 112
   Robert, 112
   Kane, John F., Dr., 98
   Honora, 124

 Keefer, Esther, 138
 Kees, Frederica Christiana, 114
 Kelley, Jennie, 209
 Kennedy, Grace, 111
 Ketcham, Caroline, 124
   Delia, 157
   Eleanor, 157, [?]
   Elizabeth, 157
   Evi, 55, 157
   Floyd, 157
   George, 157, 151
   Jerry, 157
   Harriet, 157
   James F., 157
   Margaret, 157
   Martin, 157
   Nettie, 157
   Samuel, 157
   Thomas, 157
   William, 157
 Ketchum, Charlotte, 96
   Mahlon, 95
 Kerr, Carrie, 239, 292
   Frank, 239
 Kierstede, Wyntje, 26
 Kilpatrick, Charity, 209
 Kilsby, Carrie, 75
   J. W., 75
   Victoria, 75
 Kingsley, Marion Louise, 244
 Kinnie, Fred B., 275
 Kipp, Etta, 129
   James, 179
 Klaer, Bertha, 126
   John, 126
 Knapp, Annie, 97
 Knight, Anna, 275
 Kortright, Mary, 103
 Kratz, Barnhart, 67
 Kreuger, Tillie, 200
 Krieg, Helen, 129
 Kronk, A. C., 129
 Kuykendall, Catherine, 118
   Catherine,^5 95
   Katherine, 43
   Hannah, 43
 Kyte, Fannie, 295
   Mamie E., 156

 Lambert, David, 41
   Joseph T., Dr., 276
 Lane, Nellie, 161
 Langdon, Emmet, 108
 Lauterman, Claude, 170
   Cora, 170
   Ernest, 170
   Tracy, 170
   William G., 170
 Lattimore, John, 39, 75
   John,^6 94
 Langton, George, 297
   Lauren, 102
 Laurent, Margaret, 122
   Victor P., 122
 Laurie, Grace, 118
   Madge, 118
   William, 118
 Lawrence, Emma, 238
 Lawringe, Amelia, 121
 Lawton, Charles, 140
   Edwin F., 140
   Edwin Foster, 140
   Hattie, 140
   Laura, 140, 229
   Miriam, 140
   Wilbur Austin, 140
   Wilbur A., 140
 Layton, Caty, 291
   Christie, 176
   Cornelia, 291
   Everitt, 291
   Fred, 291
   Jason, 291
   John B., 66, 193, 291
   Joseph E., 291
   Lacy, 291
   Mida, 291
   Roanna I., 291
 Leavenworth, Frank, 259, 321
 LeBarr, Lydia, 153
 LeBar, Mary Ann, 95
 Lee, Sarah, 206
 Lefevre, Caty Ann, 217
 LeFever, Mary, 96, 185
   Matt, 62, 185
 Leonguest, Mark, 179
 Lesher, Nellie Nightingale, 133, 244
 Lettig, John, 106
 Lewis, Jane, 162
   John, 162
   Rosetta, 162
   Sarah, 162
 Little, Ettie E., 140
   DeWitt, 164
   James, 164
   Maggie, 164
   Martin, 164
   William, 164
 Loder, L. T., 184
 Longcer, David, 15
 Lord, Benjamin Garret, 245
   James H., 245
   Kate Farnum, 245
   Lottie Asenath, 245
   Mariana, 245
   Russel, 245
   Russel F., 134, 245
   Russell Henry, 245
   Samuel Farnum, 245
 Losey, Esther, 176
   Laura, 238
 Louw, Abraham,^2 1, 8
   Abraham, 103, [ped: Low]
   Dinah,^4 30
   Jacobus,^3 8
   Jane,^3 8, 30
   Margaret,^3 8, 32
   Naomi,^3 8, 33
   Naomi, 103, [ped: Guimar]
   Sarah,^3 8, 31
   Sarah,^4 30
   Tys, [ped: Low]
 Louwe, Pieter Cornelisse, 8
   Pieter C., [ped: Low]
 Lovett, Lydia, 225
 Low, Thomas, 251
 Lowe, Eva Cuddeback, 233
   Hicks, 233
 Lucas, William, 305
 Lundy, Civila, 210
 Lyon, Annie M., 261, 326
   Benjamin, 261
   Emma C., 261
   Emma M., 200
   Fannie D., 327
   John W., 261, 327
   Josephine W., 327
   Robert E., 327
   Sarah, 261
   Thomas, 327
   Thomas J., 147, 200, 261
 Lytle, Gertrude D., 258

 Mackherter, Mary, 57
 Malven, Alice Dimmick, 135, 250, [ped: St. John], [ped: Malven]
   Anna B., 279
   Anna M., 273
   Elizabeth, 150, 276
   George, 250, [ped: St. John], [ped: Malven]
   John, [ped: Malven]
   John S., 279[?]
   Joseph W., 279
   Martha J., 279
   Philip S., 150, 279
 Mains, Walter S.. Rev.. 319
 Mapes, Caroline, 43, 99
   Hattie, 97
   Marv, 97
   William, 97
 Marshall, Ellen, 161
   Jennie, 161
   James, 161
   John, 161
   Joseph, 161
   Maggie, 161
   Mary, 161
   Matilda, 161
   Oscar, 161
   Prudence, 161
   Samuel, 161
   Soloman, 55, 161
   William, 161
 Martin, Anne, 164
   Elizabeth, 102
   Elvira, 209
   George E., 209
   John, 175
   John B., 157
   Hannah A., 40
   Lebbens, 139
   William, [?], 147, 260
   William B., 260
   Marvin, Alfred, 102
   Sarah, 216[?]
   Reinold Cole, 102
 Masten, Sarah Maria, 62, 184
 Mather, Carrie, 108
   James, 108
   John, 108
   Sarah, 108
 Mathews, Martha, [?]
 Mattison, John, [deed]
 Maynard, Nettie, 300
 McAllister, C. P., 97
 McCabe, Nellie, 114
 McCarthy, Eugene T., 208
 McCleand, William, 153
 McCombs, Mary Barnett, 249, 313
 McCormick, Emma, 134, 246
 McCoy, Franklin, 102
 McCullom, George, 104
 McDermott, Maggie, 129
 McFarlan, Walter, 299
 McGinnis, John, 75
 McGuire, Estella, 122
 McKeeby, Florence, 104
   Lewis, 104
   Richard, 104
   W. Coe, Dr., 97
 McKnight, Phoebe, 107
 McNeil, Louis W., 155
 Medrick, Claude, 294
 Merrill, Elias, 102
   Elizabeth, 102
   Skenk, 292
 Merritt, Hannah, 148, 266
   Henry Bacon, 101
   Lewis Cuddeback, 101
   Joseph, 101
 Mesren, Henrv, 96
 Michael, Elizabeth, [ped: Malven]
 Middagh, Margerv. 121
 Millard, Robert, 208
 Miller, Arthur S., 155
 Mills, Esther, 135, 248a
 Millspaugh, Andrew, 275
   Rachel, 133
 Minier, Carrie L., 269
   Edward E., 255
   Emma, 255
   John Ralph, 137, 255
   Thos. Cuddeback, 255
 Miner, William B., 148, 269
 Mitchell, George, 126
   Lyman Rose, 241
 Moe, Ora, 118
 Moore, Emaline, 160
   Ralph, 153
 Morgan, Catherine P., [?]
 Morris, Eleanor, 158
   Eva, 158
   Francis, 158
   Joseph, 55, 158
   Margaret A., 129
   Maria, 158
   Mary E.. 290
   Oscar, 158
   Sarah, 158
 Morrison, Delia, 200
   George, 200
   John, 200
   Kate N., 200
   Sally, 200
 Morse, Warren, 209
 Mott, Gertrude B., 307
   Henry, 126[?]
   Henry S., 66
   John C., 307
   Milton D., 307
   Virginia B., 307
 Mower, Eva, 95
 Mudd, Seeley W.. 130
 Mulhern, Julia, 123
 Mulock, Abbie, 77, 103
   Catherine, 130
   Delia, 130
   Eli Perrv, 130
   Ella, 103
   Isaac, 93, 103
   Luella, 103, 130[?]
   Peter, 103
   Sarah, 103
   Sarah J., 103
   William, 130
 Murray, Henrietta B., 244
   Jane, 244
   John Harris, Jr., 244
   John H., Jr.. 244
   John S., 188, 287
 Myers, Alice, 107
   Charlotte J., 103

 Nearpass, Anna,^6 117
   Benjamin,^6 117
   Catherine, 117
   Caty, 118
   Cornelia, 117
   Cornelius, 117
   Egbert E., 287
   Elizabeth, 117
   Emily, 117
   Frank, 117
   George,^6 117
   Harold, 287
   Jacob, 47, 117
   Jeanette, 287
   John,^6 117
   John, 117, [ped: Nearpass]
   Laura, 287
   Michel, 47, [ped: Nearpass]
   Samuel,^6 117
   William, 117
   William,^6 117
   William Henry, 258, [ped: Nearpass]
 Newkirk, Ruth, 124
 Newman, Jane F., 177, 287
 Nichols, Jessie J., 156
 Nickleweiz, Herbert, 63
 Niven, Collin C, 182
   James, 87, 182
   William B., 182
 Norris, Alfred, 98, 128
   Charles, 98
   Charles Van Auken, 98, 130
   Edward L., 98
   Elmer, 98
   Fred, 98, 128
   Georgia, 98
   Jemima, 98
   Leonard, 98
   Lewellyn, 98
   Lulu, 98
   Martha, 98
   Mary, 98
   Mina, 98[?]
   Solomon V. E., 98
   William, 98, 298
 Norwin, Nicholas, 181
 Northrop, Hannah J., 123
 Nyce, Anna R., 126
   Eva, 126
   George, 126
   John, 208
   John W., 90
   Margaret, 181
   Solomon W., 208
   Susan Van C., 208
   William H., 72, 208

 Ocks, Jemima, 200
 Odell, Alice E., 271
   Anna Laura, 271
   Chauncey H., 271
   Edith, 271
   Henry, 271
   John C., 149, 271
   Levi W., 271
   Lillie, 271
   Milton R., 271
   Philena, 149, 270
   Volney, 271
 Ogden, Alma, 123
 Oliver, Bessie L., 192
   W. C, Rev., 192
   William T., 192
 O'Reilley, Letitia Baker, 130
   Libbie A., 131
 Orth, John C., 95
 Ortt, John, 153
   William, 153
 Osterhout, Arrientje, 26
 Outwater, Alida, 155
   Cathalinda, 155
   Elizabeth, 155
   John, 155
   Leah, 155
   Mary, 155
   Samuel, 155
   Tunis G., 155
 Overheiser, Carrie, 302
 Overshire, Clara S., 96
 Owen, Harriet, 167
   Holdridge, 145
   Israel H., 50, 145
   Narcissa, 145
 Owens, Allen, 167
   Clarence, 167
   Delia, 167
   James, 167
   Lizzie, 167
   Mary, 167
   Raymond, 167
   Samuel, 167
   Thomas, 56, 167
   William, 167

 Palmer, Eliza, 239
 Parshall, Mary, 160
 Parsons, Abigail, [ped: St. John]
 Patmore, George, 96
 Patterson, Alice, 130
   Charles M., 130[?]
   Margaret, 130[?]
   Martha, 152
   Maggie M., 179
   Nellie, 320
 Payne, Henrietta, 206
 Peck, Augustus H., 328
   Carrie B., 136, 254a
   Leonard, 225
 Peckham, Sarah, 34, 84
 Penney, Emaline, 97
 Petit, Jennie, 155
 Phillips, Almarin, 189
   Edgar Wendell, 189
   Kate, 164
   Robert C, 189
 Pinchot, Constantine, 248
   Hortense, 248
 Poland, Elizabeth, 111
 Porter, Pearl, 223
 Post, Rosanna, 214
 Posten, James, 175
   Jane, 175
   Mary, 175
   Phoebe, 175
   William, 59, 175
 Prather, William W., 150, 280
 Preston, Phoebe, 107
 Price, Dorvis, 161
   Emma, 161, 210
   Grant, 161
   J. C, Dr., 307
   Lewis F., 161
 Pridham, Grace, 169
 Prigmore, Elizabeth, 57
 Prost, Emilv V. E., 97
   James H., 97
   John Stoddard, 97
   Laura Munchmon, 97
   Sarah Alice, 97
 Provost, Benj., [pion], [1gen]
   David, [1gen]
   David William,^2 [1gen][?]
   Margaretta, [pion], 1
   Maria, [1gen]

 Quackenboss, Neyltje, [ped: Westfall]
 Quick, Abram T., 104
   Anna Gertrude, 104
   Emma J., 67
   Edna, 208
   Edward, 208
   Edward Graham, 104
   Eliz., 29
   Flora A., 67
   Grace, 208
   Jacob^5 R., 67
   James W., 104
   John B., 26, 67
   Lafayette W., 67, 75
   Lena, 67
   Margaret A., 67
   Marie E.,^5 67
   Martin C.,^5 67
   Peter,^5 A. L., 67
   Ruth, 104
   Sarah L., 104
   Susan B., 208
   Susie, 200
   Thomas, [deed], 29
   Thomas J., 208

 Ray, Frank, 124
 Read, Elizabeth, 303
 Rector, Doyle Dixon, 256
 Reed, Chauncey, 281
   George, 281[?]
   H. B., Dr., 126
   Jacob, 281[?]
   John M., 281[?]
   Spencer, 281
 Reiner, Arthur, 170
   Belle, 170
   Fred, 170
   William, 170
 Relyea, Simon, 62
 Renshaw, Mary, 285
 Reugger, Walter, 190
   Valentine, 190
 Richards, Jessie, 161
   Orin B., 161
   Webster, 161
 Richardson, Clara B., 155
   Elizabeth G., 155
   Solomon, 155
 Risley, Chas. Broderick, 238
 Ritchie, Peter S., 103
 Rhodes, Angeline, 98
   Beniah, 98
   Darius, 62
   Eugene, 96
   Fletcher, 96
   Floyd S., 98
   Genevieve, 98
   Gladys, 96
   George, 98
   Jacob, 98
   John Alexander, 98
   Samuel L., 98
   William Floyd, 98
   Wilbur, 98
 Roberts, Mary Ann, 151
   Velma M., 111
 Robertson, Ira, 106
 Robinson, Ed. N., 208
   Gertrude, 208
   Mary Alice, 208
   Nora,^7 95
 Roe, Adeline I., 99
   Arthur N., 307
   Cornelia, 160
   Jemima, 99
   Nathaniel, 99
   Nathaniel O., 99
   Natalie, 99
   Thomas N., 99
   William Irving, 99
 Rochrig, Karl Franklyn, Dr., 99
 Rogers, Mary, 153
 Rooks, Franc, 271
 Roosa, Altje, 32
   Jannetje, 12
 Roloson, Peter, 15
 Rose, Catherine, 44, 107
   Clarence, 102
   Clarissa, 102
   Frederick, 102
   Frederick A., 107
   Elijah, 102, 102
   Hazel, 104
   James C., 102
   James Graham, 96
   Katherine, 96
   Lyman O., 105
   Margaret, 102
   Marguerite, 102
   Ma[r]y, 77, 102, 102, 103
   Maude, 102
   Rufus Van Etten, 105
   Sarah, 102
   William C, 96
   William R., 96
 Roselle, Daniel R., 148, 268
 Rossa, Jannetje, [ped: Van Etten]
 Rosencrance, Charles R., 205
   George E., 205
   George, 307
 Rosencrans, Catherine,^4 66
   Crissie,^5 66[?]
   Joe Van, 111
 Rosencrantz, Diana,^4 67
   Herman, 26
   Herman Hendrickson, 26
   Jacob, 26[?]
   James R.,^5 67
 Rosenkrans, Catherine, 39, 93
   Derrick, 26
   Eleanor, 102
   Harmon Hendrick, 3
   James,^3 7
   Maria, 39, 89
   Rachel, 3
   Sarah, 15, 39
 Royce, Garrison, 62
 Ruddick, Florence, 332
   Hamilton, 328, 332
 Rundle, Egbert, 228
   Ella, 228
   Eva, 228
   Helen, 228
   Ida, 228
   James, 228
   Martha, 228
   Mary, 228
   Norman, 81, 228
   Sarah, 228
   William, 228
 Russel, Annie, 175
 Rust, John, Rev., 262
 Rutse, Jacob, [deed]
 Rutsen, Jacob, [deed]

 Sanford, Mary B., 101
 Saviers, John, 152
   Peter W., 152
 Sawyer, Maria B., 199, 303
 Sayre, Caroline Eliza, 75
   Eva, 126
   George T., 126
 Schill, Sarah K., 129
 Schlecht, Jacomyntje, [ped: Elting]
 Schoonmaker, Jacob M., 210
 Schoonover, Chester, 64
   Deborah, [ped: Emigrant]
   Mary J., 64
 Schuyler, Arent, [deed]
 Schwaderer, George J., 302
 Scott, Addie, 99
   Catherine Fountain, 110
   Frank, 99
   Luella, 155
   Marion Stanard, 244
   Samuel Beverly, 244
   William E., 99
 Schultz, Cordelia D., 108
 Sears, Clifford, 98
   Daniel, 98
 Seybolt, Caroline, 125
   Fred, 125
   Ida Caroline, 240
   Jerry, 125
   Ruth, 125
   Sadie, 125
 Shaefer, Jacob, 102
   Jennie, 102
 Shaeffer, Finley D., 102
 Sharp, Elizabeth, 162
   Catherine, 162
   Morris, 55, 162
 Shattuck, Clarence D., 111
   Wilfred C., 111
 Sheets, Elizabeth, 210
 Shelden, Adams, 264
   Aseneth, 264
   Carrie, 264
   Jasper W., 264
 Shelley, David, 165
   Elizabeth, 55, 157
   Ford, 55, 165
   Lydia,^5 55
   Lidia, 161
   James,^5 [?], 55, 164, 151
   James Ford, 164
   Jane,^5 55, 160
   Maria,^5 55, 158, 164
   Rosanna, 55, 162, 164
   Roxana,^5 55, 163
   Samuel,^4 67
   Samuel,^5 55, 56, 164
   Sarah, 55, 159
   Susan,^5 55
   William, 164
 Sheperd, Lavinia, 168
 Shimer, Abram, 99, 209, 209
   Adeline, 99
   Caty, 209
   Charles Evi, 99
   Cornelius, 132
   Electus, 209
   Evi, 99
   Frank, 99
   Hester, 209
   Isaac, 41, 209
   Jacob, 99, 209
   Jacob,^5 59
   Jemima, 99, 99
   Joseph, 45, 132, 209
   Lavina, 96
   Margaret, 209
   Ma[r]y, 23, 59, 102, 108, 209
   Phoebe,^5 59
   Polly, 209
   Thomas, 209
 Shoemaker, John, 237
   Irving, 237
 Shotwell, Joseph, 226
 Simons, Anna May, 123
 Simpson, Agnes, 112
 Skinner, Anna Van Inwegen, 107
   Anna V. I., 273
   Charles N., Dr., 273
   John M., 107, 273
   John Nelson, 273
   Mary Asenath, 107, 273
   Nathan, 150, 273
 Siebold, Roxana Caldwell, 21, 52
 Slauson, Edgar Van Etten, 238
   Chas. Taylor, 238
   Lawrence Taylor, 238
 Slover, James, 93, 213
 Smith, Almond, 62, 234
   Anna, 39, 96
   Charles, 234
   David, 62, 189
   Elizabeth, 52, 155
   Esther Ann, 96
   Frank, 291
   Georgia May, 180
   Hiram, 107
   Horace, 107
   Ida, 96
   Lester, 295
   Mabel, 295
   Margaret A., 119
   Maria, 34, 79, 86, 235
   Nettie, 107
   Samuel F., 96
   William, 96
 Snediker, Florence, 152
   Dwight, 152
   Maude, 152
 Snell, Ida May, 103
 Snelling, George R., 67
 Snyder, Carolina, 61, 178
   Henrietta B., 301
   Jennie, 75
 Spafford, Russel D., 118
 Spaulding, Fannie, 223
 Speilman, Peter, 152
 Splamm, Mary, 95
 Spurbeck, Alice, 224
   Ambrose, 80, 224
   Catherine, 34, 80
   David J., 224
   Ellen, 224
   Helen, 34, 82
   Jane,^6 224
   Nettie,^6 224
 Squirrel, Sarah, [ped: Nearpass]
 Squires, Hoke, 175
   Isaac, 175
   Mary, 175
 St. John, Horace, 304, 330
   Isaac, [ped: St. John]
   James, [ped: St. John]
   Jonathan, [ped: St. John]
   Matthias, [ped: St. John]
   Philenda, 250, [ped: Malven]
   Stephen, 330, [ped: St. John]
 Stanford, Martha, 242
   William B., 242
 Stanton, Abile, 96
   Carrie, 96
   Eliza Lydia, 62, 183
   Hiram, 96
   Johnathan,^3 8, 31
   Lewis, 96
   Mary, 96
   Moses,^4 31
   Peter, 96
   Sarah, 96
   William,^4 31
 Steele, J. M., 328
 Stevens, James, 331
 Stewart, Ann J., 114
   Charlotte, [ped: Nearpass]
   Horace K., 114
   F. O., Dr., 200
   Wm., 223
 Stillwell, Aaron Longstreet, 251
   Cornelius, Dr., 203
   Elting Cuddeback, 251
   John L., 135, 251
 Stoddard, Prudence, 251a
 Stogum, Kate, 41
 Stoll, Albert, 134, 248
   Albert S., 174
   Anthony Struble, 102
   Arminda, 40
   Augustine Barnard, 248
   George, 248
   Henry Farnum, Dr., 248
   Hortense Pinchot, 205, 248
   John B., 207
   John Westbrook, 248
   Luella, 102
   Savilla, 193, 295
 Stone, Cora B., 118
   Frank, 167
   William, 167
 Storms, Clinton, 79
 Strong, Annie F., 77, 103
   Delia, 103
   Richard, 96
 Struble, Alfred, 292
   Daniel D., 292
   Gladys, 292
 Strunk, Walter M., 122
 Stryker, Martha,^7 95
 Styles, Alice, 290
 Sullivan, Mary, 77, 103
 Swart, Thomas, [deed]
 Swarts, Sarah A., 258, 318
 Swartwodt, Anthony, [deed]
   Bernard, [deed]
   Thomas, [deed], [deed]
 Swartwout, Abram,^6 108
   Augusta, 209
   Albert, 128
   Alice, 108
   Alice D., 209
   Amanda C., 275
   Anthony, [deed], [deed], [deed], [pat], 9, [ped: Emigrant]
   Benjamin, 136
   Benj. C, 111
   Benj. Cuddeback,^6 254, 275[?]
   Bernardus, [deed], [deed], [deed], [deed], [deed], [pat]
   Carrie, 128
   Catherine, 136
   Catherine,^6 251a
   Charles, 275
   Charles Howard, 254
   Charlotte, 254a
   Cornelius, 108, 150, 275
   David, 48, 128
   Deborah, 45, 108, 109
   Eleanor, 275
   Elizabeth, 136
   Ella, 275
   Ellen, [?], 136
   Ellen,^6 253a
   Esther,^2 9
   Esther,^6 253
   Esther K., 120
   Frank Benjamin, 254
   Florence, 254a
   George, 114, 275
   George Henry, 98
   George W., 114
   Harry Coleman, 254
   Helen, 128
   Henry, 128
   Henry Brinkerhoff, 136[?], 254a
   Henry Lewis, 254a
   Herbert Brinkerhoff, 254a
   Hester, 128
   Isabelle Norris, 98
   Jacob, 108, 209, 209
   Jacobus, [ped: Emigrant]
   James, 9
   James D., 45, 108, 108, 275
   Jane, 18, 20, 108
   Jane, 128, 131[?], 136, 148
   Jane,^6 252a, 265
   Jannetje Corbes, [ped: Van Inwegen]
   Jemima, 136, 209
   Jemima,^6 252
   Joel, 209
   John C., 275
   John D., 108
   Julia, 114
   Laura, 275
   Mabel, 275
   Madeline, 275
   Margaret, 108
   Margaret Wood, 254
   Mary, 98, 114, 128
   Moses Dewitt, 108
   Naomi, 275
   Nina Blanche, 254
   Paul, 275
   Peter, 105, 209, [ped: Emigrant]
   Peter E.,^6 108, 108
   Peter D., 115, 128
   Peter Grant, 128
   Peter P., 136, [ped: Emigrant]
   Philip, 128, 136
   Philip P., [ped: Emigrant]
   Phillipus, [pat]
   Reeves, 275
   Roeloff, [ped: Emigrant]
   Roeloft, [deed]
   Samuel Dewitt, 128
   Sarah, 108
   Sarah A., 209
   Sarah Alice, 108
   Sarah C., 275
   Simon, 114
   Thomas, [deed], [deed], [deed], [deed]
   Van Etten, 254
   Wilford, 209
   Willard Henry, 254
   William, 108
 Sweet, Caroline, 143
   Catherine, 143
   Charles G., 143
   Julia Jemima, 143
   Martin Pierce, 143, [?]
   Mary Ellen, 143
   Martin Anthony, 143
   Thomas, 143
   Vannette, 143
 Swinton, Edna S., 254
   Josephine, 303
   Marion W., 253a
   Mildred M., 253a
 Switts, Cornelis, [deed]
   Elias, [deed]
 Sylvester, Elbert W., 265
   E. Ware, Dr., 265

 Taber, Julia, 271
 Talbot, Robert Harris, 256
 Tallman, Geo., 224
   Orvil, 224
 Taylor, Adella, 192
   Almerin James, 86, 192
   Francilla, 192
   Laverna, 192
   Lydia, 167
   Mabel, 210
   Orletta, 192
   Willard D., 129
 Teller, Grace M., 124
   Sarah, 124
   William, 119, 124
 Tenure, Mary, 35, 86
 Terry, Chas. Woodward, 108
   Edward B., 108
   Robert, 117
 Terwilliger, Elsie, 210
   Fred, 210
 Thurber, James A., 155
   Ward, 155
 Tillman, Jane, 108
 Tillotson, Jessie, 297
 Tisdell, James, 173
   Robert, 57, 173
   Wilson, 173
 Tietsoort, Stephanus, [ped: Titsworth]
 Tietzoo, William, [ped: Titsworth]
 Titsworth, Amos, [ped: Titsworth]
   Benjamin Cuddeback, 139
   Grace Lydia, 257
   Jane, 139
   Julia, 257
   Lizzie, 139
   Margery, 257
   Olive DeWitt, 257
   Olivia, 139
   Stephen, [ped: Titsworth]
   Walter Wallace, 49, 139, 257, [ped: Titsworth]
 Titus, Sarah, 169
 Thompson, Caroline Lee, 43, 101
   Faith, 251
   Mary Elizabeth, 49, 137
 Thomas, Belle, 123
   Charles, 123
   Elizabeth, 118
   Julia, 231
 Thomasson, Francis F., 254a
   Henry S., 254a
 Thornton, Charles, 162
   DeWitt, 271
   Hattie, 140
   Helen, 231
   Lettie, 223
   Margaret, 162
   Morris, 162
   Stephen, 271
 Thorpe, Louise, 129
 Thrall, Lydia C., 92, 238
 Townsend, Burt, 118
   Kate, 118
 Tracery, Eva, 125
 Truesdell, Charles G., 170
   Ette M., 170
   Harry, 170
   John G., 170
   William, 170
 Trumble, Jessie G., 299
 Tubbs, W. Ray, Dr., 130
 Turner, George, 229
   George M., 140
   Newel, 229
   Sarah, 229
   Warren, 229
 Tuthill, Annie Laurie, 272
   Hector H., 149
   Julia E., 272
   Sally, 272
 Tuttle, Elizabeth, 291
 Tymeson, Anna L., 299
 Tys, James, [deed]
   Louw, 8
 Tyse, John, [pat]

 Van Aakin, Elizabeth, 14
   Elssie, 14
   Harmonas, 14
   Jacobus, 14
 Vanatte, Virginia, 322
 Van Akin, Lillian, 188
 Van Auken, Annettie, 2
   Annie, 102
   Anthony, 197
   Aseneth, 264
   Benj. Cole, 15
   Daniel, 148, 264
   Elizabeth, 44, 105
   Evert,^4 27, 68
   Frances, 258, 318
   Hannah, 205
   Hannah,^5 72
   Isaac, 27
   Isaac,^3 7
   James,^4 27
   John, 105
   Joseph,^4 27
   Josephine, 264
   Kate, 75
   Lydia,^5 68
   Lydia, 195
   Madeline,^4 27
   Marjorie, 19, 45
   Mary, 68, 108, 196
   Sally, 200
   Sally,^5 68
   Sarah, 264
   Selitie,^4 27
 Van Buskirk, Addie, [?]
   Amelia, 122
   Levi, 118
   Peter, 118
   Thomas, 118
 Van Cleafe, Peter M., 118
 Van Geave, Benjamin, 121
   Catherine. 121
   Clinton G., 118
   Jacob, 121
   John, 121
   Nellie, 118
 Van Derbilt, Byron, 216
 Van Demark, Alice, 109
   Elizabeth, 16
   Henry, 109
   Irene, 109
   Spencer, 109
 Van De Mark. W. Little, 121
 Vanderburgh, Dick, [deed]
 Van Dyne, George, 212
 Van Etten, Ada, 299
   Alexander G., 97
   Alice, 97
   Alva, 199, 299
   Amanda,^6 90
   Amos,^6 92, 238
   Amos, Jr., 238
   Ann,^5 50
   Ann,^5 146
   Ann Eliza, 199, 301
   Anna, 200
   Anna Caroline, 238
   Anthony,^4 20
   Anthony, 50, 69, 149, [ped: Van Etten]
   Archibald C., 299
   Aseneth,^5 49, 142
   Aseneth, 297
   Blandina, 19, [ped: Van Etten]
   Blandina,^4 20, 44, 49
   Blandina,^5 69
   Belinda, 200
   Benjamin, 199, 301
   Benjamin,^5 50, 141
   Carrie, 97, 201
   Catherine, 107, 119, 303
   Catherine,^5 37, 39, 50, 143
   Catherine,^6 92
   Charlotte, 97
   Chauncey, 297
   Claire T., 299
   Clement, 107, 297
   Cornelia,^6 91
   Cornelia, 200
   Cornelis,^4 12
   Cornelius,^5 39, 92
   Cornelius, 201, 239
   Cornelius, 197, 209
   Cynthia, 312
   Daniel, 47, 119
   Daniel,^5 37, 39, 91
   David,^6 89
   Dorothy,^5 39
   Dorothy,^6 91, 94
   Drusilla,^6 90
   Edgar L., 97
   Edgar,^7 238
   Edith Ellen, 300
   Edna Lawrence, 238
   Eleanor B., 303
   Elizabeth, 149
   Elizabeth,^5 51
   Ellen, 111, 199
   Ellen S., 299
   Elsie, 200
   Elsie,^6 90
   Elizabeth, 201
   Elizabeth^5 39
   Emma, 194, 238, 296
   Evert, 131
   Frank, 299
   Frank A., 299
   Frank C., 299
   Genevieve, 299
   George, 200, 297
   Grace, 107
   Hannah, 239
   Hannah,^5 50, 140
   Hannah,^6 119
   Helena,^5 37
   Henry, 149, 197, 201
   Hervey, 119
   Heyltje, 15
   Hilay, 92
   Howard, 303
   Hudson, 129, 200
   Hughes, 200
   Hulda,^6 93
   Isaac, [?], 200
   Isabella, 97
   Isaiah, 201
   Jacob,^3 8
   Jacob,^5 37, 69
   Jacob, 12, 30, 119, 197, 199, [ped: Van Etten]
   Jacob Jansen, 12, [ped: Van Etten]
   James,^5 39, 90
   James Pinchot, 239
   Jan,^4 12, 37
   Jan, 2, 12, [ped: Van Etten]
   Jane,^4 12
   Jane, 111, 119, 125, 238
   Jane, 45, 198, 297
   Jemima, 104, 119, 297, 300
   Jeptha, 201
   Johannes,^4 12, 39
   Johannes, Jr.,^5 39
   John,^5 89
   John Pinchot,^7 239
   John S., 303
   John T., 238
   John, 97, 198, 199, 297
   Kate, 238, 273
   Kittie, 200
   Lannah,^6 89
   LeRoy T. 299
   Levi, 28, 49, 69, 199, [ped: Van Etten]
   Levi S., 198, 300
   Levi W.,^5 50
   Luella, 238
   Lydia, 200
   Lydia A., 239
   Lydia Jane, 102
   Magdelena,^4 38
   Magdelena, 12
   Magdelena,^5 39
   Maggie, 107, 239
   Manuel,^5 39
   Margaret, 97, 147, 199, 297
   Margaret,^5 37, [?], 258
   Margaret,^6 92
   Margery, 297
   Mark, 107, 200
   Maria,^5 38
   Maria,^6 89
   Marion, 200
   Martha, 129
   Mary, 141, 197, 201
   Mary,^5 145
   Mary,^6 92
   Mary E., 97, 297
   Mary Ellen, 97
   Minerva, 97
   Minnie C, 97
   Moses,^6 90
   Nancy,^6 119
   Nathan B., Dr., 303
   Nellie Holmes, 238
   Oliver Perry, 91
   Peter, 197, 201
   Peter G., 299
   Priscilla, 147, 197
   Rachel,^6 92
   Richard,^4 12
   Robert Kennedy,^6 92, 239
   Rymerick,^5 39
   Sally, 119, 121, 198, 297
   Samuel,^5 73
   Samuel S., 238, 302
   Sarah, 19, 45, 200
   Sarah,^4 12
   Simeon,^5 37, 39
   Simon,^5 50, 144
   Solomon, 111, 198, 199, 299
   Solomon,^5 39, 69, 93
   Solomon,^6 94
   Solomon, Dr.. 303
   Solomon R.,^6 90
   Stoddard, 299
   Thomas,^5 50
   Thomas, 200, 200
   Thomas, 29, 69, 107
   Veranus, 300
   Walcott G.. 299
   Wilfred, 197
   William,^6 119
   William, 200
   William Orville, 97
   Wilmot, 299
 Van Fleet, Abraham,^4 18
   Amanda, 125
   Arien Garretsen, 18
   Benjamin, 125, 297
   Catherine,^3 4, 20
   Clara, 125
   Daniel, 18
   Daniel,^3 4
   Elizabeth, 123
   Esyntje, 36
   Frank, 125
   Gerardus Swartwout,^4 36
   Henry, 116
   Jacomyntje,^4 18
   James,^6 110
   Jan, 18
   Jennie, 125
   John, 18, 20, 36
   Levi, 116
   Magerie,^4 18
   Margaret, 129
   Sarah, ^4 66
   Solomon, 125
   Solomon,^4 18
   Thomas,^4 18
   Thomas, 45, 48, 110, 125
   William,^4 18
 Van Fredenburgh, Aaron, 15
   Absolem, 15
   Benj.,^4 15
   Elizabeth, 15
   Elsie,^4 15
   Katrina,^4 15
   Mary Conkling, 15
   Wilhelmus, 15
 Van Gorden, Abraham, 17
   Albert, 3
   Albert Gyberson, 3
   Benj., 16
   Benj.,^3 3
   Catherine,^5 41
   Daniel,^3 3
   DeWitt,^5 41
   David, 65
   David,^5 79
   Eleanor, 17
   Elias,^3 3
   Elsie,^3 3, 17
   Elsie,^5 41
   Elizabeth,^3 3, 14
   Elizabeth,^4 16
   Glorana, 15[?]
   Hannah J., 206, 305
   Harmonas,^2 1, 3
   Jannetje,^3 3
   Jeremiah, 42
   John,^5 42
   Katherine, 15
   Levi, 65, 42
   Levi,^4 42
   Loranch, 15
   Margaret,^3 3, 14
   Maria, 41
   Maria,^5 42
   Martin,^4 41
   Martine, 17
   Mary, 17
   Peter,^5 41
   Rebecca,^5 42
   Sarah, 17
   Silas, 41
   William,^5 41
 Van Haring, Jannetje, 8, [ped: Low]
 Van Houten, Bertha, 163
   Chas., 240
   Eilko, 95
   Ella R., 163
   Eva Mary, 163
   Halmah, 163
   Richard, 163
   Robert, 163
   William, 163
 Van Inwegen, Ada, 253a
   Allen, 253a
   Anna, 248a, 296, 312
   Benjamin S., 258, 320
   Charac, 253a
   Charac J., 107, 136
   Charles, 179, 194, 238
   Charles F., 296
   Charity, 197
   Charlotte,^4 19, 43
   Cornelius, 296
   Cornelius C., 194
   Eli, 66, 194
   Eliza, 202
   Eva May, 179
   Florence, 124
   George, 197
   Gerardus, [pat], [ped: Van Inwegwen]
   Hannah, 47, 197
   Hannah, 20, [ped: Van Inwegwen]
   Harmonas, [pat], [ped: Van Inwegwen]
   Harold, 253a
   H. Barentsen, 296[?]
   Henry, 197
   Heromandus B., [ped: Van Inwegwen]
   Jane, 43
   Jennie, 179
   Job, 298
   John, 320
   John, 123
   Joseph, 298
   Julia, 194
   Laura M., 299
   Lewis, 147, 196
   Lewis B., 320
   Lyman, 253a
   Maggie M., 320
   Maria, 47, 123
   Mary, 298
   Mary E., 179
   Myron, 179
   Pearl, 129
   Priscilla, 197
   Sarah E., 130
   Stoddard, 97, 136, 252
   Ralph, 253a
   Ruth, 298
   Willard, 107
   Willard B., 296
   William, 96
 Van Keuren, John A., 62, 187
   Maty, 97
 Van Ness, Catherine, 118
   Ella, 292
 Van Noy, Adelia, [?]
   Benjamin, 42
   Catherine, 180
   Eleanor, 180
   Elizabeth, 126
   Elmira, 99
   Esther,^6 116
   Frank, 180
   George,^6 116
   Guy, 180
   Hannah, 42
   James, 180
   Joseph, 180
   Mary, 181
   Nicholas, 61, 180
   Rachel, 64
   Saffrein, 42
   Solomon, 46[?]
   William, 46, 116
 Van Patten, Peter, 44
 Van Sickle, James, 15
 Van Vredenburg, Willem Isaacsen, 15
 Van Wyck, George R., 126
 Van Zandt, E. H., 107
 Vail, Eugene Blanche, 108
 Vasburg, William, 119
 Vaughn, Howard, 103
   Leroy W., 103[?]
 Viervant, Cornelius, 29
 Voorhees, Martha Sophia, 140
 Vredenburg, Willems, 15

 Wall, Ella, 308
 Wallace, Augustus Cuddeback, 101
   Aaron Van D., 101
   Helen, 101
   Louisa, 154
   Lucie Nanette, 101
   Van Deusen, 101
 Walloon, Joseph,^2 6
 Walsh, Kate, 326
 Ward, Charles, 155
   Don Carlos, 155
   Roxa, 155
   Samuel Glen, 155
   William, 155
 Waterbury, Cyrus, 184[?]
   William H., 184
 Weed, Libbie, 275
   Louis N., 88, 186
 Weiss, Rebecca, 25, 63
 Weightman, Anna L., 239
 Weeks, Margaret, 223
   Nellie, 223
   Theodore, 223
   Wm., 223
 Weller, Corinne, 102
 Welling, Irving, 223
   Grace, 223
   Henry, 223
 Wells, Delia, 126
   Henry, 128
   Jane, 207, 307
   Maude, 103
   Rebecca,^3 7, 24
   Sarah, 66
 Werneth, Maria, 67
 Westbrook, Abraham, 32, 96
   Abraham,^4 32, 71, 76
   Abram,^6 76
   Abram I., 204
   Abram T., 97
   Abram Whitaker, 96
   Alexander, 210, 210
   Alice, 307
   Allen, 210
   Alpheus, 121
   Anna B., 319
   Anna M., 319
   Anna Maria, 205, 210, 211
   Annetje Roosa, 12
   Anthony, 32
   Antjen, [ped: Van Etten]
   Belinda, 202
   Benjamin, 122, 210
   Bert H., 319
   Blanche, 308
   Blandina, 28, 73
   Catherine,^4 28
   Catherine,^5 73
   Charles B., 205
   Clayton, 210
   Coe, 180
   Cornelius, 70
   Cornelius,^4 28
   Daniel, 180, 210
   Daniel D.,^6 76
   Dayton, 102
   Ella, [?], 210, 305
   Eleanor, 180, 202
   Eliza,^6 76
   Elsie, 70, 202
   Emily, 102
   Emma, 176
   Esther, 210, [ped: Emigrant]
   Ethel, 308
   Eva, 210
   Florence J., 205
   Fred, 305
   Halsey, 210
   Hannah, 3, 17, 206, 307
   Hattie, 180, 199, 303
   Hester, 203, 204
   Hester,^4 71
   Hester,^5 73
   Heyltje, 12
   Hiram, 207
   Howard, 305
   Hugh, 205
   Hugh B., 211
   Hugh B.,^6 76
   Hyman, 205
   Isaac B., 305[?]
   Isabella, 319
   Jacob, 23, 205, 211, 258, 319
   Jacob,^5 72
   Jacob (Major), 205
   Jacob B., 206, 305
   Jacob G., 96
   Jacob W., 319
   Jagger, 210
   James, 305
   Jan, 32
   Jane, 49, 96
   Jane,^4 28, 69, 49, [ped: Van Etten]
   Jane B., 206, 306
   Jannetje, 12, [ped: Westfall]
   Jannetje,^2 1, 5
   Jennica,^5 73
   Johannas, (Capt.), [pat]
   Johannes, 12
   John A., 204, 205, 304
   John Coolbaugh, 207
   John,^4 I., 28, 71
   John I., 205
   John, (Col.), 206
   John Jacob, 7, 28
   John,^5 72, 210
   Joseph, 73, 180
   Joseph,^5 73
   Joseph J., 210
   Maria,^3 2, 304, 329
   Maria,^4 28, 70
   Martimas, Capt., 32
   Lafayette, 307
   La Fayette, Capt., 207
   Levi, 96
   Lewis, 180
   Lillian, 99
   Linn, 180
   Louisa, 96
   Lucien, 305
   Lydia,^3 7, 23
   Lydia,^5 68, 73
   Mabel, 305
   Margaret, 72, 76, 96, 205, 207, 211
   Margaret,^5 72
   Margaret L., 319
   Maria, 13
   Mary, 43, 97, 121
   Mary,^4 32, 75
   Mary Jane, 210
   Martin, 122, 147, 210
   Martin,^6 76
   Martynas, 8
   Ma[r]y,^5 76
   Moses C., 308
   Moses W., 207, 308
   Neyltje,^3 21
   Nicholas, 180
   Oscar, 122, 210
   Peter, 202
   Peter,^5 70, 73
   Philip, 305
   Phoebe, 304, 328
   Polly, 60
   Richard B., 206
   Ruben,^6 B., 76
   Saffrein,^4 28, 73
   Sally, 209
   Sally,^5 73
   Sarah, 27, 68, 99, 210
   Sarah J., 305, 330
   Solomon, Capt., 207
   Solomon,^4 69, 72
   Solomon,^5 72
   Soveryn,^5 72
   Stacy, 210, 306
   Susan, 207, 305
   Townsend, 210
   Velma, 319
   Wade, 180
   Wilhelmus, 210
   William A. C., 96
   William B., 308
 Westfall, Abram, 46, 104, 149
   Albert, 114
   Alice, 115
   Allen, 114
   Altje,^4 13, 40
   Amanda, 115, 128
   Anna, 114, 149, 271
   Aseneth, 149, 272
   Benjamin, 147, 258, 318
   Benjamin,^3 2, 11
   Benjamin,^5 51
   Betsey, 181
   Blanche, 104
   Catherine, 131, 147, 150
   Catherine,^5 [?], 51
   Charles, 262
   Charles Cleveland, 126
   Chas. Hardenburgh,^6 114
   Chauncey, 149, 270
   Clarence J., 114
   Cornelius,^6 114
   Cornelius,^4 12
   Cornelius, 113
   Cynthia, 262, 320
   Daniel,^3 2, 13
   David, 19, 46, 104, [ped: Westfall]
   Davis,^6 115
   Davi[d],^6 114
   Dina, 126
   Eleanor,^6 104, 104
   Edna, 102, 104
   Eliza, 149
   Elizabeth, 126
   Ella H.,^6 114
   Ellen, 258, 114, 211, 319
   Elmer E., 104
   Emma, 114
   Emaline S., 114
   Estella J., 104
   Esther,^6 115
   Floyd, 104
   Frank, 104, 262
   George,^6 114
   George, 61, 104, 179
   Geo. W., 114
   Grace, 95, 111
   Hannah Jane^6, 114
   Henry, 126
   Hester,^5 46, 116
   Hester Westbrook, 136
   Howard, 262
   Isabella, 115
   John D., 95
   John G., 115
   John V., 149
   Jacob G., 126
   Jacob, 126
   Jacob,^5 46, 115
   Jacob,^6 114
   Jacobus,^4 11
   Jane, 95, 111
   Jannetje, [ped: Emigrant]
   Jemima, 66, 126, 147
   Jemmima,^5 51, 151, 261
   Jemima,^5 [?]
   Jemima,^6 115
   Johannes Jurian, 2
   John, 104
   John Van Etten, 258
   Josephine, 258, [ped: Nearpass]
   Julia,^6 114
   Jurian,^2 1, 2
   Jury,^ 4 11
   Laura, 262
   Levi, 147, 258, 262
   Levi,^5 51, 149
   Lewis,^6 114
   Lewis W., 114
   Lizabeth,^4 11
   Macy, 95
   Maggie, 104
   Margaret Anna, 258
   Margery, 147
   Margariet,^4 11
   Margrietjen,^3 2, 12
   Maria,^4 11
   Marretjen,^3 2, 12
   Mary, 46, 111, 114, 126, 262
   Mary,^6 115
   Marya,^4 11
   Peter Gumaer, 104
   Rusilla, 147, 259
   Rusje, ^4 11
   Sally, 126, 147, 148, 149
   Sally,^5 45, 61, 148, 179, 260
   Samuel, 104, 115
   Samuel,^6 115
   Sarah Edna, 114
   Sarah Jane, 104
   Sarah Owen,^6 114
   Sarah,^4 11
   Simeon, 44, [?], 103, 104, [?], [?], [ped: Westfall]
   Simeon,^5 44
   Simon,^4 20
   Simon, [?], 50, 147, 258, [ped: Westfall]
   Van Etten, 258
   Wilhelmus,^5 46, 114, 114
   Wilhelmus David, 114
   William, 95, 104, 111
   William E., 258
 Westgate, Martin, 154
   Wallace A., 154
 Westphael, Jurian,^2 2, [ped: Westfall]
   Symen, [ped: Westfall]
 Westphalen, Chas., [deed]
   Johannes, [deed]
   Simon, [deed]
 Wheeler, Frances, 97
   Frank, 97
   Joseph, [deed]
   Martin, 97
   William H., 97
 White, David, 128
   Edward, 128[?]
   Eliza, 128
   Ellen, 128
   Emma, 128[?]
   Hannah, [?]
   Helen, 240, 309
   Nina E., 155
 Whitehead, Nancy, 47, 120
 Whitesall, Mary E., 275
 Whitlock, Aseneth, 148, 268
   Benjamin, 131, 148, 264
   Catherine, 148, 265, 269
   Celina, 265
   Charles, 263
   Clara L., 266
   Cornelius, 265
   David, 51, 128, [?]
   Edward, 263
   Eletta, 265
   Elizabeth, 96[?]
   Eliza, 298
   Eliza V., 132, 241
   George, 263
   Hattie, 263
   Henry A., 265
   Hope, 265
   Jane, 298
   Jemima, 98, 298
   Joel, 128, 148, 266
   Joseph, 128, 198, 298
   John, 128
   Lavina, 148
   Levi, 109, 147, 263
   Levi J., 191
   Louisa W., 263
   Mary H., 263
   Nancy, 148, 264
   Nelson, 148, 266, 267
   Neva, 109
   Nina C., 265
   Philip, 265
   Sarah, 131, 265
   Stephen E., 267
 Whitney, Abigail, 52, 153
   Edson, 188
   Eugene, 188
   Galen, 188
 Whittaker, Emaline, 205
   Robert, 122
   Zilla M., 203
 Wicks, John Barber, 155
 Wiggers, Aeltje, 3
 Wiggins, Charlotte Mae, 106
   Evelyn Lamina, 106
   Fannie, 106
   James W., 106
   Judson Kilpatrick, 106
 Wilkin, Alice, 98
 Wilcox, Frank L., 298
   Lewis V. I., 298
 Willard, Charlotte, 154
 Williams, Elizabeth, [ped: St. John]
   Geo., 107
   Ida, 107
   James, 164
   Simon, 164
 Williamson, Bertha, 307
   John, 161, 307
 Wilson, Estel,^5 57
   Franca, 169[?]
   George, [?], 206
   Jacob, 37
   James,^5 57
   Janet Raeburn, 99
   John, 57
   Lydia,^5 57
   Mireon, 37
   Sarah,^5 57
   Thomas, 37
   William T., 206
 Wiltsie, Artemissa, 96
 Winfield, Eleanor, 41
   Hannah, 104
 Winter, Egbert, Rev., 97
 Witschief, Gertrude, 290
 Wood, Abby, 152
   Burt, 123
   Ella, 129
   John, 292
 Woods, Donna Snow, 114
 Woodley, T. N., 126
 Woodruff, Archibald V. E., 303
   Archibald M., 303
   Jennie, 168
 Woodward, Augusta, 108
   Anne Eliza, 195
   Benjamin, 68, 195
   Benj., Col., 108
   Camilla, 108
   Charles, 108
   Elinior, Dr., 108
   Hattie, 108
   Kate, 108
   John, 195
   Josephine, 195
   Margaret, 108
   Millicent, 108
   Naomi, 108
   Robert, 108
   Sarah, 108
   Washington I., 195
 Woolsey, Lester W., 104
 Wright, Lansing B., 126
   Mary, 97
   Millicent, 126
   William T., 139
 Wycoff, Angelica, 34, 85
   C. C., 80, 226
   Sarah,^6 226

 Young, Irwin, 328, 331
   James B., 102
   Josephine, 102
   Leila, 331
   Margery, 102
   Mary, 118
   Willard, 331
 Youngs, Emaline, 114
   Eva, 65
   Hannah, 210
   John M., 65





End of Project Gutenberg's Caudebec in America, by William Louis Cuddeback

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAUDEBEC IN AMERICA ***

***** This file should be named 46692.txt or 46692.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/6/9/46692/

Produced by Roger Burch, from scans obtained from the Internet Archive.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

